MOLINE, IL
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 3061-2025, passed 12-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 1-1100.   HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Moline Code of Ordinances" and may be so
cited.
SEC. 1-1101.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council. The rules
of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any
section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such
construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be
repugnant thereto.
   (1)   Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions
contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out.
      In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than
the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   (2)   City shall mean the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (3)   City Council, Council. Whenever the words "Council" or "City Council"
are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of
Moline.
   (4)   Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by law is
to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed
in any statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also
be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
   (5)   Corporate Authorities. The mayor and alderpersons of the City of
Moline, except as otherwise provided in this Code.
   (6)   Corporate or City limits. The term "corporate limits" or "City limits"
shall mean the legal boundaries of the City of Moline, except as otherwise
provided by law.
   (7)   County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County
of Rock Island in the State of Illinois.
   (8)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   (9)   Gender. A word importing any gender shall extend and be applied
equally to all gender identifications as well as transgender and gender neutral
or non-binary, and to firms, partnerships and corporations.
   (10)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   (11)   Mayor shall mean the mayor of the City of Moline.
   (12)   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   (13)   Non-technical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
   (14)   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   (15)   Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and
in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
   (16)   Officers generally whenever any officer is referred to by title, such
as "clerk," "chief of police," etc., such reference shall be construed as if
followed by the words "of the City of Moline."
   (17)   Owner. The word "owner," applied to building or land, shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or
land, unless specifically defined otherwise in this Code.
   (18)   Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to
associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and
corporate as well as to individuals unless specifically defined otherwise in
this Code.
   (19)   Personal property includes every species of property except real
property, as herein described.
   (20)   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next
before and next after, respectively.
   (21)   Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal
property.
   (22)   Quorum. The word "quorum" shall mean a majority of the members of a
board, commission or committee holding office, unless otherwise specifically
provided in this Code.
   (23)   Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   (24)   Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
   (25)   Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians, excluding parkways, unless specifically defined otherwise in this
Code.
   (26)   Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot
write.
   (27)   State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to
mean the State of Illinois.
   (28)   Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways
in the City, and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property
lines and dedicated to the public use, unless specifically defined otherwise in
this Code.
   (29)   Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others, unless specifically defined otherwise in this Code.
   (30)   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   (31)   Wholesale, wholesaler, etc.  In all cases where the words
"wholesale," "wholesaler," or "wholesale dealer" are used in this Code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who
sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
   (32)   Written or in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed
to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing
or otherwise.
   (33)   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Ord. No. 3011-2022; 6/7/22)
SEC. 1-1102.   CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
SEC. 1-1103.   AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered
and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances and
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of
Ordinances by the City Council.
SEC. 1-1104.   UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATIONS OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented
thereby.
SEC. 1-1105.   EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided.
   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action
arising under the ordinance repealed.
SEC. 1-1106.   SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
SEC. 1-1107.   GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CODE; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of this Code shall be triable as a civil case whenever in this
Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished
by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any
willful violation of any provisions of this Code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. 98-2-6; §1-1107
repealed; new §1-1107 enacted; 02/03/98)
SEC. 1-1108.   OTHER AUTHORIZED PENALTIES.
   A court may impose as a sentence, in addition to or as an alternative to the
sentence authorized in Section
1-1107, the following:
   (1)   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed six (6) months under
the terms and conditions set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3.
   (2)   A period of supervision not to exceed two (2) years under the terms
and conditions set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3.1.
   (3)   Restitution as set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-5-6.
   (4)   A period of supervision shall not be ordered in any case in which the
defendant has been previously placed on supervision by any jurisdiction in the
two-year period prior to the date of the offense for which sentence is being
imposed upon the defendant.
SEC. 1-1109.   PUBLIC SERVICE WORK; MINOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
It is the intent of the City Council that the court considers a minor
defendant's ability to pay when imposing a fine, including the ability to pay
any fine in installments which are expressly authorized. If the court finds
that a minor defendant does not possess an ability to pay the fine imposed, the
court shall order the minor defendant to perform public service work in lieu of
any fine. The court in determining the amount of public service work shall be
guided by the following principles:
   (1)   The defendant's physical and mental ability to perform available
public service work;
   (2)   The availability of suitable public service work; and
   (3)   The amount of the fine that would be appropriate for the offense.
(Ord. No. 3011-2022; 6/7/22)
SEC. 1-1110.   CREDIT FOR INCARCERATION.
   Any person incarcerated on a bailable offense who does not supply bail and
against whom a fine is levied on conviction of such offense shall be allowed a
credit of five dollars ($5.00) for each day so incarcerated upon application of
the defendant. The clerk of the court shall notify the defendant in writing of
this provision of the act at the time such person is convicted. However, in no
case shall the amount so allowed or credited exceed the amount of the fine.
SEC. 1-1111.   ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES; INSTITUTION AND SERVICE.
   (a)   All actions brought to enforce any fine, imprisonment, penalty, or
forfeiture under any ordinance of the City shall be brought in the name of the
City, as plaintiff, by the filing of an information or complaint.
   (b)   No prosecution, recovery, conviction, or acquittal for the violation
of any ordinance shall constitute a defense to any other prosecution of the
same party for any other violation of the same or any other ordinance although
the different causes of action existed at the same times and, if united, would
not have exceeded the jurisdiction of the court.
   (c)   In all actions for the violation of any ordinance the first process
shall be by summons or a warrant. A warrant for the arrest of any accused
person may issue upon the affidavit of any person that an ordinance has been
violated and that the affiant has reasonable grounds to believe that the
accused is guilty thereof.
   (d)   In all actions for violation of any municipal ordinance where the
maximum fine that can be imposed for the offense does not exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) and where no jail term can be imposed, service of
summons may be by certified mail, return receipt requested, whether service is
to be within or without the state.
   (e)   Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the use of "notices to appear"
and hang-on summons and complaints authorized pursuant to Supreme Court Rules.
SEC. 1-1112.   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES NOT LIABLE TO FINE FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM
DUTIES.
   No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
SEC. 1-1113.   ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER.
   (a)   A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense
if the conduct is either that of the person himself or herself, or that of
another and he or she is legally accountable for such conduct as provided in
subsection (b), or both.
   (b)   A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:
   (1)   Having a mental state described by the ordinance defining the offense,
he or she causes another to perform the conduct, and the other person in fact
or by reason of legal incapacity lacks such a mental state; or
   (2)   The ordinance defining the offense makes him or her so accountable; or
   (3)   Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the
intent to promote or facilitate such commission, he or she solicits, aids,
abets, agrees or attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or
commission of the offense. However, a person is not so accountable, unless the
statute defining the offense provides otherwise, if:
   a.   He or she is a victim of the offense committed; or
   b.   The offense is so defined that his or her conduct was inevitably
incident to its commission; or
   c.   Before the commission of the offense, he or she terminates his or her
effort to promote or facilitate such commission, and does one of the following:
wholly deprives his or her prior efforts of effectiveness in such commission,
or gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement authorities, or otherwise
makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.
(Ord. No. 20002-06-07; new Sec. 1-1113, “ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF
ANOTHER,” enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 1-1114.   ATTEMPT.
   (a)   Elements of the Offense. A person commits an attempt when, with intent
to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a
substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (b)   Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible
for the accused person to commit the offense attempted.
   (c)   Sentence. A person convicted of an attempt is subject to the same
penalty provided for the offense attempted.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-24; new Sec. 1-1114, “ATTEMPT,” enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 1-1115.   SOLICITATION.
   (a)   Elements of the offense. A person commits solicitation when, with
intent that an offense be committed, he or she commands, encourages or requests
another to commit that offense.
   (b)   Penalty. A person convicted of solicitation is subject to the same
penalty provided for the offense solicited.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-08; new Sec. 1-1115, “SOLICITATION,” enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 1-1116.   CONSPIRACY.
   (a)   Elements of the offense. A person commits conspiracy when, with intent
that an offense be committed, he or she agrees with another to the commission
of that offense. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense
unless an act in furtherance of such agreement is alleged and proved to have
been committed by him or her or by a co-conspirator.
   (b)   Co-conspirators. It shall not be a defense to conspiracy that the
person or persons with whom the accused is alleged to have conspired:
   (1)   Has not been prosecuted or convicted; or
   (2)   Has been convicted of a different offense; or
   (3)   Is not amenable to justice; or
   (4)   Has been acquitted; or
   (5)   Lacked the capacity to commit an offense.
   (c)    Sentence. A person convicted of a conspiracy is subject to the same
penalty provided for the offense the person conspired to commit.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-09); new Sec. 1-1116, “CONSPIRACY,” enacted; 06/25/03)
SEC. 1-1117.   REINSTATEMENT FEES.
   Any licensee licensed by any part of the Moline Code of Ordinances or other
act of the City Council who fails to renew applicable licenses by the due date
will be charged a reinstatement fee equal to the amount of the license or two
hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is less.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-06; new Sec. 1-1117, “REINSTATEMENT FEES,” enacted; 06/25/02)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
   Art. I.   In General, §2-1100 - §2-1101
   Art. II.   The City Council,
      Div. 1. In General, §2-2100 - § 2-2108
      Div. 2. Meetings, §2-2200 - §2-2238
      Div. 3. Adoption of Ordinances, §2-2300 - §2304
      Div. 4. Committees, §2-2400 - §2-2406
      Div. 5. Balanced Budget Policy, §2-2500 - §2-2502
   Art. III.   Officers,
      Div. 1. In General,
         Pt. A. Miscellaneous, §2-3100 - §2-3109
         Pt. B. Conflicts of Interest, §2-3110 - §2-3118
         Pt. C. State Mandated Officials and Employees Ethics Act, §2-3119 -
3128
      Div. 2. Executive Department, §2-3200 - §2-3205
      Div. 3. The City Clerk, §2-3300 - §2-3305
      Div. 4. Director of Public Works, §2-3400 - §2-3403
      Div. 5. Director of Engineering, §2-3500 - § 2-3503
      Div. 6. Director of Utilities, §2-3600 - §2-3603
      Div. 7. Director of Finance, §2-3700 - §2-3703
   Art. IV.   Boards and Commissions,
      Div. 1. In General, §2-4100 - §2-4103
      Div. 2. Moline Commission on Youth, §2-4200 - §2-4209
      Div. 3. Board of Local Improvements, §2-4300 - §2-4305
      Div. 4. Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, §2-4400 - §2-4406
      Div. 5. Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Revenue Administrative Board, §2-4500
- §2-4503
      Div. 6. Keep Moline Beautiful Commission, §2-4600 - §2-4604
      Div. 7. Human Rights Commission, §2-4700 - §2-4708
      Div. 8. Reserved
      Div. 9. Public Art Commission, §2-4900 - §2-4905
   Art. V.    Procedures for Issuance of Bonds, §2-5100 - §2-5115
   Art. VI.   Judiciary
      Div. 1. Administrative Adjudication of City Ordinance Violations, §2-6100
– § 2-6111
      Div. 2. Administrative Hearing Procedure for Public Safety Employee
Benefit Claims, §2-6200 – §2-6202
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 2-1100.   CITY SEAL DESCRIBED.
   The seal hitherto in use for the City, a mechanical device, on which is in
the center, a governor with a beveled cogwheel; on the left an anvil and
sledge, and on the right a spur-cogwheel and mill burr, the whole surrounded by
the inscription "City of Moline incorporated August 29, 1872," shall be the
corporate seal of the City.
SEC. 2-1101.   CUSTODY AND USE OF THE CITY SEAL.
   The corporate seal of the City shall be in the custody of the city clerk to
be used by said clerk in all cases provided for and by this Code or other
ordinances of the City, or the laws of the state; and in all such other cases
where, by the laws and customs of any state or nation the use of the corporate
seal of the City may be requisite or proper.
SEC. 2-1102.   MUNICIPAL YEAR ESTABLISHED.
   The municipal year shall commence on the first day of January in each year.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1102 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1103.   FISCAL YEAR ESTABLISHED.
   The fiscal year of the City shall coincide with the calendar year.
Therefore, the fiscal year of the City shall commence on the first day of
January in each year.
(Ord. No. 2000-08-01; Sec. 2-1103 repealed; new Sec. 2-1103 enacted; 08/22/00)
SEC. 2-1104.   CITY DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED.
   The Finance Department of the City of Moline is hereby authorized to keep
funds and monies of the City in any financial institution meeting the
requirements for financial institutions and investments as established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council and labeled "Investment Policy
of the City of Moline, Illinois."
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1104 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1105.   BUDGET FINANCE SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   The City hereby adopts the budget finance system, as codified in 65
ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.9 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as now
or hereinafter amended.
   (b)    Passage of the annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be in
lieu of passage of an annual budget ordinance. The annual budget shall be
adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to
which it applies.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees repealed throughout the
Code and updated with "City Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole;" 05/13/03)
   (c)   The city administrator is hereby appointed the budget officer for the
City of Moline. The city administrator may assign some or all of the budget
officer’s responsibilities and duties, provided the city administrator shall
remain responsible for the performance thereof.
   (d)   The budget officer shall have the powers and duties specified in 65
ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.9 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as now
or hereinafter amended, in addition to any authority conferred upon the budget
officer by the corporate authorities of the City.
   (e)   Monies may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or
purposes of specific capital improvements, repair and/or replacements of
specific types of municipal equipment or other tangible property both real and
personal, to be designated as the “Capital Improvement Fund.” Expenditures from
the Capital Improvement Fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the
capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur.
   (f)   The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget
conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten (10) days prior to
passage of the annual budget, by publication in such form as the corporate
authorities may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the
tentative annual budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the corporate
authorities shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual
budget after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further
revised and passed without further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of
this hearing shall be given at least one week prior to the time of the hearing
by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1105 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1106.   LOCAL MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT ESTABLISHED; POWERS.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established a local mass transit district
to be known as the "Rock Island Metropolitan Mass Transit District" in
accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of 70 ILCS 3610/3.
   (b)   The "Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit District" shall
encompass the areas within the corporate limits of Rock Island, Moline, East
Moline, Silvis and Milan, and shall have all the powers, rights and duties
enumerated and granted pursuant to the provisions of the Local Mass Transit
District Act, being 70 ILCS 3610/1 through 3610/9, and such others as are
provided by law.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1106 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1107.   USE OF CITY OWNED VEHICLES.
   (a)   City-owned vehicles shall be used by City employees only, and said
vehicles shall be used solely in connection with and in the course of City
business. Said vehicle shall not be used for the private purpose of City
employees, and the vehicles shall in no case be used by members of employees'
families, friends, or any other persons.
   (b)   No City employee, except a department head or a person specially
designated by the city administrator, shall take a City-owned vehicle
overnight; department heads and designated employees, however, shall not use
the auto in violation of subsection (a) hereof, or allow same to be done.
   (c)   Misuse of a City vehicle shall be cause for suspension or dismissal.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1107 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1108.   PAYMENT OF CITY PAYROLL.
   The director of finance of the City of Moline, or one authorized to act in
said officer's behalf by the City Council, is hereby authorized to pay wages
and salaries of all officers and employees of the City in accordance with union
contracts for employees covered thereby; resolutions of the City Council
providing for wages, salaries, benefits, and other conditions of employment for
employees not so covered; and ordinances for elected officers; but provided,
proper payroll documentation has been submitted by department heads or other
officials so designated to do so, sufficient budget accommodations have been
made for said purposes and a properly executed warrant drawn on the City
treasury has been received.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; § 2-1108 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 93-6-2, §2-1108
amended; 06/08/93)
SEC. 2-1109.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   The City of Moline shall indemnify any person who was or is a party or
is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending, or completed
action, suit or proceeding, arising out of or occurring within the scope of
their employment or official duties whether civil, administrative or
investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the City of Moline,
an Illinois municipal corporation) by reason of the fact that such person is an
official or employee or agent of the City of Moline (including commissions of
the City of Moline), against expenses (including attorney's fees), judgments,
fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by such
person in connection with such proceeding. Expenses incurred in defending an
action, suit or proceeding, or threat thereof, may be paid by the City of
Moline in advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding.
Indemnification shall be granted to a person who has ceased to be an official,
employee or agent of the City of Moline, with regard to acts performed while
said person was an official, employee or agent and shall inure to the benefit
of the heirs, executors, and administrators of such person.
   (b)   Nothing in this section is intended to authorize the violation of
public policy by providing indemnification for payment of punitive damages.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1109 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1110.   PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED IN INCURRING INDEBTEDNESS FOR
CORPORATE PURPOSES; ISSUING NONREFERENDUM BONDS TO EVIDENCE INDEBTEDNESS;
LEVYING TAX TO PAY PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST.
   (a)   The City of Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, acting by its City
Council, with the affirmative votes of six (6) of its members, may from time to
time borrow money for proper public purposes and in evidence of such borrowing
issue its full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) payable from ad
valorem taxes to be levied without limitation as to rate or amount against all
taxable property situated within the City. Such bonds may be issued without the
submission of the question of their issuance to the electors of the City for
their approval, and the procedures for the issuance of such bonds shall be
substantially as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 95-5-2 §2-2110 (a) repealed; new (a) enacted, 05/16/95)
   (b)   The City Council shall adopt an ordinance (hereinafter designated as
the "bond ordinance") describing the public purpose or purposes to be
accomplished by such borrowing and in such bond ordinance shall make a finding
and determination that such borrowing of money is necessary for the welfare of
the government and affairs of the City, is for a proper public purpose or
purposes and is in the public interest, which finding and determination shall
be deemed conclusive.
   (c)   The bond ordinance shall indicate the amount of money necessary to be
borrowed, the amount of bonds to be issued in evidence thereof, shall fix the
details of such bonds, including the date, number, denomination and maturity,
which shall not exceed forty (40) years from the date of said bonds, terms of
redemption with or without premium, if redeemable prior to maturity, and the
rate or rates of interest. The bonds shall be sold in such manner and at such
time as may be determined by the City Council.
   A contract for the sale of such bonds may be entered into prior to the
adoption of the bond ordinance or the bond ordinance may provide for the
subsequent sale of the bonds therein authorized. In the event of such
subsequent sale and bonds are sold bearing interest at a rate or rates less
than the maximum rate authorized in the bond ordinance, prior to the delivery
of such bonds the taxes levied in the bond ordinance shall be abated by that
amount representing the savings resulting from the sale of said bonds at a
lower rate of interest than authorized in the bond ordinance.
   (d)   The bond ordinance shall direct the execution of the bonds therein
authorized on behalf of the City of Moline by the signatures of the mayor and
the clerk of said City, shall require the seal of the City to be affixed to
such bonds, shall determine whether such bonds to be issued shall be registered
in the name of the owner as to principal only or whether the same shall be
fully registered as to both principal and interest, shall indicate the place or
places of payment of the principal and interest maturing on said bonds and
shall set forth the form of bond.
   The mayor may designate a deputy to affix said mayor's signature to any full
faith and credit bonds of the City, which are required to be signed by the
mayor. In such case, the mayor shall deliver to the City Council a written
notice of such designation, such notice stating the name of the person so
selected and the specific bonds, which such person shall have authority to sign
as deputy of the mayor. Said notice shall have attached thereto a written
signature of the mayor executed by the person so designated to sign, together
with the personal signature of the deputy authorized to sign on behalf of the
mayor. Each such notice shall be recorded in the official journal of the
proceedings of the City Council and then filed with the city clerk. When the
signature of the mayor is placed on a full faith and credit bond of the City at
said mayor's direction in the specified manner, such signature in all respects
shall have the same legal effect as if signed by the mayor in person.
   (e)   The bond ordinance shall make provision for the payment of such bonds,
both principal thereof and interest thereon until maturity, by the levy of a
direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the City of Moline
sufficient for such purpose. A copy of such bond ordinance, as adopted,
certified to by the city clerk, should be filed in the office of the county
clerk of the county or counties within which any part of the City of Moline may
be situated. Such bond ordinance, as so filed, shall constitute the authority
for the county clerk or county clerks in and for each of the years for which
taxes are levied in said bond ordinance, to extend such taxes for collection
against all the taxable property situated within the City of Moline. The taxes
so levied for the payment of principal and interest on the bonds shall be
extended annually by the county clerk or county clerks without limitation as to
rate or amount and such taxes shall be in addition to and in excess of all
other taxes levied or authorized to be levied by the City of Moline. Except as
provided herein, such taxes so levied shall not be subject to repeal or
abatement in any manner whatsoever until such time as all the bonds authorized
and issued under the terms of said bond ordinance shall have been paid in full,
both principal thereof and interest thereon, up to and including the date of
maturity; provided, however, that if the City of Moline has other funds
available, the City Council may appropriate such funds and deposit them in
trust with the payment agent for the purpose of the payment of any of the
maturities of bonds or interest thereon, in which event the taxes so levied to
pay such principal or interest may be abated by the amount so deposited, such
abatement to be directed by ordinance of the City of Moline, duly adopted by
the City Council and placed on file with the county clerk or county clerks at
any time prior to the extension of such taxes for collection.
   (f)   The provisions of any bond ordinance shall constitute a budget of the
amounts required as therein referred to and described, and upon the delivery of
the bonds therein authorized, the proceeds thereof shall be used solely and
only for the purpose or purposes for which the bonds were authorized.
   (g)   Any bonds authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of any bond
ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof, and also any bonds
heretofore issued and outstanding, which by their terms are payable from taxes
unlimited as to rate or amount and levied against all the taxable property
within the City of Moline, may be refunded prior to their maturity or at their
maturity, and including the refunding of matured interest coupons evidencing
interest upon such unpaid bonds. The issuance of refunding bonds shall be
authorized by a refunding bond ordinance, which shall be adopted in the manner
and subject to the terms, conditions and provisions as herein required for the
issuance of bonds for public purposes.
   (h)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 6 of Article VII of the
1970 Constitution of Illinois, the procedures hereinabove set forth for the
issuance of full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) shall be
controlling and shall be complied with by the City of Moline in the borrowing
of money through the issuance of general obligation bonds of the City,
notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in the Illinois
Municipal Code and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto and in
any other law or laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1110 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-1111.   ESTABLISHMENT OF AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC ART ACQUISITION AND
MAINTENANCE FUND.
   (a)   Establishment of Public Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund. In order
to support the implementation of the City’s Public Art Master Plan and the
Public Art Program in the Moline Downtown and Cultural Corridors, the
acquisition and maintenance of Public Art, and Public Art Programs, each as
further defined and set forth in Division 9 of this Chapter 2, there is hereby
created a dedicated Public Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund that will be a
specific line item in the Annual Budget Ordinance.
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this Section
2-1111, the following words and phrases will have the meanings set forth below,
and such other capitalized words and phrases will be as defined in Division 9
of this Chapter 2 or Chapter 35, Article IV, Division 3 of this Code.
      Capital Improvement Project or CIP means certain capital improvement
projects located in the Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area funded by the
City.
      Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area is that area designated in
Ordinance No. 3022-2021.
      Public Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund means the line item fund in
the Annual Budget into which Public Art donations and funding are allocated and
transferred.
      Public Art Program means the Public Art Program of the City in the
Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area.
   (c)   Use of Funds. Public Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund will only be
used for the acquisition, commissioning, exhibition, maintenance, and
conservation of Public Art, as recommended by the Public Art Commission and
approved by the Corporate Authorities, as well as the following:
      (1)   Artist fees including travel and expenses related to travel;
      (2)   Artwork fabrication and installation;
      (3)   Acquisition of existing Artwork;
      (4)   Relocation of existing Artwork;
      (5)   Required permits and insurance during fabrication and installation
of Artwork;
      (6)   Preparation of the site necessary to receive the artwork;
electrical, water or mechanical service for activation of the artwork; and
      (7)   Curators and contracted Artwork services.
   In no event will these funds be used for the following:
      (1)   Reproductions by mechanical or other means of original artwork;
provided, however limited editions controlled by the artist, or original
prints, cast sculpture or photographs may be included;
      (2)   Decorative ornamental or functional elements which are designed by
the architect or consultants engaged by the architect;
      (3)   Vegetative materials, pool(s), paths, benches, receptacle,
fixtures, planters, etc., except when designed by artists;
      (4)   Art objects which are mass-produced or of standard design, such as
playground sculpture or directional fountains or other functional elements,
except when designed by artists;
      (5)   Walls, pools or other architectural elements on or in which the
artwork is placed or affixed; and
      (6)   Professional graphics, mass-produced work or work not produced by a
Public Art Commission recommended artist.
   (d)   Sources of Funds. The following sources will be used to fund the
City’s Public Art Program:
      (1)   An annual budget allocation as recommended by the Public Art
Commission and as may be approved by City Council from time to time;
      (2)   An annual allocation equal to two percent of the City’s total
annual Capital Improvement Project budget for certain Capital Improvement
Projects in the Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area; and
      (3)   Public Art Program financial grants and other financial donations
and gifts.
   In addition, the Corporate Authorities may, upon recommendation from the
Public Art Commission, from time to time, authorize the use of tax increment
financing and other City economic development programs to promote and
facilitate the installation of Public Art. The authorization of the allocation
of these funds by the Corporate Authorities will not be deposited in the Public
Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund, and instead will be allocated on a
project by project basis and may be in addition to funds from the Public Art
Acquisition and Maintenance Fund.
   (e)   Limitation of Capital Improvement Project Budget Allocations. All
capital improvement projects qualify except the following:
      (1)   regular road maintenance; and
      (2)   underground infrastructure and underground utility projects with no
above-ground components other than roads.
   Capital improvement projects with underground infrastructure including
utility projects should be included only when there are visual elements of the
project above ground. The total budget of the capital improvement project shall
include all underground components.
   (f)   Relationship Between Public Art Acquisition and Maintenance Fund and
Public Art Annual Work Plan. Budgeting for Public Art will be made through the
recommendation by the Public Art Commission and approval by the Corporate
Authorities of the Public Art Annual Work Plan as submitted in the annual
budget. This Public Art Annual Work Plan will show the funding from that year's
CIP and identify appropriate Public Art projects to be pursued for the upcoming
year.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-1111 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3022-2021, Sec. 2-
1111 enacted; 8/31/21)
ARTICLE II. THE CITY COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 2-2100.   COMPOSITION.
   The City Council shall consist of the mayor and eight (8) alderpersons.One
(1) alderperson is elected from each of the seven (7) City wards to represent
each respective ward, and one (1) at-large alderperson is elected from the
City-wide electorate and represents the entire City population.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2100 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2101.   TERMS OF ALDERPERSONS.
   Alderpersons elected shall hold office for a term of four (4) years expiring
on May 1 after the municipal election and until their successors are elected
and qualified.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2101 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2102.   PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE A MEMBER OF THE CITY COUNCIL; NON-
PARTISAN ELECTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall be eligible to the office of alderperson unless such
person shall be a qualified elector and reside within the ward for which such
person is elected; nor shall such person be eligible if said person is in
arrears for the payment of any tax or other liability due in said City; nor
shall said person be directly or indirectly interested in any contract
whatsoever to which the City is a party; nor shall said person be eligible if
said person shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery, or other corrupt
practices or crimes; nor shall said person be eligible to any office, the
salary of which is payable out of the City treasury, if at any time of such
appointment such person shall be a member of the City Council; nor shall any
member of the City Council at the same time hold any other office under the
City government; nor shall said member be either directly or indirectly,
individually or as a member of a firm, engaged in any business transaction,
other than official with the City, through its mayor or any of its authorized
boards, agents, or attorneys, whereby any money is to be paid, directly or
indirectly, out of the City treasury to such member or firm.
   (b)   The offices of mayor and City alderperson shall be elected at
nonpartisan elections and, if necessary, non-partisan primaries.
      (1)   The mayor and alderpersons of the City of Moline, elected at the
Consolidated Election, shall hold office for four (4) years and until their
respective successors are elected and qualified.
      (2)   Any election to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor or of an
alderperson to be held prior to or at the regularly scheduled election shall be
in accordance with the provisions of this proposition and applicable law.
   (c)   Effective January 1, 2002, and continuing thereafter, if a candidate
for any office mentioned in this section participates, campaigns or otherwise
runs for office on a partisan basis or with an affiliation with any political
party, such candidate shall be disqualified from office, and any such person
running with any such designation or affiliation shall not be certified by the
city clerk as a valid candidate.
   (d)   Any election to fill any vacancy in any of the offices enumerated
herein, which is to be held after the effective date of this ordinance, shall
be held in accordance with the provisions of this proposition and ordinance and
applicable law, and in accordance with the General Election Law; provided,
however, that where any such provision would conflict with this ordinance, then
this ordinance shall supersede such conflicting provision as an enactment of
the City of Moline's home rule powers.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2102 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 2002-07-03; Sec. 2-
2102 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 2-2102 relating to the same subject
matter enacted; 07/02/02)
SEC. 2-2103.   THE CITY COUNCIL TO BE THE JUDGE OF THE ELECTION AND
QUALIFICATIONS OF ITS MEMBERS.
   The City Council shall be judge of the election and qualifications of its
own members.
SEC. 2-2104.   AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL TO PUNISH ITS MEMBERS, AND
DETERMINE THE RULES OF ITS PROCEEDINGS.
   The City Council shall determine its own rules of proceeding and punish its
members for disorderly conduct; however, any alderperson who shall have been
convicted of bribery shall thereby be deemed to have vacated the office.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2104 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2105.   AUTHORITY TO PUNISH FOR DIRECT CONTEMPT.
   The City Council shall have the power to punish persons for direct contempt
of the City Council, which punishment shall be imposed by the City Council, and
shall consist of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
SEC. 2-2106.   COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Each alderperson shall receive a salary of eight thousand dollars
($8,000.00) per municipal year, paid on a bi-weekly basis. This salary shall be
compensation for attendance for all regular and all special meetings of the
City Council and any other services performed in the capacity of alderperson.
   (b)   No other compensation shall be allowed to any alderperson for
attendance at a regular meeting or a special meeting of the City Council or for
any other services performed in the capacity of alderperson. This subsection
(b) shall not preclude reimbursement for actual expenses of travel, meals, and
lodging incurred by alderpersons in attending meetings on behalf of the City
other than regular and special meetings of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2106 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 94-11-2; Sec. 2-
2106 repealed; new Sec. 2-2106 enacted; 11/01/94) (Ord. No. 95-1-7 ratified and
clarified Ord. No. 94-11-2, 01/24/95)
(Ord. No. 2001-02-01; Sec. 2-2106 (a) repealed; new Sec. 2-2106 (a) enacted;
02/06/01) (Ord. No. 3035-2014; Sec. 2-2106 repealed; new Sec. 2-2106 enacted;
01/06/15)
SEC. 2-2107.   APPOINTMENTS BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   Unless the authority for appointment of persons to organizations or
for performances of specific duties on behalf of the City is granted elsewhere
in this Code to the mayor or city administrator, the City Council reserves to
itself such appointment powers.
   (b)   To make any such reserved appointment, the City Council shall direct
that staff place such appointment on the Committee-of-the-Whole meeting agenda.
The City Council shall discuss the item at the Committee-of-the-Whole meeting
and make a recommendation to the Council, and the City Council may vote on such
item at the City Council meeting.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2107 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3015-2005; enacted
new Sec. 2-2107; 02/08/05; Ord. No. 3015-2009; Sec. 2-2107(b) repealed; new
Sec. 2-2107(b) enacted; 07/21/09)
SEC. 2-2108.   PETITIONS, REMONSTRANCES AND COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC.
   (a)   No communications from the public shall be considered unless same have
been submitted in writing to the city clerk 30 minutes prior to the published
meeting time; which writing shall identify the person making the request and
the subject matter to be addressed.
   (b)   The City Clerk shall read the communications from the public during
the Public Comment portion of the meetings.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2108 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3015-2009; new Sec.
2-2108 enacted; 07/21/09)
DIVISION 2. MEETINGS
SEC. 2-2200.   DAYS, TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS; ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   (a)   The City Council shall meet as a Committee-of-the-Whole at 6:00 p.m.
at City Hall on no less than two (2) Tuesdays of each month, where formal
action may be taken, per a set yearly meetings schedule approved by resolution
of the City Council at the end of the previous calendar year. The annual
meetings schedule of regular meetings shall be prepared, posted and
disseminated pursuant to the provisions of Section
2-2201 of the Code. If an alternate meeting date, time or location is deemed
necessary by the mayor and/or the City Council, such change shall be made with
proper public notice.
   (b)   The City Council shall hold its regular meetings at 6:00 p.m., or
immediately following the Committee-of-the-Whole Meeting, at City Hall, on no
less than two (2) Tuesdays of each month, where formal action may be taken, per
a set yearly meetings schedule approved by resolution of the City Council at
the end of the previous calendar year. The annual meetings schedule of regular
meetings shall be prepared, posted and disseminated pursuant to the provisions
of Section
2-2201 of the Code. If an alternate date, time or location is deemed necessary
by the mayor and/or the City Council, such change shall be made with proper
public notice.
   (c)   For purposes herein, the term "emergency" shall mean Council actions
required to authorize emergency repairs of City-owned property, Council actions
required to meet deadlines imposed by other governmental entities, or other
unforeseen events requiring Council action prior to the next regular City
Council meeting.
   (d)   Definition of Meeting. The term "meeting" as applied to any City of
Moline public body as defined in the Open Meetings Act shall be defined to
mean, "Any gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference,
telephone calls, electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic
mail, electronic chat and instant messaging), or other means of contemporaneous
interactive communication, of a majority of a quorum of the members of a public
body held for the purpose of discussing public business, or such other
definition as shall be contained within the Open Meetings Act as amended from
time to time." Any and all references to the term "meeting" in the Moline Code
of Ordinances shall include gatherings as provided in this definition and
Section 120/1.02 of the Open Meetings Act."
   (e)   Any member of the City Council may attend and participate in any open
or closed meeting of said public body from a remote location via electronic
means provided that such attendance is in compliance with the rules set forth
herein and any other applicable laws.
      (1)   Prerequisites. Any member of the City Council shall be provided the
opportunity to attend an open or closed meeting via electronic means from a
remote location if a quorum is physically present at the meeting site, the
quorum votes to approve the attendance by electronic means, and the requesting
member meets the following conditions:
         a.   The member must notify the city clerk as soon as is practicable,
so that necessary communications equipment can be arranged. Inability to make
the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request for
electronic attendance.
         b.   The member must assert one (1) of the four (4) following reasons
why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
            1.   due to personal illness or disability;
            2.   due to employment purposes or other City business;
            3.   due to a family emergency or other emergency; or
            4.   due to unexpected childcare obligations.
      (2)   Quorum and Vote Required. Providing the above prerequisites have
been met and following roll call to establish that a quorum is physically
present at the meeting site, a motion shall be made and considered as to
whether to allow the member to remotely attend the meeting via electronic
means. A vote may be taken to permit participation for a stated series of
meetings if the same reason applies to each case and proper notice has been
provided to the city clerk. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each
remote participation via electronic means. The motion must be approved by a
vote of a majority of the City Council.
      (3)   Adequate Equipment Required. Any member participating
electronically and other members of the City Council must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all
communications at the meeting site. Before allowing remote attendance via
electronic means at any meeting, the City Council shall provide equipment
adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
      (4)   Meeting Minutes. Any member attending remotely via electronic means
shall be counted as present for the meeting. The meeting minutes shall reflect
and state specifically whether each member is physically present, absent, or
present by electronic means and shall state the approved reason necessitating
attendance via electronic means. Draft minutes shall be published along with
the next meeting agenda for the public to review prior to adoption by the City
Council.
      (5)   Rights of Remote Member. Any member permitted to participate
remotely via electronic means shall be permitted to express his or her comments
during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as those members
physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures
previously adopted and adhered to. The remote member shall be heard,
considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any
remote members shall be called during any vote taken and his or her vote
counted and recorded by the city clerk and placed in the meeting minutes. A
member participating remotely via electronic means may leave a meeting and
return as in the case of any member, provided the member attending via
electronic means shall announce his or her leaving and returning to the quorum
present.
      (6)   Costs.   Any member participating remotely via telephone shall be
reimbursed for the cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any
other costs associated with attendance and participation via electronic means,
including video conferencing and other audio and video equipment, must be
approved by the City Council prior to incurring such costs.
(Ord. No. 3016-2007; Sec. 2-2200(a) and (b) repealed; new Sec. 2-200(a) and (b)
enacted; 04/17/07)
(Ord. No. 3020-2007; new Sec. 2-2200(e) and (f) enacted; 07/17/07)
(Ord. No. 3003-2014; Sec. 2-2200(c) repealed in its entirety and remaining
subsequent subsections of Sec. 2-2200consecutively renamed; 03/14/14)
(Ord. No. 3034-2014; Sec. 2-2200(a) and (b) repealed; new Sec. 2-2200(a) and
(b) enacted; 12/16/14)
(Ord. No. 3014-2017; Sec. 2-2200(a) and (b) repealed; new Sec. 2-2200(a) and
(b) enacted; 11/21/17 – meeting times amended to 5:30 p.m.)
(Ord. No. 3050-2017; Sec. 2-2200(a) and (b) repealed; new Sec. 2-2200(a) and
(b) enacted; 12/05/17 – meeting times amended to 6:00 p.m.)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2200 amended; 7/12/22)
(Ord. No. 3004-2025; Sec. 2-2200 amended; 1/21/25)
SEC. 2-2201.   ANNUAL NOTICE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (a)   At its last meeting of the calendar year, the City Council shall cause
to be prepared a schedule showing all of its proposed regular meetings for the
next calendar year. The schedule shall state the regular dates, times and
places of the proposed regular meetings of the City Council.
   (b)   The schedule shall, by the first day of the calendar year which it
represents, be posted in the lobby of the City Hall, on or near the door of the
council room of any other designated facility, and on the City's website. For
purposes of this division, "designated facility" shall mean that structure or
facility designated as the meeting place of the Council by resolution.
(Ord. No. 94-9-5; Sec. 2-2201(b) repealed; new subsection enacted; 09/13/94)
   (c)   The City Council shall provide digital or electronic copies of the
schedule of meetings required by this section to any local newspaper of general
circulation any local radio or television station, and to anyone who requests
to be on the list.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2201 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2202.   SPECIAL MEETINGS; CALLING; NOTICES.
   (a)    Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the mayor or
any three (3) alderpersons upon notice of not less than forty-eight (48) hours
to each member of the City Council via email, text and voice until confirmation
is received by the city clerk. Special meetings shall be posted on the main
page of the City’s website.
(Ord. No. 2002-10-05; Sec. 2-2202 (a) repealed; new Sec. 2-2202 (a) enacted;
10/08/02)
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the city clerk to promptly provide notice to
the members of the City Council, as described in Section
2-2202(a) above.
   (c)   Public notice of a special meeting of the City Council shall also be
given at least forty-eight (48) hours before the special meeting by posting a
notice in the lobby of City Hall and on or near the door of the council room of
any other designated facility.
(Ord. No. 2002-10-05; Sec. 2-2202 (c) repealed; new Sec. 2-2202 (c) enacted;
10/08/02)
   (d)   A notice of special meetings shall be provided to any local newspaper
of general circulation or any local radio or television station that has filed
an annual request for such notice.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2202 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2203.   MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, and shall
preserve order and decorum, and shall decide all questions of order, which
decisions shall be subject to an appeal to the City Council.
SEC. 2-2204.   CHAIRMAN PRO TEM.
In the absence of the mayor, the acting mayor, or the mayor pro tem, the City
Council may elect an alderperson to act as temporary chairman. Such alderperson
shall have only the powers of a presiding officer, and a right to vote in such
person's capacity of an alderperson on any ordinance, resolution or motion.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2204 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2205.   QUORUM; COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF ABSENT MEMBERS.
   (a)   Excessive absenteeism. Excessive absenteeism shall mean an absence
from more than five (5) meetings of the City Council during a municipal year.
Any alderperson who is absent from more than five (5) meetings during a
municipal year shall be assessed an administrative fee of two hundred twenty-
two dollars ($222.00) per absence in excess of five (5). The invoice for such
fee will be issued by the City Clerk and shall be paid to the City's Finance
Department within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance. 
   (b)   A majority of the whole number of the members of the City Council
shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a lesser number may convene from
time to time, and compel absent members to attend any regular or special
meetings by a written citation to that effect, stating the day and hour of the
meeting. The citation shall be signed by the mayor or the alderpersons issuing
it, and may be served by the chief of police, or by any officer authorized to
serve processes in the City, by reading the citation to the absent members of
the City Council. Any alderperson who willfully fails to obey the citation may
be expelled and his office may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the
City Council.
(Ord. No. 3035-2014; Sec. 2-2205 repealed; new Sec. 2-2205 enacted; 01/06/15)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2205 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2206.   ROLL CALL OF MEMBERS.
   At the hour appointed for meetings of the City Council, the city clerk shall
call the roll of the members, marking the absentees, and announce whether a
quorum is present. If a quorum is present, the City Council shall proceed to
the business before it.
SEC. 2-2207.   ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   The following shall be the order of business for regular meetings of
the City Council:
      (1)   Call to order of the members;
      (2)   Pledge of allegiance to the flag;
      (3)   Invocation;
      (4)   Roll call of members;
      (5)   Establishment of quorum;
      (6)   Remote electronic attendance (if necessary);
      (7)   Public comment;
      (8)   Consent Agenda - Approval of minutes of previous meetings (and,
unless requested as a matter of personal privilege, reading of the minutes
shall not be required if a written copy has been supplied with the Agenda);
      (9)   Consent Agenda - Consideration of appointments requiring advice and
consent of the City Council;
      (10)   Consent Agenda- Second reading ordinances;
      (11)   Consent Agenda - Resolutions;
      (12)   Omnibus vote;
      (13)   Non-Consent Agenda - Second reading ordinances;
      (14)   Non-Consent Agenda - Resolutions;
      (15)   Non-Consent Agenda - First reading ordinances;
      (16)   Miscellaneous business of City Council and staff;
      (17)   Public Comment;
      (18)   Executive Session (if necessary);
      (19)   Action after Executive Session (if necessary); and
      (20)   Adjournment.
   (b)   No item of business shall be considered under subsection (a)(8)
through (a)(11) and subsections (a)(13) through (a)(15) above unless same has
been submitted in writing to the city clerk prior to 10:00 a.m. on the Tuesday
prior to the City Council meeting or unless a request has been submitted to the
city clerk prior to 10:00 a.m. on the Tuesday before the City Council meeting
in writing; which writing shall identify the person making the request and the
subject matter to be addressed.
   (c)   Said order of business shall be followed at all meetings except in the
following cases:
      (1)   If a public hearing is scheduled and advertised, said Committee-of-
the-Whole-Council meeting shall automatically be recessed after the meeting is
called to order so that said public hearing may be held, and the Committee-of-
the-Whole-Council meeting shall automatically reconvene at the close of said
public hearing. Any public hearing conducted by the City Council shall conform
to the least restrictive, but legally sufficient, of the requirements provided
under federal or state law, as applicable, or, alternatively, as set forth in
the Rules and Regulations adopted by City Council resolution from time to time.
(Ord. No. 2001-05-03; Sec. 2-2207 amended by enacting new subsection (c)(3);
05/15/01) (Ord. No. 2001-07-07; Sec. 2-2207 repealed; new Sec. 2-2207 enacted;
07/24/01) (Ord. No. 3003-2004; Sec. 2-2207(c) repealed; new Sec. 2-2207(c)
enacted; 02/03/04) (Ord. No. 3068-2005; Sec. 2-2207(a) subsections (1)(2)(3)(4)
repealed; new subsections (1)(2)(3)(4) enacted; 11/01/05) (Ord. No. 3015-2009;
Sec. 2-2207 repealed in entirety; new Sec. 2-2207 enacted; 07/21/09; Sec. 2-
2207(a) repealed; new Sec. 2-2207(a) enacted; 06/10/14; Ord. No. 3016-2022;
Sec. 2-2207 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3019-2025; Sec. 2-2207 amended; 4/22/25)
SEC. 2-2208.   ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   The Finance Department shall provide a list of all accounts payable by the
City to the City Council, bi-weekly at minimum. Items on said list may be
removed and referred to the City Council for further consideration by motion
approved by majority vote. Such removed item shall thereafter be considered as
directed by Council in its motion. All remaining unremoved items shall be
deemed approved for payment without further action of the Council, so long as
authorized by budget resolution or approved by contract authorized by Council
or otherwise within the delegated authority of a City officer. Any matter which
is not authorized by budget resolution of the City Council or approved by
contract authorized by the City Council or otherwise within delegated authority
of an officer of the City and which presents a bill to the City or claim
against the City shall not be included on such list and shall be presented
individually for consideration by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2001-07-07; Sec. 2-2208 repealed; new section enacted; 07/24/01; Ord.
No. 3016- 2022; Sec. 2-2208 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2209.   DETERMINATION OF QUESTIONS OF PRIORITY OF BUSINESS.
   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by the
mayor without debate.
SEC. 2-2210.   MANNER OF ADDRESSING THE CHAIR.
   (a)   Each member of the City Council, prior to speaking, shall address the
mayor, but such member shall not proceed with any remarks until recognized and
named by the chair.
   (b)   When two (2) or more members of the City Council address the chair at
once, the mayor shall name the member of the City Council who shall be first to
speak.
SEC. 2-2211.   PRESENTATION OF COMMUNICATIONS.
   Each alderperson present at a regular Council meeting shall be recognized by
the chair in the order of seating, starting with the first ward, for the
purpose of presenting communications, reports, petitions, motions, or new
business to the City Council. Once recognized, the alderperson has the floor
and shall not be interrupted except for a matter of personal privilege or point
of inquiry. The member who has the floor should state that said member is
yielding the floor when completed.
(Ord. No. 95-5-2; §2-2211 repealed in its entirety; new section enacted; 05/16/
95; Ord. No. 3016-2022; § 2-2211 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2212.   LIMITATION ON SPEAKING UPON QUESTIONS.
   No member of the City Council shall speak more than twice on the same
general question on the Council Agenda nor more than once on a previous
question except by leave of the chair. No person in the gallery shall speak on
a subject more than once except by leave of the chair. This shall not restrict
or limit a member from making motions as outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2212 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2213.   CALLING MEMBERS TO ORDER; APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   A member of the City Council called to order while speaking, shall
immediately cease speaking, unless permitted to explain. If there is no appeal,
the decision of the chair shall be conclusive, but if the member appeals from
the decision of the chair, the City Council shall decide on the case by
majority vote without debate.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2213 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2214.   INTERRUPTING SPEAKERS.
   While a member of the City Council is speaking, no member shall hold any
private discourse, nor pass between the speaker and the chair.
SEC. 2-2215.   MOTIONS TO BE SECONDED; WHEN REDUCTION TO WRITING REQUIRED.
   No motion shall be put or debated unless it is seconded. When a motion is
seconded, it shall be stated by the chair before debate, and every motion shall
be reduced in writing by the city clerk and published in the minutes.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2215 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2216.   MOTIONS ALLOWABLE WHEN QUESTION IS UNDER DEBATE.
   (a)   When a question is under debate, the only motions in order shall be:
      (1)   To adjourn;
      (2)   The previous question;
      (3)   To lay on the table indefinitely or until a certain time;
      (4)   To suspend the rules or immediately consider;
      (5)   To postpone indefinitely;
      (6)   To adjourn to a certain day;
      (7)   To refer; and
      (8)   To amend.
   (b)   The motions authorized by subsection (a) shall have precedence in the
order herein arranged; the first four (4) to be decided without debate.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2216 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2217.   MOTIONS TO ADJOURN.
   (a)   A motion to adjourn the City Council shall always be in order, except:
      (1)   When a member is in possession of the floor;
      (2)   While the ayes and nays are being called;
      (3)   When the members are voting;
      (4)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; or
      (5)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken.
   (b)   A motion to adjourn, without move, cannot be amended; but a motion to
adjourn to a given time, may be and is open to debate.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2217 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2218.   MOTIONS CALLING FOR THE PREVIOUS QUESTION.
   When the previous question is moved and put, it shall be in this form:
"Shall the main question be now put?" If this is carried, all proposed
amendments, and all further motions and debate shall be excluded, and the
question be put without delay.
SEC. 2-2219.   MOTIONS TO LAY ON THE TABLE.
   A motion to lay a question on the table, without move, is not debatable, but
a motion to lay on the table and publish, or any other condition, is subject to
amendment and debate.
SEC. 2-2220.   MOTIONS TO "STRIKE OUT AND INSERT."
   On a motion to "strike out and insert," the paragraph to be amended shall
first be read as it stands, the words proposed to be struck out, and those to
be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it would stand if so amended.
SEC. 2-2221.   MOTIONS TO AMEND.
   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but to amend an amendment
to an amendment shall not be entertained.
SEC. 2-2222.   NATURE OF AMENDMENTS WHICH ARE IN ORDER.
   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an
amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
SEC. 2-2223.   INDEFINITE POSTPONEMENT OF MOTIONS.
   When a motion is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken up again
during the same meeting.
SEC. 2-2224.   PRIORITY BETWEEN MOTIONS TO REFER A QUESTION TO COMMITTEES OF
THE COUNCIL.
   A motion to refer a question to the Committee-of-the-Whole of the City
Council shall take precedence over a similar motion for a special committee.
SEC. 2-2225.   RECONSIDERATION OF MOTIONS.
   (a)   A motion may be reconsidered at any time during the same meeting, or
at the first meeting held thereafter. A motion for a reconsideration being once
made and decided in the negative, shall not be renewed before the next meeting.
   (b)   A motion to reconsider must be made by a member who voted in the
majority, or by those who were absent and did not vote upon the motion to be
reconsidered.
(Ord. No. 3023-2018; repealed Sec. 2-2225 in its entirety; enacted new Sec. 2-
2225 – NOTE: Ord. No. 3023-2018, adopted 06/05/18 was in effect from 06/05/18
to 06/30/18 only and was automatically repealed on 06/30/18 at which time the
above language continued in effect.)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2225 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2226.   LIMITATION ON RECONSIDERATION OF QUESTIONS.
   No question shall be reconsidered more than once, nor shall a vote to
reconsider be reconsidered.
SEC. 2-2227.   RESTRICTIONS ON RECONSIDERATION OF VOTES AT SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting unless there be present as large a number of alderpersons as were
present when such vote was taken.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2227 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2228.   WITHDRAWAL OF MOTION OR RESOLUTION.
   After the chair states a motion or resolution, it shall be deemed to be in
possession of the City Council, but it may be withdrawn at any time before
decision or amendment.
SEC. 2-2229.   ENTRY OF NAME ON MINUTES OF ALDERPERSON PROPOSING RESOLUTION OR
MOTION.
   In all cases where a resolution or a motion is entered on the minutes of the
City Council, the name of the member moving the same shall be entered also.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2229 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2230.   DECORUM.
   While the mayor is putting the question, no member of the City Council shall
walk across or out of the council room.
SEC. 2-2231.   ALDERPERSONS TO VOTE ON QUESTIONS; EXCEPTION.
   Each member of the City Council who shall be present when a question is
stated from the chair, shall vote thereon, unless said member is directly
interested in the question, in which case said member shall so state for the
record, describe such interest in sufficient detail as to apprise the Council
and the public of the nature of the interest and shall not vote.
Notwithstanding any common law or statutes to the contrary, and as an express
exercise of the City's home rule authority in derogation of any such law or
statute, no vote to abstain or similar vote shall be permissible hereunder, and
refusal to vote aye or nay or to state a direct interest in the question, as
outlined above, shall constitute a direct contempt of the City Council,
punishable as outlined in Sec.
2-2105 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 93-6-1, §2-2231 amended; 06/08/93)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; § 2-2231 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2232.   WHEN THE MAYOR SHALL VOTE.
   The mayor shall cast a vote under the following circumstances:
   (1)   Where the vote of the alderpersons has resulted in a tie;
   (2)   Where one-half (1/2) of the alderpersons elected have voted in favor
of an ordinance, even though there is no tie vote; and
   (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the City Council is required
by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2232 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2233.   REQUIRED VOTE FOR CITY COUNCIL ACTION; RECORDING OF VOTE.
   (a)   Omnibus votes. Any Council bill, requiring for passage only the
concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the City Council and
requested by the Committee-of-the-Whole or the mayor to be included on the
Council Agenda for omnibus vote and then so listed, may be included in a single
motion for adoption; and then the yeas and nays by roll call shall be taken on
said motion. Each such Council bill included within said motion shall be
considered passed or failed in accordance with said single vote as if a
separate vote had been taken on each such Council bill. Each alderperson has
the right and privilege to demand that any Council bill listed on the Council
Agenda for omnibus vote be removed from such list and voted on separately;
provided, said question of privilege is raised prior to the commencement of
voting.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03)
   (b)    Other votes. As to any matter not provided for in (a) above, the yeas
and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and on all
propositions to create any liability against the City, or to expend or
appropriate any money in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in all
other cases at the request of any member, which yeas and nays shall be entered
on the journal of its proceedings; and the concurrence of a majority of all
members elected to the City Council shall be necessary to the passage of any
such ordinance or proposition.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; Sec. 2-2233 (c) and (d) repealed in their entirety; 05/
13/03)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2233 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2234.   SALE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Real property. The City Council shall have the power to sell or lease
any municipal real property which is determined to be surplus and which is not
needed for future use. This power shall be exercised by ordinance. Sale or
lease of real property by competitive bidding shall be approved by a simple
majority of the corporate authorities then holding office. The City Council
reserves the right to reject any and all bids. Sale or lease of real property
through negotiation shall require approval by a two-thirds majority of the
corporate authorities then holding office; except that, when authorization to
proceed by negotiation shall have been by resolution adopted by the affirmative
vote of two-thirds of the corporate authorities then holding office, then
approval by a simple majority of the corporate authorities then holding office
shall be sufficient for passage.
   (b)   Personal property. The City Council shall have the power to sell,
lease or dispose of any municipal personal property which is determined to be
surplus and which is not needed for future use and is no longer useful to or in
the best interest of the City. This power shall be exercised by resolution and
shall authorize department heads to dispose of said property through the legal
process that is most advantageous to the City, whether sealed bid, auction,
negotiation or otherwise. Municipal personal property that is no longer
functional or operational (broken, damaged or non-repairable) and determined to
contain no value by a department head may be disposed of by the department head
without declaring the property as surplus and without further authorization.
(Ord. No. 3029-2015; Sec. 2-2234 repealed; new Sec. 2-2234 enacted; 08/04/15)
SEC. 2-2235.   COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   Unless and until the City Council adopts a competitive bidding procedure, 65
ILCS 5/11-76.2 (Illinois Municipal Code) shall represent the minimum
requirements for competitive bidding for the sale or lease of municipal
property except insofar as the voting requirement in said paragraph is
different than that contained in Section
2-2234 above.
SEC. 2-2236.   DEED OF CONVEYANCE.
   When the sale of municipal real property has been approved by the City
Council, and the consideration paid or secured, the mayor may convey the real
estate and transfer it, by proper deed of conveyance, stating therein the
consideration therefor. Said signature of the mayor is to be attested and
sealed by the city clerk.
SEC. 2-2237.   IMPROPER REMARKS.
   No person shall, in debating a matter before the City Council, engage in
personalities.
SEC. 2-2238.   SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   The rules of procedure of the City Council established in this article may
be temporarily suspended by unanimous consent of all members of the City
Council present, but shall not be repealed, altered or amended, unless by
concurrence of two-thirds of all the alderpersons elected.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2238 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 3. ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
SEC. 2-2300.   STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The City Council shall style all ordinances proposed to be adopted as
follows: "Be it ordained, by the City Council of the City of Moline, Illinois.”
SEC. 2-2301.   INTRODUCTION AND PASSAGE OF COUNCIL BILLS.
   (a)   Any council bill, whether it be a proposed ordinance or resolution,
shall be read by the city clerk by title only upon introduction; except, in
those instances when no written brief explanation of such council bill has been
made available to members of the City Council at least seventy-two (72) hours
prior to the meeting at which it is introduced, it shall be read by the city
clerk in its entirety.
   (b)   Nothing in subsection (a) shall prevent a member of the City Council
from exercising a right of privilege in demanding that a council bill for which
written explanation has been provided as set forth be read in its entirety;
nothing in subsection (a) shall prevent the City Council, upon adoption of a
proper motion, from waiving the reading in its entirety of a council bill for
which no written explanation has been provided as set forth.
   (c)   Before any council bill that proposes an ordinance shall be placed
before the City Council for final passage, it shall lay over at least one (1)
week after introduction unless the City Council, upon proper motion passed by
two-thirds (2/3) of all the alderpersons elected, moves for immediate
consideration. If there are multiple bills to be considered or for which
multiple requests for consideration would otherwise be made, then such motion
to consider all or any combination of such council bills may be made in one
combined motion for immediate adoption, to-wit: I move to consider council
bills numbered _______; and then the yeas and nays by roll call shall be taken
on said combined motion. Each such motion for consideration on each council
bill included within said combined motion shall be considered passed or failed
in accordance with said single vote as if a separate vote had been taken on
each such motion for consideration.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; Sec. 2-2301(d) repealed in its entirety; 05/13/03) (Ord.
No. 3028-2004; Sec 2-2301 (c) repealed; new Sec. 2-2301 (c) enacted; 05/11/04)
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2301 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2302.   APPROVAL OF ORDINANCES BY THE MAYOR; VETO.
   All ordinances passed by the City Council shall, before they take effect, be
deposited in the office of the city clerk; and if the mayor approves of them,
the mayor shall sign them. Those ordinances of which the mayor disapproves,
shall be returned to the City Council, with the mayor's written objections
thereon, at the next regular meeting of the City Council, occurring not less
than five (5) days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one
or more items in any ordinance, or to the entire ordinance; and in case the
veto only extends to a part of an ordinance, the residue thereof shall take
effect and be in force. But in case the mayor shall fail to return any
ordinance, with objections thereto, by the time required, the mayor shall be
deemed to have approved the ordinance, and it shall take effect accordingly.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2302 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2303.   RECONSIDERATION OF ORDINANCE AND PASSAGE OVER VETO.
   Upon the return of any ordinance by the mayor, the Council shall reconsider
the ordinance, and if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the
members elected to the City Council shall agree, by yeas and nays, to pass the
ordinance, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to
approve it. The vote to pass the ordinance over the mayor's veto shall be taken
by yeas and nays, and entered on the journal.
SEC. 2-2304.   PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (a)   The City Council shall cause all ordinances of the City, which impose
any fine, penalty, or forfeiture, or make any budget amendment, to be published
in one of the following forms:
      (1)   Printed or published in book or pamphlet form, published by
authority of the City Council, and it shall be published on the City website;
and
      (2)   Be published at least once within ten (10) days after passage, in
one or more newspapers published in the City.
   (b)   No ordinance required by subsection (a) to be published, shall become
effective until ten (10) days after its publication, unless a statement of the
urgency of the ordinance is contained in it and it achieves passage by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the City Council then holding office. If
such an ordinance contains such a statement of urgency and is passed by the
requisite majority, it shall take effect immediately upon approval by the
mayor.
   (c)   All ordinances not required by subsection (a) to be published shall
take effect from and after their passage, unless otherwise provided.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2304 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 4. COMMITTEES
SEC. 2-2400.   STAFF TRAFFIC COMMITTEE; COUNCIL REVIEW.
   (a)   The following matters related to traffic and pedestrian safety
programs shall be decided and administered by a traffic committee comprised of
the director of engineering or a designee thereof, the director of public works
or a designee thereof, the chief of police or a designee thereof, and the fire
chief or designee thereof:
      (1)   Designated parking for persons with disabilities;
      (2)   Signage and barricades but not including crosswalk locations and
not including traffic control devices requiring an engineering study and
opinion under the Illinois Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (b)   An appeal from a decision of the traffic committee may be taken to the
City Council by any party whose interests are aggrieved by the decision. An
appeal from a decision of the traffic committee shall be made to the City
Council by filing a written notice with the city administrator within thirty
(30) days of the decision of the traffic committee or said appeal is waived.
Any decision of the traffic committee of the public works department from which
no appeal is taken shall be considered final and binding.
   (c)   All other matters relating to traffic, street parking regulations, and
pedestrian safety programs, including but not limited to amendments to the
various appendices and schedules adopted by ordinance, shall be first referred
to the traffic committee for a recommendation that shall then be forwarded to
the City Council for final determination.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; Sec. 2-2400 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 2-2400
relating to the same subject matter enacted; 05/13/03; Ord. No. 3026-2019; Sec.
2-2400 repealed; new Sec. 2-2400 enacted; 11/19/19; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
2400 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2401.   COMPOSITION OF SPECIAL COMMITTEES; CHAIRMAN.
   (a)   All special committees shall consist of at least three (3) members
each, unless some other special number is specified; and the first person named
shall be the chairman.
   (b)   All meetings of the special committees will be held at City Hall, or
other place so designated by resolution and notice of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2401 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2402.   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   The members of any special committees of the City Council shall be appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; Sec. 2-2400 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 2-2400
enacted; 05/13/03)
SEC. 2-2403.   CITY CLERK TO GIVE NOTICE OF COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS AND
BUSINESS.
   The city clerk shall notify all members of the City Council appointed to
committees of the City Council of their appointment, and the clerk shall notify
the committees of the business referred to them.
SEC. 2-2404.   CITY CLERK TO KEEP A LIST OF COMMITTEES.
   The city clerk shall keep a list of all committees of the City Council.
SEC. 2-2405.   COMMITTEE REPORTS.
   (a)   Any special committee of the City Council, to which a matter is
referred, shall in all cases report in writing the statement of facts, with its
opinion thereon. Any majority report may be included in and take the form of
the minutes of the said committee; any committee member or group of committee
members not constituting a majority may submit a minority report in writing to
the City Council.
   (b)   All minutes and other reports of said committees of the Council shall
be addressed "To the Mayor and alderpersons of the City of Moline, in Council
assembled," and shall briefly describe the matter referred and the conclusion
to which the committee has arrived, which conclusion shall be summed up in the
form of an order, resolution or recommendation, or shall be submitted with the
notation "No Recommendation" if an issue cannot be determined in committee
within the time frame allotted said committee.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2405 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2406.   TERMINATION OF SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   On the acceptance of a final report from a special committee, the special
committee shall be considered discharged without a vote, unless otherwise
ordered.
DIVISION 5. BALANCED BUDGET POLICY
SEC. 2-2500.   BUDGET POLICY; ESTABLISHED.
It shall be the general policy of the City of Moline that any budget resolution
adopted annually by the City and relating to the general fund shall be a
balanced budget. The term-balanced budget shall mean that the expenses and
expenditures being paid from the general fund in any given fiscal year shall
not exceed the revenues being paid into said general fund plus any draw downs
of reserves in compliance with the City’s adopted fund balance policy. The
requirements of this Section
2-2500 shall only apply as set forth in Section
2-2501.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2500 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2501.   BALANCED BUDGET; IMPLEMENTATION; RESTRICTIONS.
   Any budget adopted of resolution by the City Council for any particular
fiscal year and related solely to the general fund shall be balanced as defined
in Section
2-2500, unless an unbalanced budget resolution is approved by a two-thirds (2/
3) majority of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-2501 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-2502.   INTERNAL APPLICATION ONLY; PROHIBITION ON THIRD- PERSON USE OF
SAID ORDINANCE.
   The general fund balanced budget restrictions referenced in this Division 5
of Article II of
Chapter 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances shall be for internal use of the
City only. No person or third person, governmental official or judge may use
this paragraph to invalidate any action of the Moline City Council in adopting
any type of budget resolution, whether balanced or unbalanced. Further, no
person or third person should rely on this ordinance as any type of limitation,
circumscription, or reduction in the City's powers, which limitations,
circumscriptions, and reductions are specifically disclaimed by the City of
Moline.
(Ord. No. 95-12-1; new Division 5 of Article II adopted; 12-19-95)
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
Part A. Miscellaneous
SEC. 2-3100.   PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR OFFICE.
   (a)   No person shall be eligible for any City office who is not a qualified
elector of the City, and who shall not have resided therein at least one (1)
year next preceding such person's election or appointment.
   (b)   No person shall be eligible to be an officer of the City who is in
default on a debt due the City.
SEC. 2-3101.   COMMISSIONS OF APPOINTMENT AND CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION.
   All officers of the City elected or appointed under this Code, except the
city clerk, the alderpersons and the mayor, shall be commissioned by warrant
under the corporate seal, signed by the mayor and the city clerk. The mayor
shall issue a certificate of appointment or election, under the seal of the
City to the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3101 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3102.   OATH.
   (a)   All officers of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the
following oath or affirmation:
   "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
and the Moline Code of Ordinances, and that I will faithfully discharge the
duties of the office of______________ according to the best of my ability."
   (b)   The oath or affirmation, when subscribed, shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3102 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3103.   VACANCIES IN ELECTED OFFICE; FILLING.
   (a)   By election. If a vacancy occurs in an elective office with at least
twenty-eight (28) months remaining in the unexpired term, and the vacancy
occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days prior to the general municipal
election next scheduled, the vacancy shall be filled at that general municipal
election.
   (b)     By appointment. If a vacancy occurs later than the time specified in
(a) above, the vacancy shall be filled as follows:
      (1)   Mayor: The City Council shall elect one of its members acting mayor
who shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor
until a successor is elected and has qualified.
      (2)   Alderperson: The mayor shall appoint a person to fill the unexpired
term until a successor is elected and has qualified.
   (c)   Temporary appointment. If a vacancy occurs as provided in (a) above,
the vacancy shall be temporarily filled by appointment as provided in (b)
above.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3103 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3104.   COMPENSATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS NOT TO BE ALTERED DURING TERM.
The fees, salary or compensation of any City officer who is elected or
appointed for a definite term, shall not be increased or diminished during that
term.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3104 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3105.   CERTAIN OFFICERS NOT TO HOLD OTHER OFFICE.
   The mayor, the city clerk, or any alderperson shall not hold any other
office under the City government during such officer's term of office.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3105 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3106.   CERTAIN OFFICERS TO BE CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE.
   The mayor, and each alderperson, shall be conservators of the peace, and as
such, shall exercise the powers conferred upon them under the statutes of the
state.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3106 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3107.   DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO SUCCESSOR IN OFFICE.
   Any person who is an officer of the City shall, within five (5) days after
written notification and request, deliver to said officer's successor in office
all property, books, and effects belonging to the City, or appertaining
thereto; and, upon refusal to do so, shall be liable for all damages caused
thereby and to the penalty prescribed in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3107 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3108.   PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO ADMINISTER OATHS.
   The mayor and the city clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations upon all lawful occasions.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3108 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3109.   LOSS OF DOCUMENTS.
   Should the mayor, corporation counsel, or any other person, suffer any paper
or record entrusted to either one or more of them, to be lost or obliterated,
such person shall be responsible for the damage that may accrue by such loss.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3109 amended; 7/12/22)
Part B. Conflicts of Interest
SEC. 2-3110.   DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental
structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the
public have confidence in the integrity of its government. Neither, though,
should public officials and employees be punished for their status as public
officials and employees when there is no potential that a private interest
could affect a government decision or policy, nor should a policy be so vague
and yet restrictive that citizen participation is inhibited. In recognition of
these goals, a Code of Ethics for all City officials and employees is adopted.
The purpose of this Code of Ethics shall be as follows:
   (1)   To define and clarify "interest" as it appears in 50 ILCS 105/3;
   (2)   To describe and exempt de minimis interest since such interests do not
present incentive to cause decisions or policies to be changed to further such
interests and since regulation of such interests appears to punish public
official or employment status rather than further a legitimate public policy
goal and since failure to exempt such interests will inhibit rather than
encourage citizen participation;
   (3)   To establish clear guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all
officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are
incompatible with the best interests of the City;
   (4)   To provide a procedure that will allow for public officials and
employees to seek, in advance, guidance upon which they can rely in situations
where there are two (2) or more reasonable interpretations to said Code of
Ethics or where the factual situation is such that the applicability of said
Code of Ethics is unclear; and
   (5)   To direct disclosure by such officials and employees of private
financial or other interests in matters affecting the City so that there will
be not even an appearance of impropriety.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3110 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3111.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Administrative action means enforcement actions, whether
investigation, inspection, or issuance of administrative orders or effecting an
arrest; preparation of reports, recommendations, or other documents for the
mayor, City Council, corporation counsel, or any board, commission, or agency
of the City; the negotiation of, review of, or administration of any contract
for the sale of goods, services, or property to the City; and any other act,
order, review, or document preparation of an administrative official or
employee of the City that involves said official or employee's substantial,
independent, and discretionary involvement.
   (b)   Interest means direct or indirect pecuniary benefit accruing to a
public officer or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is or
may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the City except for
such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the substance of
their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of
similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated.
(Ord. No. 3005-2014; Sec. 2-3112(b) repealed; new Sec. 2-3112(b) enacted; 03/
18/14)
   For the purposes of this Code of Ethics, a public officer or employee shall
be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of the following persons or
entities:
      (1)   Any person related to said public officer or employee by blood or
marriage in a degree closer than the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity
(determined by the civil law method);
      (2)   Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship
exists with the public officer or employee;
      (3)   Any business entity in which the public officer or employee is an
officer, director, or member having a financial interest, or by which the
public officer or employee is employed; and
      (4)   Any business entity of which the stock or legal or beneficial
ownership in excess of seven and one-half (7 1/2) per cent is controlled or
owned directly or indirectly by the public officer or employee.
   (c)   Official act or action means any legislative, administrative,
appointive, or discretionary act of any officer or employee of the City or any
agency, board, committee, or commission thereof.
   (d)   Business entity means any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership,
and person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture,
trust, or corporation.
   (e)   Public officer or employee means any person, officer, or employee
holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the
City, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any board, committee, or
commission thereof.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3111 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3112.   CODE OF ETHICS.
   (a)   Code of Ethics established. The requirements herein set forth shall
constitute a Code of Ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines
for the ethical conduct of public officers and employees of the City.
   (b)   Interest in contract or transaction. No public officer or employee,
who, alone or in concert, has the power or duty to perform an official act or
action or whose office, board, committee, commission, agency, or department has
the power or duty to perform an official act or action related to a contract or
transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the
City shall:
      (1)   Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or
transaction;
      (2)   Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising, or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract or transaction;
      (3)   Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a
person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction;
      (4)   Have solicited, accepted, or granted a present or future gift,
favor, service, or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract
or transaction, except as provided in Section
2-3112(c); or
      (5)   Have encouraged, made, or accepted any ex parte or unilateral
application or communication where a determination is to be made after a public
hearing and such public official or employee fails to make the contents of the
communication part of the record.
   (c)   Gift exemption. The prohibition against gifts or favors in Section
2-3112(b)(4) shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   An occasional, nonpecuniary gift that is insignificant in value;
      (2)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
      (3)   Any gift that would have been offered or given notwithstanding
public official or employment status.
   (d)   Pre-acquisition of interest. No public official or employee, with
respect to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an
official act or action of the City, shall acquire an interest in or affected by
such contract or transaction at a time when the public official or employee
believes or has reason to believe that it will be affected directly or
indirectly by an official act or action of the City.
   (e)   Disclosure of information. No public officer or employee, with respect
to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official
act or action of the City, shall disclose without proper legal authorization
confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the
City or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest
of such public officer, employee or others.
   (f)   Incompatible service. No public officer or employee shall engage in or
accept private employment or render service for private interest when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of the
officer's or employee's official duties or would tend to impair such official
or employee's independence of judgment or action in the performance of official
duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as
provided in this Code of Ethics.
   (g)   Appearances. No public officer or employee shall appear on behalf of
any private person, other than such officer or employee, said officer or
employee's spouse, or minor children, before any City agency or before any
court action in which the City is a party thereto when said public officer or
employee's office, board, committee, commission, agency or department has the
power or duty to perform an official act or action related to the subject
matter of the appearance. Said prohibition shall not be deemed to prevent
appearance as a participant in or representative of the collective bargaining
process and/or the administration of any memoranda of understanding with City
employees. However, a member of the City Council may appear before City
agencies on behalf of said member's constituents in the course of said member's
duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or
civic obligations.
   (h)   Public contracts. No public officer or employee, who, in the capacity
as such officer or employee, participates in the making of a contract or whose
office, board, committee, commission, agency, or department participates in the
making of a contract in which said officer or employee has a private pecuniary
interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some
function requiring the exercise of discretion on said officer, employee, or
officer or employee's office, board, committee, commission, agency, or
department's part; shall enter into any contract with the City unless:
      (1)   The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and
competitive offering; or
      (2)   Corporation counsel waives the requirement of this section after
determining in writing that it is in the best interest of the City to do so.
   (i)   Public property. No public officer or employee shall request or permit
the use of City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property or City-paid-
for labor for personal convenience or profit unless such use is made available
to the general public in the normal course of business.
   (j)   Special treatment. No public officer or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any person beyond that which
is available to every other person similarly situated.
   (k)   Later case interest. No public officer or employee shall, after
termination of service or employment with the City, appear before any board,
commission, committee, or agency of the City in relation to any case,
proceeding, or application in which said officer or employee personally
participated during the period of said officer or employee's service or
employment, or which was under said officer or employee's active consideration.
   (l)   Absolute prohibition of appearance. No public officer or employee
shall appear before a board, commission, committee, agency, or department of
the City on which said officer served or for which said employee was employed
for a period of one year after termination of service or employment.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3112 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3113.   EXCEPTIONS TO CODE OF ETHICS.
   (a)   It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of the Code of
Ethics if the interest of a public officer or employee in a person or business
entity is a contractual obligation of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
which has not been preceded by any other obligation, discharged or existing,
between the parties, and which is not the first in a series of two (2) or more
loans or debts which either of the parties is under an obligation to make or
incur.
   (b)   A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business
by an institution authorized by the laws of this state to engage in the making
of such loans shall not be deemed to create an interest in violation of this
Code of Ethics.
   (c)   A contract for a commercial retail sale, even though over the value of
five hundred dollars ($500.00), shall not be deemed to create an interest in
violation of this Code of Ethics.
   (d)   All promotions or offers to the City's employees for the purchase of a
product or products at a reduced rate or for the provision of special services
shall be presented to corporation counsel for approval pursuant to the
following criteria:
      (1)   The promotion or offer must be made available to all City
employees;
      (2)   The promotion or offer is one that is made available to employees
of other local employers or to the employer on behalf of its employees; and
      (3)   The company providing the promotion or offer is not a business
entity that conducts business directly with the City.
(Ord. No. 3089-2004; new 3ll4 (d) enacted; 11/02/04; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec.
2-3113 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3114.   DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST.
   (a)   Any member of the City Council who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed official act or action shall disclose, prior
to said act or action taking place or immediately upon learning about said act
or action if it has already taken place, on the record of the City Council the
nature and extent of such interest.
   (b)   Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal
interest in any proposed official act or action shall disclose, prior to said
act or action taking place or immediately upon learning about said act or
action if it has already taken place, to the mayor and corporation counsel and
on the official record, if any, of any official act or action, the nature and
extent of such interest.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3114 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3115.   ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Corporation counsel shall have the primary responsibility for the
enforcement of this Code. Said counsel shall have the power to investigate any
complaint, to initiate any suit, and to prosecute any criminal or civil action
on behalf of the City.
   (b)   The City Council may direct corporation counsel to investigate or
prosecute any apparent violation of the Code or it may employ or appoint any
qualified counsel to investigate or prosecute any violation or series of
violations of this Code by one or more persons.
   (c)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of the Code
has occurred may file a complaint with corporation counsel or with the City
Council, who may thereafter proceed as provided for under Sections
2-3114(a) or (b). However, nothing in the Code shall be construed to prevent
complainants from instituting direct legal action through the appropriate
judicial authority.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3115 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3116.   ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (a)   Where any public officer or employee has a doubt as to the
applicability of any provision of this Code to a particular situation, or as to
the definition of terms used herein, said public officer or employee may apply
to corporation counsel for an advisory opinion. The officer or employee shall
have the opportunity to present such officer or employee's interpretation of
the facts at issue and of the applicability of provisions of the Code before
such advisory opinion is made.
   (b)   Such opinion, until amended or revoked, shall be binding on the City,
the City Council, and corporation counsel in any subsequent actions concerning
the public officer or employee who sought the opinion and acted on it in good
faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the
advisory opinion. Such opinion shall not be binding in any action initiated by
any private citizen.
   (c)   Any advisory opinion prepared by corporation counsel shall be made
public. However, the name of the person requesting the opinion and the names of
all persons or business entities mentioned in the opinion shall be deemed
confidential information and shall not be disclosed by corporation counsel
unless the public officer or employee waives such confidentiality or where
corporation counsel deems the public official to have failed to act in good
faith in requesting the opinion or in conforming with the opinion or to have
failed to act in conformance with the opinion.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3116 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3117.   PENALTIES; FORFEITED POSITION; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTION.
   (a)   Any public officer or employee who willfully and knowingly violates
any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a petty offense
which shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
   (b)   Upon conviction for any violation of this Part B of any public officer
or employee, such officer or employee shall immediately forfeit said public
officer or employee's office or position. Nothing in this part shall be
construed to prohibit such public officer or employee from being re-elected,
reappointed or otherwise rehired to any position forfeited under the provisions
of this part.
   (c)   Corporation Counsel, with the consent of the City Council, may exempt
from the provisions of this part any conduct found to constitute a violation by
any public officer or employee, if said counsel finds that the enforcement of
this part with respect to such conduct is not necessary in the public interest.
   (d)   Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an official act
or action of the City in which there is an interest prohibited by this Code, or
which involved the violation of a provision of this Code, shall be voidable at
the option of the City.
   (e)   Corporation Counsel shall have the power, where a violation of the
provisions of this Code is threatened or has occurred, to bring civil action or
proceeding at law or in equity for a judgment enjoining any violation of the
provisions of this part or requiring the relinquishment of any prohibited
interest or the voiding of any such contract or transaction, taking into
account the interests of the City and any third persons who may be injured
thereby. Where corporation counsel determines that the public interest may best
be served by not voiding a contract or transaction entered into in violation of
this part, such contract or transaction may be enforced and an action or
proceeding may be brought against any public officer or employee found in
violation of provisions of this part for damages not to exceed twice the
damages suffered by the City or twice the profit or gain realized by the public
officer or employee, whichever is greater.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3117 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3118.   DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS.
   The city clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed
to every public officer and employee of the City within thirty (30) days after
enactment of this Code. Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or
engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of
public office or employment.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3118 amended; 7/12/22)
Part C. State Mandated Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
SEC. 2-3119.   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
   (a)   Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i)
relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that
are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   (b)   Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions
for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code
(10 ILCS 5/1-3).
   (c)   Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   (d)   Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked
by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes
of this Ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer
or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   (e)   Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded
to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   (f)   Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   (g)   Employee means a person employed by the City of Moline whether on a
full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of the City as employer with regard to the
material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
   (h)   Employer means the City of Moline.
   (i)   Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
   (j)   Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not
receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension
benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   (k)   Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an
office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
   (l)   Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection
with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does
not include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any
executive, legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective
bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.
   (m)   Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk.
   (n)   Prohibited political activity means:
      (1)    Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event;
      (2)    Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event;
      (3)    Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any
document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution;
      (4)    Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
      (5)    Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question;
      (6)    Assisting at the polls on Election Day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question;
      (7)    Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls;
      (8)    Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
      (9)    Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective
office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office;
      (10)    Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
      (11)    Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
      (12)    Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question;
      (13)    Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
      (14)    Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention; and
      (15)    Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   (o)   Prohibited source means any person or entity who:
      (1)    Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)    Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii)
with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
      (3)    Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)    Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or
employee.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3119 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3120.   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (a)    No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the City of
Moline in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (b)    At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as
part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment,
or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   (c)    No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the
form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in
any prohibited political activity.
   (d)    Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this Ordinance.
   (e)    No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for
which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to
grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of
a political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3120 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3121.   GIFT BAN.
   Except as permitted by this Article, no officer or employee, and no spouse
of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this Section.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3121 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3122.   EXCEPTIONS.
   Section
2-3121 is not applicable to the following:
      (1)    Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
      (2)    Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value;
      (3)    Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code
or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate;
      (4)    Educational materials and missions;
      (5)    Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
      (6)    A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancée;
      (7)    Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members;
      (8)    Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this Section, "catered" means
food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by
any means;
      (9)    Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances;
      (10)    Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, "intra-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity;
      (11)    Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death; and
      (12)    Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3122 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3123.   DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.
   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate this Ordinance if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited
source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501 (c)
(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered, or succeeded.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec, 2-3123 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3124.   ETHICS ADVISOR.
   Corporation Counsel is appointed to serve as the "ethics advisor" of the
City of Moline. The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the City of Moline concerning the interpretation of and compliance
with the provisions of this Ordinance and State ethics laws. The ethics advisor
shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3124 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3125.   EXISTING ETHICS ORDINANCE OR GIFT BAN ORDINANCE.
   This ordinance does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify Sec.
2-3112 et seq., of the Code, which regulates the conduct of City officials and
employees. To the extent that, and in any circumstance wherein Sec.
2-3112 is less restrictive than the State Officials and Employees Act (Public
Act 93-615 as amended by Public Act 93-617) or this ordinance, then the
provisions of this ordinance shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of
the Act. Where this ordinance would be less restrictive than the provisions
contained in Sec.
2-3119 et seq., then Sec.
2-3119 et seq., shall control.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3125 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3126.   LOCAL ETHICS COMMISSION.
   The local Ethics Commission for the City of Moline shall be composed of the
members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City of Moline as
created by Section
2-4400 of this chapter.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)    To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of
its duties and the exercise of its powers;
      (2)    Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with Section
2-3112 of this Ordinance and refer violations of this Ordinance to the
appropriate counsel for prosecution. The Commission shall, however, act only
upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this Ordinance
and not upon its own prerogative;
      (3)    To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this Ordinance;
      (4)    To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the City of Moline to cooperate with the Commission
during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with
requests by the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or
discharge; and
      (5)    The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3126 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3127.   STATE LEGISLATIVE ETHICS COMMISSION; COMPLAINTS.
   (a)    Complaints alleging a violation of this Ordinance shall be filed with
the Ethics Commission.
   (b)    Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
   (c)    Upon not less than 48 hours' public notice, the Commission shall meet
to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed
sufficient to allege a violation of this Ordinance, to determine whether there
is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to
proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by
the Open Meetings Act. The Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and
the respondent of the Commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven (7) business days
after receiving the complaint.
   (d)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Section
2-3120 of this Ordinance and there is a determination of probable cause, then
the Commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
Commission may elect to notify, in writing, the corporation counsel designated
by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the
complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient
to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then
the Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall
be made public.
   (e)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of Article
5 of Public Act 93-615, as amended by Public Act 93-617, then the Commission
shall notify in writing the corporation counsel designated by the corporate
authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to corporation counsel
the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the Commission
concerning the alleged violation.
   (f)    On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours' public notice of
the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall
allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The
hearing may be closed to the public only to the extent authorized by the Open
Meetings Act.
   (g)    Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing is concluded, the Commission shall either (i) dismiss the complaint or
(ii) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the
city administrator or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular
findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed
shall be a matter of public information.
   (h)    If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand,
the Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48
hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to
present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the
Commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator
and to the City Manager or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
   (i)    If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date
of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall
render its decision as required under subsection (e) within seven (7) days
after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding that
election, the Commission shall render such decision before the date of that
election, if possible.
   (j)    The Commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any
provision of Article 10 of Public Act 93-615, as amended by Public Act 93-617,
in an amount of not less than One Thousand One Hundred One Dollars ($1,001.00)
and not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). The Commission may fine
any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of
this Ordinance in an amount of not less than One Thousand One Hundred One
Dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). The
Commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge.
   (k)   A complaint alleging the violation of this Act must be filed within
one year after the alleged violation.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3127 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3128.   PENALTIES.
   (a)    A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section 2-3120
of this Ordinance may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($2,500.00).
   (b)    A person who intentionally violates any provision of Section
2-3121 of this Ordinance is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than One
Thousand One Hundred One Dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000.00).
   (c)    Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this Ordinance to the local enforcement
authorities, the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official, may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00).
   (d)    A violation of Article 5 of Public Act 93-615, as amended by Public
Act 93-617, shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by corporation counsel
for the City of Moline by filing in the circuit court any information, or sworn
complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to
the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of
the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   A violation of Section
2-3121 of this Ordinance may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by
corporation counsel for the City of Moline, or, by the Ethics Commission
through the designated administrative procedure.
   (e)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of Section
2-3120 or
2-3121 of this Ordinance is subject to discipline or discharge.
(Ord. No. 3022-2004; new Part D enacted, "State Mandated Officials & Employees
Ethics Act"; 04/27/04; (Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3128 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 2. EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
SEC. 2-3200.   CREATED; PURPOSE.
   The executive department is hereby created. The purpose of this department
is to provide executive and general administrative direction, supervision, and
control over the affairs of the City. This department will provide a focus for
municipal policy and program development, coordination, and implementation.
Legal services to the City shall be provided by this department through the
City's corporation counsel. Funds for the operation of the legislative and
court functions and responsibilities of the City shall be included in the
annual budget of the executive department.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3200 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3201.   MAYOR.
   (a)   Qualifications and term. The mayor shall be a citizen of the United
States, a qualified elector, reside within the City limits, and shall hold
office for a term of four (4) years, such term expiring on May 1 following the
municipal election of candidates to said office and until a successor is
elected and qualified.
   (b)   Acts creating vacancy in office. The following acts shall create a
vacancy in the office of the mayor:
      (1)   Resignation;
      (2)   Failure to elect or qualify;
      (3)   Death;
      (4)   Permanent mental or physical disability;
      (5)   Conviction of a disqualifying crime;
      (6)   Abandonment of office;
      (7)    Removal from office; and
      (8)   Removal of residency from the City.
   (c)   Mayor pro tem. Following each mayoral election, the City Council
approves, by resolution, a monthly rotating schedule designating an alderperson
to serve as mayor pro tem, and who shall possess the power of the mayor during
the absence or disability of the mayor.
   (d)   General powers and duties. The mayor shall have the following general
powers and duties:
      (1)   Recommend to the City Council for consideration such policies,
programs, projects, or other measures as deemed necessary or expedient;
      (2)   Take care that the laws and ordinances of the City are faithfully
enforced;
      (3)   Exercise all appropriate powers as granted to the mayor by law,
including, but not limited to power to appoint members to boards and
commissions pursuant to the Code, the power to appoint such person(s) necessary
to fill unexpired terms of alderpersons when said terms are or become vacant,
the power to preside at Council meetings, including the power of voting as set
forth in the Moline Code of Ordinances, and all other granted powers except
those functions and responsibilities assigned by law to other elected officials
and appointed officers;
      (4)   Provide continuing liaison with the various agencies of the City
and with other governmental bodies both within and outside the City;
      (5)   Have the power at all times to examine and inspect the books,
records and papers of any agent, employee, or officer of the City; and
      (6)   Perform all other duties as are prescribed by law, this Code, or
other City ordinance.
   (e)   Emergency powers of the mayor; enumerated; "curfew," "state of
emergency" defined; notice to public; suspension of certain businesses;
penalty.
      (1)   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them:
         a.   Curfew is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or
persons walking, running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley,
street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits
of the City, except officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency.
         b.   A state of emergency shall mean:
            1.   A riot, unlawful assembly, mob action or civil disturbance
characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat of force or
violence accompanied by apparent immediate power to execute such threat by
person or persons in the City without authority of law.
            2.   Any period of a disaster or emergency as declared by the
Governor of the State of Illinois that includes any part of the City of Moline,
any natural disaster, epidemic or other threat to public health, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or any man-made calamity or
explosion within the corporate limits of the City, or the imminent threat of
such, resulting or reasonably anticipated to result in the death or injury of
persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. An
epidemic as referenced herein shall have the same meaning as provided by the
Center for Disease Control as "an increase, often sudden, in the number of
cases of a disease above what is normally expected in that population in that
area," and shall include a pandemic, which is defined as a type of epidemic
"that occurs over a wide geographic area and affects a large number of people."
      (2)   The mayor is hereby authorized, upon the occurrence of a state of
emergency, to find that the state of emergency exists in accordance with said
definitions of subsection (e)(1), and said mayor is, in addition, hereby
authorized to exercise the powers granted in this section during the state of
emergency, upon the signing under oath a statement finding that a state of
emergency does exist. Said statement shall also set forth facts to substantiate
such findings, describe the nature of the emergency and declare that a state of
emergency exists.
      (3)   This statement of the mayor finding that a state of emergency
exists shall be filed with the city clerk as soon as practicable after its
execution.
      (4)   After a declaration of a state of emergency by the mayor, a general
curfew applicable to such persons and to such geographical areas of the City,
or the City as a whole, may be ordered as deemed advisable, and the curfew
shall be applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed necessary
in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
      (5)   After the declaration of a state of emergency, the mayor may also,
in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders by executive order:
         a.   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency or
otherwise imminently necessary for the protection of life and property;
         b.   Approve such contracts as may be presented by the city
administrator for goods and/or services that are reasonably necessary to
respond to the emergency, notwithstanding any other requirements of the Code of
Ordinances, provided the cost of said contract is less than $100,000.00;
         c.   Authorize overtime, recalls from duty, the cancellation of
vacations, and increases in human-power resources;
         d.   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the City for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
         e.   In the event the Local State of Emergency extends beyond the
current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, to approve new
spending by the City during the existence of the Local State of Emergency;
         f.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns
and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption or sale of
intoxicating liquor, beer, and recreational cannabis is permitted;
         g.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor and
recreational cannabis by any wholesaler or retailer;
         h.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle; and
         i.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing,
transferring or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.
      (6)   A statement of emergency declared by the mayor in accordance with
this section shall expire not later than the call to order of the first regular
meeting of the City Council after a statement of emergency is declared revoked
by the mayor.
      (7)   Upon issuing the declaration herein authorized, the City's
Communications Coordinator shall notify the news media situated within the City
and shall cause the declaration declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the following places within the City: City Hall, the police station,
the post office and the City's website.
      (8)   Any person violating the provisions of this section or any
executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense and
punished as provided in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
   (f)   Salary.
      (1)   The mayor shall receive a salary of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) per annum.
(Ord. No. 3026-2012; Sec. 2-3201(g)(1) repealed; new Sec. 2-3201(g)(1) enacted;
11/16/12; Ord. No. 3008-2017; Sec. 2-3201(g)(2) repealed in its entirety –
elimination of mayoral health insurance participation requirement effective May
4, 2021; 06/13/17; Ord. No. 3011-2020; Sec. 2-3201(f) repealed; new Sec. 2-3201
(f) enacted; 03/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3201 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3202.   CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created the position of city administrator.
   (b)   Appointment and dismissal.  The administrator shall be appointed by
the City Council. The city administrator shall be the administrative head of
the municipal government; shall be responsible for the efficient administration
of all departments; shall be appointed without regard to said administrator's
political beliefs and for an indefinite term, and the conditions of the city
administrator's employment may be set forth in an agreement. In the case of the
absence or disability of the city administrator, the City Council may designate
a qualified administrative officer of the municipality to perform the duties of
the city administrator during such absence or disability. The city
administrator may at any time be removed from office by a majority vote of the
members of the City Council.
   (c)   Duties and responsibilities.  The city administrator shall be the
chief administrative officer of the City and shall be responsible to the City
Council for the general administration and direction of the operations of the
various departments and offices of the City and in addition thereto shall:
      (1)   Enforce the laws and ordinances within the municipality;
      (2)   Appoint all directors of departments with the advice and consent of
the City Council; except the parks and recreation director and library
director, which directors shall be appointed by the respective commissions;
      (3)   Remove all directors of departments without the advice and consent
of the City Council; except the parks and recreation director and the library
director;
      (4)   Exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof created
in this Code, or that may be created by the City Council; except as limited
elsewhere in this Code;
      (5)   Assist the mayor and City Council in the preparation and
administration of the annual budget and assist the director of finance in the
preparation of the annual budget and tax levy ordinances. In the preparation of
the annual budget, the city administrator shall consult with each of the
various City departments, commissions, and boards and may require and obtain
such information from them as may be useful and necessary for preparation of
the annual budget. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be
presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management
practices;
      (6)   Establish such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are
made by the City, City departments, commissions or boards except as authorized
by the annual budget, and in the administration of such procedures have the
authority to examine all books and records of all City departments, commissions
and boards;
      (7)   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all City departments, commissions and boards;
      (8)   Have the power on any formal charge to remove any officer or
employee appointed by the city administrator, other than those covered by Sec.
2-3202(c)(3) whenever the administrator shall be of the opinion that the
interests of the City demand such removal. Such removal shall be made without
the advice, consent or review of the City Council;
      (9)   Attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part
in the discussions, but with no right to vote;
      (10)   Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as deemed
necessary or expedient;
      (11)   Administer the Personnel Code and the City of Moline Position
Classification and Compensation Plan and in relation thereto establish and
maintain a personnel records system;
      (12)   Negotiate on behalf of the City with City employee organizations
pursuant to direction of the City Council;
      (13)   Establish from time to time and encourage the establishment by
City departments and offices, employee training programs that will improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of the various City departments and offices;
      (14)   Analyze all City departments and offices and recommend to the City
Council methods to improve their efficiency and effectiveness;
      (15)   Assist the mayor and City Council in the development of City
policies and programs;
      (16)   Examine the long-range fiscal outlook of the City and advise the
City Council regarding such matters;
      (17)   Perform financial analysis of annexation, tax, and legislative
proposals and advise the City Council regarding such matters;
      (18)   Maintain a current knowledge of state and federal funding
programs, present analysis of appropriate programs to the City Council and
initiate and administer those programs approved by the City Council; and
      (19)   Perform such other duties, consistent with the ordinances of the
City and the laws of the State of Illinois, as the City Council may direct or
delegate from time to time.
   (d)   Qualifications.  The city administrator shall have the following
training and qualifications:
      (1)   Education and training should be sufficient to accomplish the job
as described in the employee job description.
      (2)   Knowledge: Shall have a knowledge of management administration,
City government operation, and good general business practices; shall also have
ability to perform administrative, managerial and staff functions; shall have
ability in employee and public relations; shall have supervisory ability; shall
have an ability to communicate verbally and in writing.
   (e)   Salary. The salary of the city administrator shall be set by the City
Council as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 92-6-1; Sec. 2-3202 repealed; new section 2-3202 enacted; 06/02/92)
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03; Ord. No.
3016-2022; Sec. 2-3202 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3203.   CORPORATION COUNSEL.
   (a)    Creation. There is hereby created the position of corporation
counsel. The corporation counsel can either be filled by a full-time City
employee or an outside attorney or law firm. If the corporation counsel is not
a full-time City employee, the position shall be considered an independent
contractor.
   (b)   Appointment and dismissal. The corporation counsel shall be appointed
by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the City Council and
may be dismissed by the city administrator at any time in accordance with the
provisions of this Code set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). In the event a corporation counsel appointed by the city
administrator does not receive the advice and consent of the City Council, the
city administrator may appoint a temporary corporation counsel whose temporary
appointment may not exceed ninety (90) days and cannot be renewed after such
appointment has expired.
   (c)   Qualifications and conditions of employment. The corporation counsel
shall be licensed by the Supreme Court of the State of Illinois, shall be
experienced in the general practice of law, and shall be knowledgeable in
municipal law.
   (d)   Duties and responsibilities. The corporation counsel shall report to
the city administrator and mayor and have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   To serve as principal legal specialist of the City as directed
pursuant to the ordinance;
      (2.a)   To provide verbal and written advice to the mayor and city
administrator or, at the direction of the mayor or city administrator, any city
officer on any matter of law in which the interests of the City are involved;
      (2.b)   To provide verbal and written advice to the City Council and any
of its committees on any matter of law in which the interests of the City are
involved as directed by the city administrator. When said advice is requested
in written form, the request shall be made by motion on the Council floor and
shall require a majority of Council present to vote in favor of said request;
      (3)   To prepare ordinances when requested by the mayor, city
administrator, or the City Council upon motion made on the Council floor and
apprised by a majority of Council members present in favor of said request;
      (4)   To attend all regular or special meetings of the City Council, and
upon request of the mayor or city administrator, any meetings of the City
Council's committees;
      (5)   As directed by the city administrator, to prosecute, defend or
appeal on behalf of the City all cases in which the interests of the City are
involved, including those arising from traffic violations, or any case where
the official acts of any City officer or agent are involved except where those
cases are handled by an insurance provider for the City;
      (6)   To examine all assessments and tax lists or other papers in
relation to the assessment or collection of taxes or assessments, and approve
the assessments and tax lists, and represent the City in all special assessment
proceedings;
      (7)   To report to the city administrator, mayor and City Council from
time to time the status of all cases of the City in litigation;
      (8)   To review all bonds, contracts and other instruments and recommend
action concerning them prior to the City making commitments; and
      (9)   To perform such other legal or advisory services as requested by
the city administrator.
   (e)    Special counsel. From time to time, the city administrator may
authorize the engagement of special legal counsel to handle individual legal
matters.
   Such special counsel shall be compensated at a rate established and approved
by the City Council at the time of engagement. The corporation counsel shall
cooperate with such special legal counsel for the term of such engagement.
Special legal counsel shall be engaged only for a specific legal matter or for
a specific period of time.
(Ord. No. 99-5-2; Sec. 2-3203(d) and (e) repealed; new Sec. 2-3203(d) and (e)
enacted; 05/04/99) (Ord. No. 2000-12-07; Sec. 2-3203, subsection (d)(2)
repealed; new subsection (d)(2) enacted; 12/05/00) (Ord. No. 3008-2019; Sec. 2-
3203, "CITY ATTORNEY," repealed in entirety; new Sec. 2-3203, "CORPORATION
COUNSEL," enacted; further establishing that any reference to city attorney in
the Code shall have the same meaning as the term corporation counsel; 03/12/19;
Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3203 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3204.   ASSISTANT CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created the position of assistant city
administrator.
   (b)   Appointment and dismissal. The assistant city administrator shall be
appointed by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the City
Council and shall report to the city administrator. The city administrator may
remove the assistant city administrator with or without the consent of the City
Council. Said assistant city administrator may hold another non-conflicting
municipal office, including a department director position, other than park and
recreation director or library director, on an interim basis.
   (c)   The assistant city administrator may serve as the acting city
administrator when the city administrator is absent from his or her office for
more than one (1) consecutive day, and as directed by the city administrator.
   (d)   Compensation. The assistant city administrator shall receive
compensation in such amount and manner as the city administrator, with consent
of the City Council, who shall fix it from time to time by contract, ordinance,
or motion.
   (e)   Powers and Duties. The assistant city administrator shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   Provide staff support services for the city administrator and the
City Council; and
      (2)   Perform such other duties as may be specified by the city
administrator.
(Ord. No. 3009-2020; Sec. 2-3204 enacted; 03/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
3204 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3205.   ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL.
   In addition to the mayor, the city administrator, corporation counsel and
the executive department shall include such other personnel as authorized by
the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3009-2020 repealed existing Sec. 2-3204, Sec. 2-3205 enacted; 03/17/
20; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3205 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 3. THE CITY CLERK
(Text Effective May 1, 2001)
SEC. 2-3300.   OFFICE CREATED; DUTIES; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the appointive office of the city clerk who shall
have all the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk as provided by
statute, except as directed otherwise by the city administrator or except as
modified herein. The city clerk shall be appointed by the city administrator
with the advice and consent of the City Council and may be dismissed by the
city administrator at any time in accordance with the provisions of this Code
for the removal of officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3).
SEC. 2-3301.   SALARY.
   The city clerk shall receive a salary as provided in the Class and
Compensation Plan. Thereafter, the city clerk shall receive the same general
wage increase and anniversary increase provided to the general class of
employees exempt from collective bargaining agreements, if any is so provided
in any particular year.
(Ord. No. 2002-04-01; Sec. 2-3301 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 2-3301
related to the same subject matter enacted; 04/02/02; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec.
2-3301 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3302.   ATTENDANCE AT CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   The city clerk shall attend each meeting of the City Council, and shall keep
a correct typed or computerized record of the proceedings of the City Council
actually attended by the clerk.
SEC. 2-3303.   PREPARATION AND CUSTODY OF RECORDS; PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The city clerk shall keep all the records, papers, votes and proceedings of
the City Council, and of the City, during the recess of the county, and all
assessments, returns, and of elections of the City officers; and shall not
suffer any records or papers, or other instrument of writing belonging to the
City, to be taken out of the City's records office, subject to the penalty
prescribed in Section
1-1107 of this Code, and a further forfeiture of the amount of all damages that
may accrue by the loss or obliteration of any records or papers of the City,
should any document be lost or obliterated.
SEC. 2-3304.   EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS
   The city clerk, or one authorized to act in the clerk's behalf, shall, in
conjunction with the mayor, sign all ordinances, bonds, and orders on the City
treasury, and affix the seal of the City thereto.
SEC. 2-3305.   DEPUTY CLERKS; APPOINTMENT, DUTIES.
   (a)   The city administrator shall have the authority to appoint such number
of uncompensated deputy clerks as are necessary for the efficient operation of
the office. Such deputies shall be appointed from City employees already
employed by the City.
   (b)   The deputy city clerks shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law to be executed by the city clerk, and affix the
seal of the city clerk thereto wherever required. In signing any document, a
deputy city clerk shall sign the name and title of such deputy city clerk.
   (c)   The powers and duties described in subsection (b) shall be exercised
only in the absence of the city clerk from the place where the city clerk's
office is maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by
the clerk to the deputy city clerk to exercise such power, or the city
administrator has determined in writing that the city clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
(Ord. No. 99-10-1; Chapter 2, Div. 3, "THE CITY CLERK" repealed in its
entirety; new Chapter 2, Div. 3 relating to the same subject matter enacted;
10/05/99 [effective after May 1, 2001])
DIVISION 4. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
SEC. 2-3400.   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS – CREATED.
   There is hereby created the department of public works to be composed of
four (4) divisions:
   (1)   Fleet & Facilities;
   (2)   Municipal Services;
   (3)   Park Maintenance; and
   (4)   Buildings, Inspections and Code Enforcement.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3400 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3401.   POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS CREATED; APPOINTMENT;
RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
There is hereby created the position of director of public works. The director
of public works shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice
and consent of the City Council and may be dismissed by the city administrator
at any time in accordance with the provisions of this Code for the removal of
officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). Said director shall be responsible for the administration,
direction, and supervision of the department of public works and its personnel
and carry out such other functions as may be assigned from time to time by the
city administrator. The individual appointed to the position of director of
public works shall be a person skilled in public works, and shall have
experience in planning and scheduling work; a demonstrated ability to
communicate orally and in writing; a knowledge and understanding of and
experience in street construction and maintenance; municipal services; fleet
and facilities; park maintenance; buildings, inspections and code enforcement;
or any equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
required knowledge, skills and abilities.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3401 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3402.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The director of public works shall organize the department and command,
coordinate and control all the assigned functions and duties of the department.
The director of public works shall protect the department from unnecessary
damage or loss and keep the department in proper running order and repair. The
director of public works shall have the following functions and duties:
   (1)   Plan and direct the repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks,
alleys and appurtenances thereto including:
      a.   Snow removal and ice control;
      b.   Street sweeping and cleaning;
      c.   Patching of improved and unimproved streets; and
      d.   Weed control on public right-of-way.
   (2)   Plan and direct the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse.
   (3)   The control, management, and supervision of all City shops and
garages, including all equipment and vehicles.
   (4)   Administration and maintenance of all public buildings.
   (5)   Plan and direct functions of the Building Division.
   (6)   Administer maintenance duties of the Parks and Recreation Board.
   (7)   Maintain appropriate records and prepare monthly and annual reports as
may be required.
   (8)   Be the chief fiscal planner for the department; prepare the annual
budget and control expenditures for all the foregoing.
   (9)   Undertake long-range planning and programming of public works
services.
   (10)   Shall cause all the ordinances in relation to the streets, alleys and
sidewalks to be enforced, and shall give written permits when necessary to
private parties desiring to use the streets and alleys, and shall enter
complaints for violation thereof. Shall obey such orders, general and special,
as may be received from the City Council and the city administrator. And for
any refusal or willful neglect to perform any duty required of the director of
public works by any ordinance of the City, said director shall be subject to
removal from office.
   (11)   The director is hereby designated as supervisor of police and fire
alarms, and it is hereby made said director's duty to keep these systems at all
times in good condition, to make such tests as are necessary or advisable and
to make extensions to the systems as provided for from time to time. In
addition, said director is hereby authorized to operate and keep in repair, and
to extend lines and wires for fire and police alarm systems, and to properly
care for other matters coming under the director's supervision.
   (12)   Perform such other duties, consistent with the ordinances of the City
and laws of the State of Illinois, as the city administrator may direct from
time to time.
   (13)   Establish and administer appropriate work rules, standards and
practices consistent with City ordinances and policies to accomplish the
foregoing.
   (14)   The director shall assist the director of engineering in keeping a
correct map or profile of all the highways, streets and alleys now or hereafter
laid in said City on file in the director of engineering's office, with their
dimension and location, and shall also keep, in conjunction with thedirector of
finance, just, true and correct books of account, in such a manner that the
same will at all times show the true condition and state of business of said
office. Such books shall at all times be subject to inspection by the City
Council. The director shall deliver such books of account to any successor in
office when said director's appointment is terminated.
   (15)   Shall not, in a private capacity, either directly or indirectly, for
said director or others, or by others in trust for said director or said
director's own or others' account, be interested in any work or labor performed
for the City by, through or under the director as such officer, or in any
contract or agreement made and entered into by the director by virtue of said
director's office.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees repealed throughout the
Code and updated with "City Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole;" 05/13/03;
Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3402 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3403.   PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   In addition to the director of public works, the department of public works
shall include assistant director of public works; fleet and facilities manager;
municipal services general manager; and such other personnel as authorized by
the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3403 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 5. DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING
SEC. 2-3500.   DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING - CREATED.
There is hereby created the department of engineering to be composed of three
(3) divisions:
   (1)   Design Services;
   (2)   Construction Management Services; and
   (3)   Traffic Operations.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3500 enacted; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3501.   POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING CREATED; APPOINTMENT;
RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
   There is hereby created the position of director of engineering. The
director of engineering shall be appointed by the city administrator with the
advice and consent of the City Council and may be dismissed by the city
administrator at any time in accordance with the provisions of this Code for
the removal of officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). Said director shall be responsible for the administration,
direction, and supervision of the department of engineering and its personnel
and carry out such other functions as may be assigned from time to time by the
city administrator. The director of engineering shall direct as to workmanship,
materials and methods of construction for all engineering projects, shall have
supervision of the inspectors and inspection of all engineering projects, shall
make such tests as may be required of materials of construction for work done
on local improvements and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to
said director from time to time by the city administrator or the City Council.
   The individual appointed to the position of director of engineering shall be
a person skilled in engineering design, permitting, construction
administration, management, and shall have experience in planning and
scheduling work; a person skilled in civil engineering, and shall have
experience in planning and scheduling work; a demonstrated ability to
communicate orally and in writing; a knowledge and understanding of and
experience in engineering design of streets, water, wastewater and storm water
systems; or any equivalent combination of experience and training which
provides the required knowledge, skills and abilities.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3501 enacted; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3502.   PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING.
   In addition to the director of engineering, the department of engineering
shall include an assistant director of engineering; a construction manager;
design manager; traffic operations manager; and such other personnel as
authorized by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3502 enacted; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3503.   DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING DUTIES.
   The director of engineering shall organize the department and command,
coordinate and control all the assigned functions and duties of the department.
The director of engineering shall protect the department from unnecessary
damage or loss and keep the department in proper running order and repair. The
director of engineering shall be a registered professional engineer in the
state and have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (1)   The director of engineering shall perform all engineering services for
the department of engineering and for such other departments of the City as may
be required.
   (2)   The director of engineering shall prepare plans, construction cost
estimates and specifications for all work done on local improvements, and for
such other work as the City Council shall designate by resolution or ordinance
that requires the skill of a civil engineer and surveyor.
   (3)   Shall examine and recommend for approval, in accordance with the
provisions of this Code regulating subdivisions, all plats of subdivision of
land within the City, cause the plats to be recorded upon the City maps and
records, and assign to each lot the proper house numbers according to the
provisions of Section 28-5100, et seq., in this Code.
   (4)   Shall prepare and keep on file in the department of engineering a
sectional map record showing:
      a.   The size and location of all water and/or sewer systems constructed
in the City and also location of all branches for house connections;
      b.   The location and character of all pavements and storm drains
constructed in the City;
      c.   The location and character of all sidewalks constructed; and
      d.   In book form, a progress record of plans and profiles of all public
works constructed in the City as is not otherwise recorded in detail.
   (5)   The director of engineering shall be designated as supervisor of
traffic signals, and it is hereby made said director of engineering's duty to
keep these systems at all times in good condition, to make such tests as are
necessary or advisable and to make extensions to the systems as provided for
from time to time.
   (6)   Shall make all necessary surveys for establishing street grades and
boundaries of City property and shall furnish street grades to property owners
along streets where such grades have been established when directed so to do by
the mayor or City Council.
   (7)   Shall supervise and direct all work pertaining to the future extension
of all water, storm and sanitary sewer mains. The director of engineering shall
keep a correct map of all water, storm, and sanitary sewer mains laid now or
hereafter for the use of the department of utilities. The director of
engineering shall authorize, and the plumbing inspector shall inspect and
approve, all private connections made to the water and/or water pollution
control system.
   (8)   Conduct engineering studies, in consultation with the director of
public works and director of utilities, and maintain all engineering records
and documents of the City, provide technical engineering advice and service to
all City departments, divisions, offices, boards and commissions as the city
administrator may direct from time to time.
   (9)   Design and inspect all City construction projects and review all
engineering work done by consultants for the City to assure that the best
interests of the City are met.
   (10)   Be the chief fiscal planner for the department; prepare the annual
budget and control expenditures for the department.
   (11)   Undertake long-range planning and programming of engineering work and
services.
   (12)   The duties of the director of engineering may be handled by the
assistant director of engineering in the absence of the director of
engineering.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3503 enacted; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 6. DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES
SEC. 2-3600.   DEPARTMENT OF UTILITIES - CREATED.
   There is hereby created the department of utilities to be composed of three
(3) divisions:
   (1)   Water;
   (2)   Stormwater; and
   (3)   Water Pollution Control.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3600 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3601.   POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES CREATED; APPOINTMENT;
RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
   There is hereby created the position of director of utilities. The director
of utilities shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice and
consent of the City Council and may be dismissed by the city administrator at
any time in accordance with the provisions of this Code for the removal of
officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). The director of utilities shall be responsible for the
administration, direction, and supervision of the department of utilities and
its personnel and carry out such other functions as may be assigned from time
to time by the city administrator. The individual appointed to the position of
director of utilities shall be a person skilled in utility management, and
shall have experience in planning and scheduling work; a demonstrated ability
to communicate orally and in writing; a knowledge and understanding of and
experience in construction and maintenance of water and pollution control
systems; hydraulic or sanitary engineering; or any equivalent combination of
experience and training which provides the required knowledge, skills and
abilities.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3601 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3602.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The director of utilities shall organize the department and command, coordinate
and control all the assigned functions and duties of the department. The
director of utilities shall protect the department from unnecessary damage or
loss and keep the department in proper running order and repair. The director
of utilities shall have the following functions and duties:
   (1)   The construction, operation, and maintenance of all sanitary and storm
sewer facilities and appurtenances, including sanitary sewers and pumping
stations, storm sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, and water courses under the
jurisdiction of the City.
   (2)   The construction, operation, and maintenance of all water treatment
and water facilities and appurtenances, including water mains, booster pumping
stations, and water storage units, under the jurisdiction of the City.
   (3)   Be the chief fiscal planner for the department; prepare the annual
budget and control expenditures for all the foregoing.
   (4)   Undertake long-range planning and programming of public utilities.
   (5)   Shall cause all the ordinances in relation to all water treatment and
water facilities and appurtenances, including water mains, booster pumping
stations, and water storage units, under the jurisdiction of the City, and all
the ordinances in relation to all sanitary and storm sewer facilities and
appurtenances, including sanitary sewers and pumping stations, storm sewers,
drains, ditches, culverts, and water courses under the jurisdiction of the
City, to be enforced, and shall give written permits when necessary to private
parties desiring to use the streets and alleys, and shall enter complaints for
violation thereof. Shall obey such orders, general and special, as may be
received from the City Council and the city administrator. And for any refusal
or willful neglect to perform any duty required of the director of utilities by
any ordinance of the City, said director shall be subject to removal from
office.
   (6)   Perform such other duties, consistent with the ordinances of the City
and laws of the State of Illinois, as the city administrator may direct from
time to time.
   (7)   Establish and administer appropriate work rules, standards and
practices consistent with City ordinances and policies to accomplish the
foregoing.
   (8)   The director shall assist the director of engineering in keeping a
correct map or profile of all the water and sanitary sewer mains now or
hereafter laid in said City on file in the director of engineering's office,
with their dimension, location and connections, hydrants, and cutoffs, and
shall also keep, in conjunction with the Finance Department, just, true and
correct books of account, in such a manner that the same will at all times show
the true condition and state of business of said office. Such books shall at
all times be subject to inspection by the City Council. The director shall
deliver such books of account to any successor in office when said director's
appointment is terminated.
   (9)   The director of the department, or person duly authorized by said
director, shall review plans and specifications for extensions and improvements
to the water and/or sanitary sewer system and submit recommendations for
approval or changes. The director shall assist the director of engineering in
determining that extensions and improvements are in accordance to plans and
specifications.
   (10)   It shall be the duty of the director of the department to enforce all
the laws and ordinances related to the entire water and water pollution control
system of the City.
   (11)   Shall not, in a private capacity, either directly or indirectly, for
said director or others, or by others in trust for said director or said
director's own or others' account, be interested in any work or labor performed
for the City by, through or under the director as such officer, or in any
contract or agreement made and entered into by the director by virtue of said
director's office.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3602 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3603.   PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENT OF UTILITIES.
   In addition to the director of utilities, the department of utilities shall
include the water general manager; water pollution control general manager; and
such other personnel as authorized by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3602 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 7. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
SEC. 2-3700.   DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE - CREATED.
   There is hereby created the department of finance to be composed of two (2)
divisions:
   (1)   Utility Billing and Collections; and
   (2)   Accounting.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3700 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3701.   POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE CREATED; APPOINTMENT;
RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
   Said finance department shall be under the supervision and control of the
director of finance. Said officer shall be appointed by the city administrator
with the advice and consent of the City Council and may be dismissed by the
city administrator at any time in accordance with the provisions of this Code
for the removal of officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). Said officer shall possess the following qualifications:
   (1)   Education and training should be sufficient to accomplish the job as
described in the employee job description; and
   (2)   Knowledge of the principles of cash management; municipal accounting;
data processing; fiscal planning; and all areas of fiscal management, control,
and administration.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3701 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3702.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Said director of finance shall have charge of the supervision and control of
the department of finance and the administration of the fiscal affairs of the
City to the extent same has not been reserved to the mayor, city administrator,
and City Council, and to that end, said officer shall have the following
authority and duties:
   (1)   Keep books and accounts of the receipts and expenditures of all
departments;
   (2)   Keep accurate detailed accounts of:
      a.   All taxes and assessments, general or special in nature, assessed on
behalf by or on behalf of the City and all money due to the City from any and
every source;
      b.   Money received and the several sources from which derived; and
      c.   All funds of the City and disbursements made therefrom and all
obligations incurred thereby.
   (3)   Prescribe the method of keeping accounts for all departments,
commissions, boards, and offices of the City, which method shall be uniform as
nearly as practicable, shall conform to the laws of the state, and shall be
consistent with sound municipal accounting principles;
   (4)   Examine and audit all accounts and claims against the City except
claims for unliquidated damages; and said officer, or one authorized to act in
said officer's behalf by the City Council, shall not issue or sign any draft,
check, or warrant until such examination and audit verifies the correctness of
the account upon which the same is issued;
   (5)   Be responsible for the approval of all proposed expenditures; and,
unless said officer shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of
budgeted available funds for the purpose for which expenditure is to be made,
no encumbrance and no expenditure shall be made;
   (6)   Balance the books of account of all departments, boards, and
commissions of the City each calendar month under the direction of the city
administrator and make monthly and quarterly public financial statements to the
City Council;
   (7)   Present to the City Council annually, following the completion of the
audit, and whenever required by the City Council, a detailed statement of the
financial condition of the City, which shall include all receipts and
expenditures of the various departments; a detailed statement of the debt of
the City, and the purpose for which it was incurred; and an inventory of only
capitalized assets in compliance with GAAP Accounting and City Capital Asset
Guidelines;
   (8)   Serve as ex officio City treasurer and have custody of all public
funds belonging to or under the control of the City, or any office, department,
board, commission, or agency of the City government; deposit all funds coming
into said officer's hands in such depositories as may be designated by
resolution or ordinance of the City Council subject to the requirements of law
as to collateral, the payment of interest on deposits, and any ratio limits as
to deposits to assets;
   (9)   Oversee the safe keeping of all investments and invested funds of City
government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity; have
the safekeeping of all bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness of the
City, and be responsible for the receipt and delivery of the same for transfer,
registration, or exchange;
   (10)   Have supervision and direction of the collection of all moneys due
the City from any other source whatsoever unless otherwise provided by law or
ordinance and all moneys due the City collected by any other officer or
employee of the City shall be promptly accounted for and paid into the City
treasury; said collection shall specifically include water and sewer bill
collections and administrative fines for parking violations;
   (11)   Serve ex officio as the collector of special assessments and have all
the duties thereof as provided by law;
   (12)   Collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees, and other
revenues of the City or for whose collection the City is responsible; and
receive all money receivable by the City from the state or federal government;
or from any court, or from any office, department, board, commission, or agency
of the City; or from any source whatsoever;
   (13)   Maintain payroll records and pay the City payroll as required by
ordinance upon receipt of proper certification of the correctness of same;
   (14)   Work under the direction and supervision of the city administrator in
the preparation of the annual budget, revenue forecasts, and other fiscal
documents;
   (15)   Perform all other duties required by law and maintain adequate
internal controls and separation of duties to prevent fraud; and
   (16)   Perform all other duties which the City Council and city
administrator may from time to time require or which by ordinance are assigned
to said officer.
(Ord. No. 92-6-1; §2-3602 repealed; new section enacted; 06/02/92)
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees repealed throughout the
Code and updated with "City Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole;" 05/13/03)
(Ord. No. 3029-2015; Sec. 2-3602(15) repealed – removed the duty of the
accounts & finance officer to serve as manager of all surplus property to be
disposed of by the City, its departments, boards, etc. and to supervise the
procedures of said disposal; remaining subsections renumbered; 08/04/15; Ord.
No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3702 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-3703.   PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
   In addition to the director of finance, the department of finance shall
include an assistant director of finance, finance manager and such other
personnel as authorized by the City Council from time to time. The director of
finance shall have the authority to arrange and distribute the various duties
of said office to the separate divisions of the office according to the
discretion of said officer; provided, said distribution is consistent with
sound management practices, with due regard to the primary functions of said
divisions as indicated by title of the divisions, and is in writing filed with
the city clerk and the city administrator. In all cases, though, expenditure
and collection duties, shall be segregated for internal control purposes.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-3703 amended; 7/12/22)
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 2-4100.   LIST OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (a)   The following boards and commissions are agencies of the City, and the
respective number of members and terms of said members of said boards and
commissions are listed solely for information purposes and the sections
elsewhere referenced in this Code creating said boards and commissions are
governing:
      (1)   Board of Local Improvements: Three (3) members - Terms co-existent
with their terms of City office;
      (2)   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners: Three (3) members - Three-
year term;
      (3)   Citizens Advisory Council on Urban Policy: Seven (7) members -
Three-year term;
      (4)   Building Code Board of Appeals: Five (5) members - Four-year term;
      Note: The mayor may designate the Building Code Board of Appeals to serve
as the Housing Code and Dangerous Building Code appeals boards.
      (5)   Library Board of Directors: Nine (9) members - Three-year term;
      (6)   Electrical Appeals Board: Five (5) members - Three-year term;
      (7)   Mechanical Appeals Board: Five (5) members - Two-year term;
      (8)   Plumbing Appeals Board: Five (5) members - Two-year term;
      (9)   Moline Commission on Youth: Seven (7) members - Three-year term;
      (10)   Moline Plan Commission: Eleven (11) members - Six-year term;
      (11)   Park and Recreation Board: Seven (7) members - Five-year term;
      (12)   Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Revenue Administrative Board: Seven (7)
members – Two-year term;
      (13)   Historic Preservation Advisory Committee: Seven (7) members -
Three-year term;
      (14)   Human Rights Commission: Seven (7) members – Four-year term;
      (15)   Keep Moline Beautiful Commission: Seven (7) members - Three-year
term; and
      (16)   Public Art Commission: Seven (7) members - Two-year term.
   (b)   The members of said boards and commissions are appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council, except the members of the
foreign fire insurance tax revenue administrative board, all of who are members
of the Moline Fire Department.
   (c)   All meetings of the boards and commissions will be held at City Hall,
or other place so designated by resolution and notice of the City Council,
except that the Library Board of Directors, Moline Commission on Youth, and
Park and Recreation Board shall hold meetings pursuant to the direction of each
respective board.
   (d)   Any member of the City's boards and commissions may attend and
participate in any meeting of said boards and commissions from a remote
location via electronic means in the same manner as set forth for the City
Council and under the same rules and restrictions set forth in Section 2-2200
(e) above and provided that such attendance is in compliance with any other
applicable laws.
   (e)   Excessive absenteeism. Any appointed member who is absent from more
than the number of regular meetings permitted by this subsection (e) shall be
considered to have resigned from the board or commission and a vacancy shall
exist to be filled according to City ordinance. Except as hereafter provided,
an appointed member may be absent from no more than four regular meetings of a
board or commission during a municipal year. Members of the Plan Commission may
be absent from no more than eight regular meetings of the Plan Commission
during a municipal year. Members of the Foreign Fire Tax Board and the Youth
Commission may be absent from no more than two regular meetings of that board
or commission during a municipal year. Members of boards or commissions which
do not have regularly scheduled meetings are not subject to the attendance
requirements of this subsection (e).
(Ord. No. 94-9-5; Sec. 2-4100 repealed; new Sec. 2-4100 enacted; 09/13/94; Ord.
No. 3020-2007; new Sec. 2-4100(d) enacted; 07/17/07; Ord. No. 3012-2009; Sec.
2-4100(12) repealed; new Sec. 2-4100(12) enacted; 05/26/09; Ord. No. 3036-2009;
Sec. 2-4100(13) repealed; new Sec. 2-4100(13) enacted; 11/17/09)
(Note: Sec. 2-4100(a)(9) – scrivener's error corrected 05/29/15 by amending
number of members from fifteen (15) to seven (7) per Ord. No. 3031-2006,
enacted 06/27/06; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4100 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No.
3025-2023; Sec. 2-4100(e) amended; 07/18/23; Ord. No. 3018-2024, Sec. 2-4100(a)
(15) repealed and subsequent subsections renumbered; 5/7/24)
SEC. 2-4101.   JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.
   The various jurisdictions, powers, and authority of said boards and
commissions, and their composition and the terms of said members of said boards
and commissions, as set forth in Section
2-4100, are identified elsewhere in this Code, and each one of them shall abide
by said delegation of authority.
SEC. 2-4102.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS WHICH ARE NOT CITY AGENCIES.
   The following boards and commissions are not agencies of the City, but are
independent entities to which the mayor either sits ex officio or appoints a
member or members (with advice and consent of the City Council).
   (1)   Board of Commissioners of the Metropolitan Airport Authority or Rock
Island County: mayor appoints one (1) member - Five-year term;
   (2)   Board of Trustees of the Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit
District: mayor appoints one (1) member - Three-year term;
   (3)   Moline Housing Authority: Five (5) members - Five-year term;
   (4)   Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund: Two (2) of Five (5)
members appointed to Two-year term, with mayor, ex officio;
   (5)   Board of Trustees of the Fire Pension fund: Two (2) of Five (5)
members appointed to Two-year term, with mayor, ex officio;
   (6)   Bi-State Regional Commission: One (1) alderperson appointed to term
not to exceed term of office with mayor, ex-official;
   (7)   Illinois Quad City Civic Center Authority Board: city administrator,
ex-officio and mayor appoints two (2) members - Three-year term; and
   (8)   Board of Directors of the Quad Cities Convention and Visitors Bureau:
mayor appoints one (1) member - Three-year term.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4102 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4103.   REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL BOARD OR COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   All public hearings required by statute or ordinance, required to be held
before any board or commission created under the Moline Code of Ordinances,
shall substantially conform to the Rules and Regulations promulgated from time
to time by resolution of the City Council for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 3003-2004; new Sec. 2-4103 enacted; 02/03/04)
DIVISION 2. MOLINE COMMISSION ON YOUTH
SEC. 2-4200.   CREATED; COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created the Moline Commission on Youth, consisting of seven
(7) members who are residents of the City, and who over the years have shown a
special, vital and public spirited interest in youth leadership and youth
problems.
(Ord. No. 3031-2006; Sec. 2-4200 repealed; new Sec. 2-4200 enacted; 06/27/06)
SEC. 2-4201.   EX OFFICIO MEMBERS.
   The mayor, a representative from the police department, a representative
from the parks department, a representative from the library and one additional
city staff member shall be ex officio members of the commission on youth. A
city staff member will act as the recording secretary to comply with 2-4208 and
2-4209, as well as the Open Meetings Act.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03; Ord. No.
3031-2006; Sec. 2-4201 repealed; new Sec. 2-4201 enacted; 06/27/06; Ord. No.
3026-2023; Sec. 2-4201 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 2-4202.   PURPOSE.
   The overall purpose of the commission shall be to encourage the continuing
betterment of opportunities for the wholesome development of the youth in the
City.
SEC. 2-4203.   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; RECOMMENDATIONS.
   (a)   The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject
to approval by the City Council. In making appointments, the mayor shall first
consider recommendations made by the commission.
   (b)   In the month of March, the commission shall make its recommendations
for appointments to fill the expiring terms of members, which appointments
shall be effective on the first day of April. Recommendations for special
appointments to the commission shall be made as vacancies may occur.
SEC. 2-4204.   TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   The terms of the members of the commission shall be for three (3) years.
SEC. 2-4205.   FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year for the commission shall be from the first day of January to
the last day of December next following.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4205 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4206.   ORGANIZATION.
   The commission shall select its own chairman and officers in accordance with
procedures, which the commission may adopt.
SEC. 2-4207.   FUNCTIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The commission shall:
   (1)   Assist in coordinating and integrating governmental and private plans
and services affecting the welfare of children and youth in the City;
   (2)   Assist in coordinating and integrating all plans and services for
protecting children from exposure to harmful influences and conditions
conducive to delinquency;
   (3)   Make or cause to be made studies and surveys related to juvenile
behavior or in the interest of youth guidance;
   (4)   Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from City
departments and agencies as may be reasonably necessary to carry out its work;
   (5)   Recommend plans and methods for the improvement of opportunities for
the wholesome development of youth in the City;
   (6)   Create subcommittees, composed of members or nonmembers of the
commission, to aid and assist in the work of the commission; and
   (7)   Create a special subcommittee consisting of persons qualified by
experience and training to provide guidance and counseling to children referred
to it by the police department, the family court, the schools, or any social
agency.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4207 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4208.   RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings, which shall
be available for public inspection.
SEC. 2-4209.   ANNUAL REPORT TO THE COUNCIL.
   In March of each year, the commission shall prepare and submit to the City
Council a summary report of its operations, studies, meetings held, and
attendance of its members during the preceding fiscal year, along with a
statement of projected plans for the subsequent fiscal year.
DIVISION 3. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SEC. 2-4300.   ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established a board of local improvements for the City. This
board shall consist of three (3) members who are qualified to serve as members
of the board of local improvements under state law. The members' terms shall be
co-extensive with their terms of City office.
SEC. 2-4301.   MAYOR TO BE PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD.
   The mayor shall be the president of the board of local improvements.
SEC. 2-4302.   COMPENSATION.
   The members of the board of local improvements shall receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the City Council in
conformance with state law.
SEC. 2-4303.   MEETINGS.
   The board of local improvements shall meet at such times as it may
determine, or upon call of the president of the board.
SEC. 2-4304.   POWERS AND DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   The board of local improvements shall have the powers and duties prescribed
by statute unless specifically modified herein.
SEC. 2-4305.   HOME RULE POWERS.
   The board of local improvements shall follow the procedures set forth herein
below rather than those prescribed by state statute:
   (1)   Nothing in the state statute shall prevent the City Council from
initiating a local improvement by referring an improvement project to the board
for consideration as a local improvement;
   (2)   The board shall have authority to accept bid security in the amount of
five percent (5%) of the bid and in the form of a cash bond, a cash bond
accompanied by a certified check, or a bid bond executed by corporate surety
satisfactory to the board;
   (3)   Upon retirement of bonds or vouchers or installment payments thereon,
funds received shall be applied first to interest due thereon and then to the
principal thereof and no separate accounting shall be required for all projects
initiated after the date hereof;
   (4)   Bonds or vouchers shall be paid in numerical order and not on a pro
rata basis whenever sufficient monies are available for the redemption of one
(1) or more of them;
   (5)   Registered holders of bonds or vouchers shall be entitled to notice to
the hearing on the final certificate of completion in the same manner as other
interested parties;
   (6)   The board shall have a preliminary assessment roll prepared and
available for inspection at the public hearing to determine the scope, nature,
necessity, and extent of a proposed local improvement, and said preliminary
assessment roll shall be prepared as if the project as proposed and designed
would go forward without modification. If the board modifies said project as a
result of said public hearing, the preliminary assessment roll will be revised
to reflect said modification prior to forwarding its recommendation to the City
Council; and
   (7)   If there are any changes in the preliminary assessment roll equaling
ten (10) per cent or more of public benefit or the aggregate private benefit
after the City Council has considered a project, but before an order of final
confirmation, the board shall report said changes to the City Council prior to
setting any hearing to confirm the revised assessment roll; and the City
Council may then decide to proceed or abandon the local improvement project in
its discretion.
DIVISION 4. BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SEC. 2-4400.   ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby established a board of fire and police commissioners which
shall consist of three (3) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor, with
the consent of the City Council, for a term of three (3) years.
SEC. 2-4401.   PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE BOARD.
   The eligibility of persons for appointment to the board of fire and police
commissioners shall be as prescribed by statute.
SEC. 2-4402.   SECRETARY; APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION.
   The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint a secretary who
shall hold office until a successor is appointed by the board and whose
compensation shall be fixed by the annual budget of the City.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4402 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4403.   POWERS AND DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   The board of fire and police commissioners shall have such powers and duties
as are prescribed by statute unless said powers and duties are specifically
modified or revoked herein or elsewhere in the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 2-4404.   POLICE CHIEF NOT TO BE APPOINTED BY THE BOARD.
   The board of fire and police commissioners shall not appoint the chief of
police.
SEC. 2-4405.   FIRE CHIEF NOT TO BE APPOINTED BY THE BOARD.
   The board of fire and police commissioners shall not appoint the fire chief.
SEC. 2-4406.   POWERS AND DUTIES IN DEROGATION OF STATE LAW.
   Notwithstanding powers and duties established by state statute in the board
of fire and police commissioners, said board shall have the following specific
powers and duties:
   (1)   To define the meaning of “day” for purposes of discipline and
otherwise;
   (2)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to grounds for
disqualification of applicants; provided, said grounds are job related and do
not constitute unlawful discrimination;
   (3)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the grant
and use of military credits for original and promotional appointments and to
the grandfathering of military credit points for existing officers still
eligible for military credit points under existing law and regulations;
   (4)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to hearing
procedures for the removal or discharge of probationary officers when the
grounds for removal or discharge give rise to a property interest under the
common law;
   (5)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to procedures
for the issuance of departmental discipline under the board's appellate
jurisdiction, unless superseded by a collective bargaining agreement;
   (6)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to hearing
procedures for non-disciplinary discharges as established by ordinance or
memoranda of understanding; provided, such rules shall not provide for more
than appellate jurisdiction in the board over same and shall not provide the
board with discretion to determine if discharge is an appropriate remedy; and
   (7)   To establish and adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the
establishment and maintenance of original eligibility registers, duration for
original eligibility registers and promotions; provided, no eligibility
register shall be valid for a period longer than three (3) years.
   Furthermore, should the City Council consider and approve by resolution
rules and regulation promulgated by the board, any power or duty contained in
said approved rules and regulations, whether in conflict with state law or not,
is to be construed as a delegation of power by a home rule unit of government.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4406 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 5. FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX REVENUE ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD.
SEC. 2-4500.   BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance tax revenue
administrative board which shall consist of seven (7) members.
SEC. 2-4501.   BOARD COMPOSITION, ELECTION, TERM, VACANCIES.
   (a)   The board shall consist of the fire chief, who shall hold office by
virtue of rank, a battalion or assistant chief, a captain or lieutenant, a
firefighter/engineer, a firefighter/paramedic, and two (2) at-large members.
   (b)   The battalion or assistant chief, captain or lieutenant, firefighter/
engineer, and firefighter/paramedic shall be elected by secret written ballot
of all the commissioned members of the Moline Fire Department held on the third
(3rd) Thursday of April in even-numbered years; however, it is understood that
the president of the employee organization recognized as the chief bargaining
agent for members of the Moline fire department, if any, is entitled to sit ex-
officio as a member of such board and that no election will be held for the
rank held by such president. The term of the board members shall be two (2)
years and shall commence on May 1 following election.
   (c)   The two (2) at-large members shall be elected from the sworn members
of the bargaining unit of the Moline Fire Department. The term of the at-large
board members shall be two (2) years and shall commence on May 1 following
election; however, the original at-large members shall have an abbreviated term
commencing thirty (30) days following passage hereof.
   (d)   If a vacancy occurs in office because a member terminates service with
the fire department for any reason, is promoted out of the ranks represented or
resigns, the fire chief shall appoint a person to fulfill the remaining term of
a battalion or assistant chief, and the then union president, if any, shall
appoint a person to fulfill the remaining term of the remaining ranks'
representatives. If there is no exclusive bargaining agent recognized, the
chief shall appoint a person to fill the remaining term of the remaining ranks'
representatives.
   (e)   If there is an insufficient number of candidates to fill all
positions, the number of board members may be reduced, but not to fewer than
three (3) members.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4501 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4502.   BOARD OFFICERS: CHAIRMAN, TREASURER, SECRETARY.
   The board members shall elect a chairman, a treasurer and a secretary to
serve as officers of the board. Said officers shall serve in accordance with
the bylaws adopted by said board.
   (a)   Chairman. A chairman of the board shall be elected annually from
members serving on the board and shall preside over all meetings. In the event
of the chairman’s absence, the board members present shall select a chairman
from those members present to serve in his or her absence for that meeting. The
chairman shall be responsible for calling special meetings and shall be
responsible for notifying the secretary of all meetings. The chairman shall
vote on all issues to come before the board in the same capacity as any other
member.
   (b)   Treasurer. The board shall annually elect a person to serve as
treasurer of the board from either its members or from non-members, or, in the
alternative, shall appoint the director of finance to serve as its treasurer.
If no person is elected to serve as treasurer or in the event of any vacancy in
the office of treasurer of the board, the director of finance shall serve as
its treasurer until the vacancy is filled. Nothing herein shall prevent a
person serving on the board to serve as treasurer, but no compensation shall be
paid to such person or to the director of finance. Other persons serving as
treasurer shall be entitled to compensation established by the board.
   (c)   Secretary. The secretary to the fire chief shall serve as the
recording secretary to the board; however, the board shall elect from its
members a person to serve as secretary of the board. The secretary of the board
may be elected annually or following the board member elections held in even-
numbered years so that the term for said position runs concurrently with the
terms of the board members.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4502 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4503.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The board shall have the power to expend money provided by the foreign
fire insurance tax in accordance with written bylaws and to make gifts to the
City of property, supplies or money for the use, maintenance and benefit of the
Moline Fire Department and to adopt bylaws establishing the manner of selection
of a chairman and the other offices of the board; the rules of procedure for
the conduct of its meetings, the establishment of regular meeting times and
places and the manner of calling special meetings; the authority of its
officers; and other necessary matters dealing with the administration of the
fund; however, such bylaws may not violate the following:
      (1)   A quorum shall not exist without either the fire chief or the
battalion or assistant chief representative being present; however, if both the
fire chief and the battalion or assistant chief representative are absent for
three (3) consecutive meetings, a quorum can exist without either the fire
chief or the battalion or assistant chief representative being present so that
regular business may be conducted;
      (2)   No bylaw or amendment thereto shall be effective until same has
been on file with the city clerk for at least ten (10) days; and
      (3)   The purposes for which funds may be expended shall not include
purposes other than the following:
         a.   Personnel expenditures for safety devices or education;
         b.   Personnel expenditures for training or training materials;
         c.   Personnel expenditures for health or physical fitness devices,
education, or screenings but no member of the fire department shall be entitled
to additional paid leave, pension, insurance, or other welfare benefits as a
result of expenditures authorized by subsection a., b., or c., herein;
         d.   Furniture, appliances, and other materials necessary for personal
comfort of personnel at the firehouses;
         e.   Specialized equipment such as cardio-pulmonary resuscitation
dolls, jaws of life, etc.;
         f.   Compensation for treasurer and auditing of the fund;
         g.   Bonding for the board and its officers;
         h.   Pension contributions to the fire pension fund; but not
contributions required of individual members of such fund; and
         i.   Contingencies for expenditures falling within the previous
purposes or necessarily implied thereby.
      (b)   The board shall have the duty to submit to the City Council, on or
before April 30th of each year, a report detailing meetings, actions, funds
received and funds dispersed for the previous year ending on March 31st. In
addition, the board shall require that accounts be kept in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles for government entities and make the
book of accounts available for inspection and auditing by the director of
finance or designee thereof. Further, no purchase of equipment, supplies or
other property shall be made unless same complies with the purchasing
ordinances and policies of the City.
      (c)   The board shall have the duty to require its treasurer and all
board members to post a surety bond acceptable to the City in the penal sum of
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) each conditioned on the faithful
performance of the duties of office and the payment of all monies received by
such officer according to law and ordinance.
      (d)   As required by state statute, all funds provided to, and/or
expended by, the board shall be audited as part of the annual municipal audit
to verify that all expenditures have been expended by the board only and are
for the maintenance, use, and benefit of the department as set forth herein.
(Ord. No. 96-1-7; §2-4503 amended; new (d) enacted; 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3036-2009;
Division 5 repealed in entirety; new Division 5 enacted; 11/17/09; Ord. No.
3016-2022; Sec. 2-4503 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 6. KEEP MOLINE BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION
SEC. 2-4600.   COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Keep Moline Beautiful Commission which shall
consist of seven (7) members, with three-year terms. The members shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4600 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3018-2025; Sec. 2-
4600; 4/22/25)
SEC. 2-4601.   COMMISSION COMPOSITION.
   The Commission, as appointed by the mayor, shall consist of a representative
of the City Council, the Moline Centre Program Manager, four (4) citizen
representatives, and a city employee representative.
(Ord. No. 3018-2024; Sec. 2-4601 amended; 5/7/24)
SEC. 2-4602.   ORGANIZATION.
   The Commission shall select its own chairman and officers in accordance with
procedures which the Commission may, from time to time, adopt.
SEC. 2-4603.   MISSION.
   The mission of the Keep Moline Beautiful Commission shall be to initiate and
support active partnerships and projects between Moline citizens, businesses,
and City government to promote a more beautiful, clean, and healthy environment
for both residents and visitors to enjoy.
SEC. 2-4604.   FUNCTIONS, GENERALLY.
   The Commission shall:
   (1)   Initiate and support National Keep America Beautiful initiatives and
programs and conform to Keep America Beautiful ("KAB") certification
requirements; and
   (2)   Initiate and support City of Moline beautification programs such as
but not limited to the "residence of the month" beautification award, "business
of the month" beautification award, Adopt-A-Park, Adopt-A-Street, Neighborhood
Partnership Committee, and Green Groupies.
   Initiate and support non-profit and volunteer organizations, environmental
events and initiatives including the Blue Can Group, Moline Centre Program,
Bald Eagle Days, Eagle View Group, Sierra Club, Earth Week Coalition, Living
Lands and Waters, River Action, Quad City Conservation Alliance and Cool
Cities.
(Ord. No. 96-2-1; Article IV amended; new Division 6 enacted; 02-13-96; Ord.
No. 3050-2008; Division 6 repealed; new Division 6 enacted; 11/18/08; Ord. No.
3016-2022; Sec. 2-4604 amended; 7/12/22; Ord. No. 3018-2024; Sec. 2-4604
amended; 5/7/24)
DIVISION 7.   HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
SEC. 2-4700.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Human Rights Ordinance."
SEC. 2-4701.   INTENT.
   In adopting this article, it is the intent of the City to aid in securing an
end to discrimination in the City of Moline, including but not limited to,
ending discrimination by reason of age, color, creed, family status, marital
status, national origin, physical and mental disability, political affiliation,
race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or any other discrimination based upon
categorizing or classifying a person that is not based upon factual data about
the persons or group and is not related to the purpose for which it is used.
SEC. 2-4702.   NOTIFICATION OF RIGHTS.
   (a)   Any individual who believes that he or she has been subjected to
illegal discrimination in violation of state law shall be notified of the
following by the commission:
      (1)    Any individual who believes that he or she has been aggrieved by a
violation of the provisions of the Illinois Human Rights Act, found generally
at 775 ILCS 5/5-101 et seq., may file a complaint in accordance with that Act;
and
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the Illinois Department
of Human Rights and the Illinois Human Rights Commission shall be provided to
said complaining individual, along with the hours of operation of the Illinois
Department of Human Rights.
   (b)    The commission shall keep a record of all such complaints received
for which the information above described is provided.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4702 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4703.   NUMBER OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   The Moline Human Rights Commission shall have seven (7) members, of which
any three can comprise a panel of sub-committees.
(Ord. No. 3018-2021; Sec. 2-4703 amended; 7/27/21)
SEC. 2-4704.   APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint
three commissioners to a one-year term, and four commissioners to a two-year
term. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint
the successor to each commissioner to serve for a term of two years. Special
appointments shall be made by the mayor and City Council as vacancies may
appear. The commission's members may be removed by the mayor at any time, with
or without cause, for any reason or no reason, but always with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3018-2021; Sec. 2-4704 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4502 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4705.   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
   To the extent practicable, the commission shall be composed of a broad
representation of the City community, with due consideration for
representatives from various religious faiths, racial and nationality groups,
and other interested persons.
SEC. 2-4706.   ELECTIONS BY THE COMMISSION.
   At the annual meeting of the Commission, the Commission members shall elect
the following officers: chair, vice-chair, and recording secretary. The
recording secretary shall take minutes of each meeting.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-4706 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4707.   MEETINGS AND QUORUMS.
   The Commission shall meet on a designated date each month. Such other
meetings may be held at the call of the chairman or majority of the members of
the said commission. There must be in attendance a minimum of three (3)
commission members, which shall constitute a quorum, before any business may be
conducted.
SEC. 2-4708.   DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   The commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   The duty of notification of rights specified in Sec.
2-4702, above;
   (b)   The duty to educate the public, City staff, and elected officials,
through meetings, dissemination of materials, educational seminars and other
appropriate means, as to:
      (1)   The existence of diversity in the community and its importance to
the community;
      (2)   The illegality of discrimination in all its invidious forms;
      (3)   The rights of persons who have suffered from unlawful
discrimination and the remedies available to such persons under existing law;
and
      (4)   Other appropriate educational matters related to human rights
within the City of Moline.
   (c)   The commission shall invite and enlist the cooperation of racial,
religious and ethnic groups, community organizations, fraternal and benevolent
societies, veterans' organizations, professional and technical organizations
and other groups in the City in carrying on its work. The Commission may aid in
the formation of local community groups in such neighborhoods as it may deem
necessary or desirable to carry out specific programs designed to lessen
tensions or improve understanding in the community, or to assist in the
education of community members on their individual rights. The Commission shall
cooperate with state and federal agencies whenever it deems such action
appropriate in effectuating the policy of this article.
   (d)   The commission shall request such cooperation, assistance and data
from City departments through the city administrator as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out its work.
   (e)   The commission shall also have the duty to work with other units of
local government in Rock Island County, to end unlawful discrimination in Rock
Island County. Such duty shall include additional educational efforts as well
as gauging interest in an inter-governmental agreement to implement a county-
wide Human Rights Commission with investigatory and enforcement powers as
provided by statute.
   (f)   The commission shall render an annual report to the Mayor and City
Council.
(Ord. No. 2002-02-03; new Div. 7, "HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION," enacted; 02/12/02;
Ord. No. 3018-2021; Sec. 2-4708 amended; 7/27/21 (Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4708 amended; 7/12/22))
DIVISION 8. RESERVED
 
(Ord. No. 3018-2024; Division 8, “MOLINE CENTRE MAIN STREET COMMISSION,”
repealed; Division 8 reserved for future use; 5/7/24)
DIVISION 9. PUBLIC ART COMMISSION
SEC. 2-4900.   PUBLIC ART COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the Public Art Commission that will consist of
seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor, at least one of whom will be a
current member of the Historic Preservation Commission, with the advice and
consent of the City Council. In addition, the Mayor will designate a City
employee to serve as staff liaison between the Corporate Authorities and Public
Art Commission.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4900 enacted; 8/31/21)
SEC. 2-4901.   COMMISSIONER TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS.
   Commissioners will serve staggered two-year terms with the initial Mayoral
appointments as follows:
      Four Commissioners will be appointed to two-year terms; and
      Three Commissioners will be appointed to three-year terms.
   The Mayor will designate one Commissioner appointee as “Chair”.
   No Commissioner will serve more than three consecutive terms; provided,
however, that should a Commissioner’s replacement not obtain the consent of
City Council upon expiration of a Commissioner’s term then the incumbent
Commissioner will serve until a replacement Commissioner obtains City Council’s
consent.
   The Mayor will select Commissioners that are representative of the City’s
demographics and have experience or interest in the placement, creation, or
designation of public art, as well as any other qualifications the Mayor deems
necessary and appropriate. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Sec.
2-4901, Commissioners will not be required to be City of Moline residents.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4901 enacted; 8/31/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4901 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4902.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Division 9, the following words and phrases will have the
meanings set forth below.
   Art or Artwork means works in any permanent medium or combination of media
produced by a professional practitioner in the art but does not include
performing or literary arts such as dance, music, drama, or poetry.
   Artist means a practitioner of the creative arts, generally recognized as
such by critics and peers, with a body of work including commissions,
exhibitions, sales, publications, and collections. For the purposes of this
document, “artist” shall not include persons primarily working in the
professional fields of architecture, engineering, design or landscaping.
   Capital Improvement Project or CIP means certain capital improvement
projects located in the Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area funded by the
City.
   Commission means the Public Art Commission.
   Commissioner means the members of the Moline Public Art Commission.
   Corporate Authorities means the Mayor and City Council.
   Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area is that area designated in Ordinance
No. 3022-2021.
   Moline Public Art Collection means all Public Art owned by the City.
   Public Art Master Plan or Plan means the “Moline Public Art and Placemaking
Plan”, prepared by the Public Art Consultants, approved and adopted by the
Corporate Authorities pursuant to Ordinance No. 3022-2021, on August 31, 2021,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
   Public Art means a work of art that is visible and accessible to the public
for a minimum of 40 hours per week. Public Art may include sculpture, painting,
installations, photography, video, works of light or sound, or any other work
or project determined by the Public Art Commission to satisfy the intent of
this Chapter, provided, however, that none of the following shall be considered
Public Art:
      1.   Objects that are mass produced of standard design, such as banners,
signs, playground equipment, benches, statuary, street or sidewalk barriers, or
fountains;
      2.   Reproduction, by mechanical or other means, of original works of
art, except as incorporated into film, video, photography, printmaking or other
derivative works as approved by the Public Art Commission;
      3.   Decorative, architectural, or functional elements that are designed
by the building architect or landscape architect as opposed to an artist
commissioned for this purpose; or
      4.   Landscape architecture or gardening, except where these elements are
designed by an artist and are an integral part of a work of art.
   Public Art Program means the Public Art Program of the City in the Downtown
Moline Public Art Program Area.
   Public Art Annual Work Plan means the annual work plan developed by the
Public Art Commission with staff, detailing the Public Art projects and funding
levels recommended for the upcoming year.
   Public Space means any area or property (public or private) which is
accessible or visible to the general public a minimum of 8 hours per business
day.
   Publicly Owned Land means any City owned land open to the public and managed
by the City.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4902 enacted; 8/31/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4902 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4903.   ORGANIZATION, POLICIES, AND PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Organization. After the initial appointment of a Chair by the Mayor,
each subsequent Chair will be selected by the Commission from among their
membership and pursuant to procedures the Commission adopts for itself, which
procedures and any amendments thereto will be filed with the Office of the City
Clerk.
   (b)   Policies. The Commission will operate in accordance with policies and
procedures adopted by City Council from time to time. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in this Subsection 4903(b), in the case of any conflict between
any adopted policy and this Division 9, this Division 9 will control.
   (c)   Procedures.
      (1)   Meetings. All meetings of the Commission will be held on dates as
determined by annual resolution of City Council and pursuant to the
requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq., as the
same may be amended from time to time. Additional meetings of the Commission
may be held on the call of the Chair, or upon a majority of the Commissioners
then holding office, and upon proper notice.
      (2)   Minutes and Records. The Commission will keep minutes of its
proceedings summarizing said meeting and showing the vote of each Commissioner
upon questions considered.
      (3)   Necessary Vote. The concurring vote of at least a majority of the
currently appointed Commissioner will be necessary to take any action or adopt
any motion of any matter under the Commission’s jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4903 enacted; 8/31/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4903 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4904.   MISSION.
   The Public Art Commission advises the City’s Corporate Authorities in all
matters pertaining to City-sponsored Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area,
as identified in the Public Art Master Plan approved and adopted by City
Council pursuant to Ordinance No. 3022-2021. The Commission’s primary goal is
to increase the public’s awareness of all visual arts, including, but not
limited to, exhibition of sculpture, paintings, mosaics, photography, and
video.
   The Public Art Commission will be responsible for interpreting and reviewing
proposed Public Art projects in the Downtown Moline and Cultural Corridors
Public Art Program areas and making recommendations to the City’s corporate
authorities based on criteria identified in Sec. 4903(b) of this Division.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4904 enacted; 8/31/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4904 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-4905.   RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Public Art Commission is strictly an advisory and recommending body to
the Corporate Authorities and will have no powers independent of those
specifically delegated to it by the Corporate Authorities. The Public Art
Commission will advise and make recommendations to the Corporate Authorities
for all Public Art and Public Art Programs in the Downtown Moline and Cultural
Corridors, and the following specific matters:
   (1)   Prepare and present the Public Art Annual Work Plan to the Corporate
Authorities for their approval;
   (2)   Present an annual report to the Corporate Authorities of the Public
Art Commission’s activities;
   (3)   Advise and make recommendations on existing Public Art Policies, and
amendments to the Public Art Policies;
   (4)   Advise and make recommendations on artist selection juries and
process;
   (5)   Advise and make recommendations on commission and placement of Public
Art projects in the Downtown Moline and Cultural Corridors Public Art Program
Areas;
   (6)   Advise and make recommendations on the maintenance, relocation, or
removal of Public Art;
   (7)   Advise and make recommendations on allocations from the Public Art
Acquisition and Maintenance Fund, as well as other economic development
programs including, without limitation, tax increment financing to support the
installation of project specific Public Art on private property; and
   (8)   Advise and make recommendations on such other matters as may be
delegated to the Public Art Commission by the Corporate Authorities, from time
to time.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 2-4905 enacted; 8/31/21; Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-
4905 amended; 7/12/22)
ARTICLE V. PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF BONDS
SEC. 2-5100.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as and may be referred to as the City of Moline
Revenue Bond Enabling Ordinance.
SEC. 2-5101.   DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
   (1)   Bond ordinance means an ordinance adopted by the City Council of the
City authorizing the issuance of specific bonds;
   (2)   City means the City of Moline, Illinois;
   (3)   Economic development project means any land, interest in land,
building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition,
appurtenance, machinery, or equipment or any combination or portion thereof,
and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection therewith,
for use by any person; provided, that the existence of such economic
development project will create or retain employment opportunities in or near
the City;
   (4)   Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation (including public utilities), association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal
entity, or their legal representative, agent, or assigns;
   (5)   Pollution means any form of environmental pollution including, but not
limited to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste
pollution, thermal pollution, radiation contamination, or noise pollution as
determined by the various standards prescribed by this state or the federal
government and including, but not limited to, anything which is considered as
pollution or environmental damage in the Illinois Environmental Protection Act
415 ILCS 5/1 through 5/58.17 and any amendment thereto and substitution
therefor;
   (6)   Pollution control facility means any land, interest in land, building,
structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, appurtenance, addition,
machinery, or equipment or any combination or portion thereof, and all real and
personal property deemed necessary therewith, having to do with or the end
purpose of which is reducing, controlling, preventing, or eliminating
pollution;
   (7)   Project means any economic development project, pollution control
facility, or revenue-producing facility or system or any combination or portion
thereof located within the City or within ten (10) miles of the corporate
limits of the City but not within the corporate limits of any other
incorporated municipality;
   (8)   Project costs means and includes the aggregate total of all reasonable
or necessary costs and expenses incidental to the acquisition, construction, or
reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement or extension of a project
including, without limitation, the costs of studies and surveys; plans,
specifications, architectural and engineering services; acquisition of real
estate, easements, or other interests in land; site development; acquisition,
demolition, construction, equipment of new and rehabilitated buildings;
rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair, or remodeling of existing buildings;
the provisions of funds for the purpose of redeeming, retiring, or otherwise
providing for the payment of any outstanding obligations payable from revenues;
legal, auditing, financial consulting, or other special services deemed
necessary to issue or review the issuance of revenue bonds; equipment and
appurtenances; and all other necessary and incidental expenses, including
capitalization of funds for reserves deemed necessary for the successful
financing and operation of the project;
   (9)   Revenue bonds means any bonds heretofore or hereafter issued by the
City payable from the revenues of a project;
   (10)   Revenue-producing facility or system means any facility or system
owned or controlled by the City, or to be controlled or owned by the City,
which generates revenues through charges for the use or services thereof,
including any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, fixture,
improvement, appurtenance, addition, machinery, equipment or any combination or
portion thereof, and including all real and personal property deemed necessary
in connection therewith; and
   (11)   User means the person or persons who will occupy, operate, maintain,
or employ the project after acquisition or construction thereof, whether as
owner, purchaser, lessee, or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5101 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-5102.   DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is hereby determined and declared that this article is enacted for the
purpose of prescribing procedures for the issuance of revenue bonds by the City
and this article is enacted pursuant to the powers conferred upon the City by
the provisions of the 1970 Constitution of Illinois and the issuance of such
bonds is hereby declared and determined to be a public purpose and function
pertaining to the government and affairs of the City.
SEC. 2-5103.   ADDITIONAL POWERS.
   In addition to powers, which it may now have, the City shall have the
following powers under this article:
   (1)   To construct, acquire, reconstruct, improve, better or extend, and to
finance and refinance one or more projects;
   (2)   To issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project
costs of any project, and to designate an appropriate name for such bonds;
   (3)   To pledge to the punctual payment of such revenue bonds, the interest
thereon, and the redemption premium, if any, the revenue and receipts to be
received from the project;
   (4)   To issue its revenue bonds to refund in whole or in part revenue bonds
heretofore or hereafter issued by the City;
   (5)   To make, enact and enforce all necessary rules and regulations for the
acquisition, construction, extension, improvement, management, operation and
maintenance of the facility or system;
   (6)   To charge the inhabitants or users a reasonable compensation for the
use and service of the project, sufficient at all times to comply with the
covenants of the bond ordinance;
   (7)    To enter into leases or other agreements with any user in order to
secure the City's revenue bonds, provided, however, that any such lease or
other agreement must provide that such user shall pay to, for or on behalf of
the City an amount sufficient to pay principal, interest, redemption premiums
and all other costs in connection with the City's revenue bonds so that such
bonds will never constitute an indebtedness of the City or a loan of its credit
within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision;
   (8)    To mortgage any project in favor of the holder or holders of bonds
issued therefor; and
   (9)   To sell and convey any project, including without limitation the sale
and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this
article, for such price and at such time as the Council of the City may
determine. However, no sale or conveyance of any project shall ever be made in
such manner as to impair the rights or interests of the holder or holders of
any bonds issued hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5103 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-5104.   BOND ORDINANCE - ADOPTION PROCEDURES.
   The City of Moline is in compliance with the state statute for debt
management. In addition, the City also has a debt management policy, adopted as
Resolution No. 1135-2014. This policy is updated periodically. The state
statute and the debt management policy guide the City on the issuance of bonds.
In order to exercise the powers granted by this article and to authorize the
issuance of bonds, the City Council shall adopt a bond ordinance in a validly
called public meeting in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Moline
for the conduct of meetings and adoption of ordinances. Said bond ordinance
shall be effective upon passage and approval.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5104 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-5105.   SAME - CONTENTS.
   (a)   Findings by City Council. The City Council shall make a finding and
determination in the bond ordinance that the borrowing of money is necessary
for the welfare of the government and affairs of the City, is for a proper
public purpose, or purposes, and is in the public interest, which finding and
determination shall be conclusive.
   (b)   Description of project. The bond ordinance shall contain a description
of the project to be financed in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds. If
all or a part of the project consists of the refunding of outstanding bonds of
the City, the bonds to be refunded shall be described in the ordinance. The
ordinance may provide that a single issue or series of bonds be issued, both
for construction and refunding purposes, and any bonds issued for refunding
purposes may either be surrendered and exchanged for the bonds being refunded,
par for par, or may be sold in accordance with the terms of the bond ordinance
and the proceeds applied to the payment and redemption of the bonds being
refunded in such manner as the City Council may determine, and the City may
enter into any agreements required to prepare and carry out any refunding plan.
   The ordinance shall contain a general description of the construction or
acquisition part of the project and an estimate of the total project cost. It
shall not be necessary that the ordinance refer to detailed plans and
specifications for the construction or acquisition. The ordinance shall state
the means providing for defraying the total project costs and shall determine
the period of usefulness of the project to be constructed or acquired.
   (c)   Form of bonds and coupons.  The bond ordinance shall prescribe the
bond form and coupon form (if any), and it shall be plainly stated in the face
of each bond whether or not the bond does in any way constitute an indebtedness
of the City within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory limitation,
and indicate the revenues and other funds from which principal and interest
will be paid. The bonds shall be executed by the officers of the City
designated in the bond ordinance, and such bonds shall be the valid and binding
obligation of the
   City notwithstanding that, before the delivery thereof, all of the persons
whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the City. The
bonds and coupons may be executed either by the manual or printed facsimile
signatures of the designated officers, all as provided in the bond ordinance,
and all in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Facsimile Signature of
Public Officials Act.
   (d)   Sale of bonds, maturity of bonds and redemption. A contract for the
sale of the bonds may be entered into before the adoption of the bond
ordinance, or the bond ordinance may provide for the subsequent sale of the
bonds. If such contract has been entered into prior to the adoption of the bond
ordinance, the bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates set forth in the
bond ordinance. If such contract is entered into after the adoption of the bond
ordinance, the bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates as shall be
designated by a resolution of the City Council adopted prior to the delivery of
the bonds. The bond ordinance shall fix all of the other terms and conditions
in connection with the bonds determined advisable by the City Council, and such
bonds shall be payable at such times, be in one or more series, bear such date
or dates, mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from
their respective dates, be payable in such medium of payment at such place or
places, carry such registration privileges, be subject to such terms of
redemption at such premiums, be executed in such manner, contain such terms,
covenants and conditions, and be in such form, either coupon or registered, as
such ordinance may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the City
Council before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at public or private
sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the City
Council. The bonds shall be deemed to be securities and negotiable instruments
within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code.
   (e)   Covenants in bonds. Any bond ordinance may contain covenants as to:
   (1)   The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the lease
and other agreements or the project for which the bonds are to be issued,
including the creation and maintenance of reserves;
   (2)   The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to any project or
any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions
thereto;
   (3)   The maintenance and repair of any project;
   (4)   The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of
insurance moneys;
   (5)   The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the
State of Illinois, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit
of the bondholders, paying agent and bond registrar;
   (6)   The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and
   (7)   The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any
portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a
receiver.
   The bond ordinance may provide that the principal of and interest on the
bonds shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering the project
for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions
thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture of trust may contain such covenants
and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the
bond ordinance and shall be executed in the manner Section
2-5105 provided for in the bond ordinance. The provisions of this article and
the bond ordinance and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute
a contract with the holder or holders of the bonds and continue in effect until
the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the
bonds so issued have been fully paid, or until provision for payment shall have
been made as provided in the bond ordinance, and the duties of the City and its
corporate authorities and officers under this article and any bond ordinance
and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by mandamus,
foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other appropriate
suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction, in the
manner and subject to the terms of such bond ordinance, mortgage or indenture
of trust.
   (f)   Use of bond proceeds. The proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds issued
pursuant to this article shall be used solely and only for the purpose or
purposes for which the bonds were authorized in the bond ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5105 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-5106.   RIGHTS UNDER PREEXISTING BOND ORDINANCES.
   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to alter, change or impair the
rights of the holders of any of the revenue bonds of the City issued prior to
the effective date of this article, and the rights of such holders shall remain
in full force and effect, all as provided in the ordinance heretofore adopted
by the City Council and authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds presently
outstanding.
SEC. 2-5107.   TITLE TO THE PROJECT.
   It shall not be necessary for the City to own or acquire any project or part
thereof financed hereunder.
SEC. 2-5108.   LIEN OF BONDS.
   All bonds issued under this article have a lien upon the revenues and
receipts derived from the lease or other agreement between the City and the
user or from the project; and the Council may provide in the bond ordinance for
the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien
upon such revenues and receipts or may provide that the lien upon such revenues
and receipts is subordinate.
SEC. 2-5109.   LIABILITY OF BONDS.
   All bonds issued under and pursuant to this article shall be limited
obligations of the City payable solely out of the revenues and receipts derived
from such lease or other agreement or from the project. No holder of any bond
issued under this article has the right to compel any exercise of the taxing
power of the City to pay the bonds, the interest or premium, if any, thereon,
and the bonds shall not constitute an indebtedness of the City or a loan of
credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory
provisions.
SEC. 2-5110.   EXEMPTION FROM CONSTRUCTION AND BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC
BUILDINGS.
   (a)   The acquisition and construction of an economic development project or
a pollution control facility shall not be subject to any requirements relating
to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or improvements imposed by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes or any similar requirements which may be lawfully
waived by this section and any requirement of competitive bidding or
restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose or
the lease, sale or other disposition of property of the City is not applicable
to any action taken under authority of this article.
   (b)   All applicants under this article shall agree to pay the prevailing
rate of hourly wages and to require each facility to do likewise and to monitor
their contractors and subcontractors to assure that prevailing wages are paid
as a condition to passage of a bond ordinance. This provision shall be
administered as follows:
      (1)   For purposes hereof the term "prevailing rate of hourly wages"
shall mean the arithmetic mean of the determination of the United States
Department of Labor pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act, 40 USC Sections 276a et
seq., as published in the Federal Register at the time of execution of the
contract for the various trades and laborer classifications found therein for
Scott County, Iowa, and Rock Island County, Illinois;
      (2)   All rules of construction and for determining compliance adopted by
the United States Department of Labor pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act shall be
applicable to this provision;
      (3)   An applicant or user shall file with the City or its agent, the
bond trustee, a certification under oath that all contractors and
subcontractors are required contractually to pay the prevailing rate of hourly
wages. An independent person such as an accountant or architect shall be
required to certify to the City or its agent, the bond trustee, that all
tradesmen and laborers have been paid the prevailing rate of hourly wages when
a requisition for disbursement of bond proceeds is made; the City or its agent,
the bond trustee or lender, shall not honor any requisition for disbursement of
bond proceeds unless the proper certifications hereunder have been filed;
      (4)   Tradesmen, laborers, and unions representing same are intended to
have the right to file in a court of law, in their own name or names, a cause
of action to collect the difference between wages that should have been paid
and wages that were actually paid;
      (5)   Violations of this provision, in addition to any other remedy,
shall result in liquidated damages paid to the City in the amount of money
equaling the difference in interest costs between what an applicant or user
would have paid for financing at one hundred twenty-five (125) per cent of the
prime rate in effect at the largest bank in Illinois on the date of issuance
or, if a floating interest rate is provided for, on the interest determination
dates provided for and what the applicant or user actually has paid for
financing at the interest rate provided for in the bond ordinance; and
      (6)   The community and economic development department shall be
responsible for administration of this provision.
   (c)   This provision shall not be applicable to any economic development
project or pollution control facility, which has been approved for issuance
prior to the effective date hereof. "Approved for issuance" shall mean an
executed memorandum of intent or a resolution closing any required public
hearing and authorizing proceeding with the issuance of bonds or passage and
approval of the bond ordinance, whichever comes first.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5110 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-5111.   POWERS CONFERRED AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL; LIMITATIONS
IMPOSED; EFFECT.
   Subject only to the limitations set forth in Section
2-5106 of this article, the procedures herein set forth for the issuance of
revenue bonds shall be controlling and shall be complied with by the City in
the borrowing of money by the issuance of revenue bonds, notwithstanding any
provisions to the contrary contained in the "Illinois Municipal Code," and all
acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, and in any other law or laws
of the State of Illinois or any ordinance heretofore adopted by the City. The
powers conferred by this article are in addition to and supplementary to any
powers conferred by any such laws or ordinances, and revenue bonds may be
issued pursuant to this article for the purpose of financing projects and
paying project costs without regard to the requirements, restrictions or other
provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance.
SEC. 2-5112.   USE OF TAXES IN SUPPORT OF A REVENUE-PRODUCING SYSTEM.
   Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from using the proceeds of
taxes collected by the City or any other funds in the hands of the City for the
purpose of operating, maintaining or supporting a revenue-producing facility or
system, or for financing such a project.
SEC. 2-5113.   USER TO PAY EXPENSES.
   The user of such a project or facility shall pay for all of the City's out-
of-pocket expenses for special studies, financial and legal consultants, and
other necessary expenses incurred in reviewing the propriety of issuance of
revenue bonds and in issuing said revenue bonds; however, any deposit and
eighty percent (80%) of the financing fee shall be applied to these project
costs.
SEC. 2-5114.   DEPOSIT.
   Any person requesting the City to finance any economic development project
or pollution control facility by issuance of its revenue bonds shall make, upon
submission of a written request to consider the economic feasibility of said
project or facility, a non-refundable deposit with the City in the amount of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to reimburse the City for its preliminary
expenses in investigating the desirability and feasibility of such financing.
Upon adoption of a comfort resolution indicating the City's preliminary
agreement to issue a specific amount of bonds, a further deposit equal to one-
half of the financing fee shall be paid to the City. Said deposits will
be disbursed by the City in payment of such expenses notwithstanding that
financing is not completed; however, said deposits may be repaid as a project
cost from the proceeds of any bonds issued to finance the project. While the
three thousand dollar ($3,000.00) deposit is over and above the financing fee,
it shall be applied to expenses in the following priority:
   (1)   City's out-of-pocket expenses;
   (2)   Applicant or user's out-of-pocket expenses; and
   (3)   Remainder, if any, to the City.
SEC. 2-5115.   FINANCING FEE.
   The City shall charge a financing fee each time that revenue bonds are
issued by it for an economic development project or a pollution control
facility. Said fee shall be computed at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per
thousand dollars of bonds for the first two million five hundred thousand
dollars ($2,500,000.00), of bonds issued with a minimum fee of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00); for bond issues exceeding two million five hundred
thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00) City shall charge an additional fee to be
computed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per thousand dollars of bonds issued
in excess of two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00).
Financing fees shall be calculated on the principal amount of bonds issued at
the time of the issuance of bonds by the City. Financing fees shall be deemed
reimbursement to the City for its administrative costs in reviewing, evaluating
and administering any bond issue and shall be a project cost in addition to
those costs defined in Section
2-5101(8), project costs, of this article. The financing fee shall be applied
to expenses in the following priority:
   (1)   Twenty percent (20%) of the financing fee shall be claimed by the
City; and
   (2)   The remaining eighty percent (80%) of the financing fee shall be
claimed in the following priority:
      a.   The City's out-of-pocket expenses;
      b.   The applicant or user's out-of-pocket expenses; and
      c.   Remainder, if any, to the City.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-5115 amended; 7/12/22)
ARTICLE VI. JUDICIARY
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF CITY ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
SEC. 2-6100.   PURPOSE.
   The stated purpose of this article is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of City ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such City
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and minimum penalties and
authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
SEC. 2-6101.   CREATION.
   Illinois law grants municipal and county governments the power to conduct
administrative adjudication proceedings to enforce compliance with ordinances.
The governments may enter into mutual intergovernmental agreements by the
authority granted to them by the Illinois Constitution (Art. VII, Section 10)
and the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (5 ILCS 220/1-220/8), to exercise
jointly any governmental service, activity, or undertaking which any of them is
authorized by law to perform. The implementation of an Administrative Hearing
Officer system may be approached more efficiently and economically on an area-
wide basis and by joint efforts and resources.
   The Municipal Code Enforcement System (hereinafter "MUNICES") was
established via an intergovernmental agreement between the City of Moline,
other local, participating Illinois cities and villages, Rock Island County,
and the Bi-State Regional Commission. The parties to said intergovernmental
agreement shall be members of MUNICES. Said intergovernmental agreement was
reviewed and approved by the Moline City Council. MUNICES hears a wide range of
cases involving violations of municipal ordinances that were once heard in the
Rock Island County Circuit Court. The establishment of MUNICES does not
preclude the corporate authorities or corporation counsel from using any other
method to enforce ordinances of the City.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6101 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6102.   ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   Administration of MUNICES is handled by the Bi-State Regional Commission
(hereinafter “Bi-State”). Because MUNICES hearings are held at Rock Island City
Hall, MUNICES expedites resolutions, reduces litigation expenses, and allows
the Circuit Court to focus on more serious offenses.Each MUNICES participating
jurisdiction will be responsible for the determination of which code violations
will be enforced through the joint MUNICES system; designating fines to be
collected for the code violations; the appointment of personnel to serve on the
Administrative Committee; and the staffing of hearings with appropriate
personnel, as needed.
   An administrative committee shall oversee matters related to the
establishment and ongoing operations of the MUNICES system. Each member
government shall be represented in the Administrative Committee by its chief
administrative officer or a designee of that officer. Advisory members to the
Administrative Committee shall include at least one representative from the
police department and/or the legal department from each of the participating
jurisdictions.
   Staff shall include:
   (a)   Program Administration. Bi-State shall provide for the administration
of the program in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement with the
participating entities. Bi-State will be responsible for managing MUNICE’s day
to day operations and coordination between the participating entities.
Responsibilities may include: issuing notices of hearing dates; serving as
clerk during hearing proceedings; recording hearings; recording fines and
penalty assessments imposed by the administrative hearing officer; issuing
payment receipts; maintaining all records; collecting monies paid as fines and/
or penalties assessed; keeping financial records; providing reports to
participating jurisdictions; and other duties as directed by the MUNICES
Administrative Committee.
   (b)   Administrative Hearing Officer. An attorney(s) eligible to serve as a
hearing officer will be retained on a contractual basis. Responsibilities will
include: presiding at administrative hearings; hearing testimony; issuing
subpoenas; preserving and authenticating all records of hearings and evidence;
issuing written findings, decisions, and orders; imposing penalties consistent
with applicable code provisions; and assessing costs upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6102 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6103.   FINANCIAL.
Revenue for the program will consist of receipt of payment for fines and
penalties levied by the Administrative Hearing Officer. Revenue will be
accounted for each jurisdiction from which the violation originated. All
expenses related to operation of MUNICES will be accounted for and prorated to
each jurisdiction on the basis of percentage of cases to the total number of
cases. The difference between the revenue generated by each jurisdiction’s
fines and its share of expenses (including a reserve) will be rebated to the
respective jurisdiction on a quarterly basis.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6103 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6104.   PROCEDURE.
   The system of administrative adjudication of any City ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated hereunder shall be in accordance with the
following procedures:
   (a)   Violation notice of any ordinance violation, including violations of
the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, shall be issued by the persons
authorized under this Code and shall contain information and shall be certified
and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set
forth;
   (b)   All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers, as well as
other specifically authorized individuals of any City department, shall have
the authority to issue violation notices;
   (c)   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter
or a violation of any section of any City ordinance is authorized to issue
notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter
set forth;
   (d)   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the party violating the ordinance if known;
      (2)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance);
      (3)   The particular ordinance violated;
      (4)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
      (5)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment;
      (6)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice;
      (7)   The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance
violations other than violations of the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code,
the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and
the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6104 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6105.   SERVICE.
   (a)   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice:
      (1)   In the case of violation of the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Code by:
         a.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle or vehicle violating
any compliance regulation;
         b.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present;
         c.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible person; or
         d.   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person responsible for the ordinance violation.
      (2)   In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of
the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code by:
         a.   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation;
         b.   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible person;
         c.   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person responsible for the ordinance violation; or
         d.   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found
when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
   (b)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate to be kept by the code enforcement coordinator attesting to
the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her
control.
   (c)   The original or facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by
the code enforcement coordinator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of
business.
   (d)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith
or a copy of the notice shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6105 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6106.   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate any alleged ordinance
violation on its merits. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and
shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-liability, made by the
administrative hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence,
including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon
by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing
officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in
accordance with Sec.
2-6111 hereof. Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits
may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall
be on the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the
verified notice of violation.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6106 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6107.   NOTICES.
   (a)   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a City
ordinance, other than a City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code violation, to
appear at the time and date designated for a hearing or, in the case of a
violation of the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, the registered owner,
operator or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to pay the fine, in full as stated on
said notice, the code enforcement coordinator shall send or cause to be sent
notices by first class mail, postage prepaid to the person who received the
notice of an ordinance violation; or in the case of the violation of the City
Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, the registered owner or operator of the "cited
vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State and shall be
sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the
lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent
in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail.
   (b)   The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the following
sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   Upon the failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance
violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation of the City Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Code, the registered owner, operator or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be
sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the
following information:
         a.   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
         b.   Particular ordinance violated;
         c.   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
         d.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
         e.   A section entitled "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of
a violation of the City Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, or the registered
owner, operator or lessee may appear at an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as
specified in the Notice of Hearing;
         f.   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits;
         g.   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability
for the cited violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated; and
         h.   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City.
   (c)   A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following
the conclusion of administrative hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and
shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the City;
      (2)   A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs
are debts due and owing the City; and
      (3)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the City within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6107 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6108.   FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay
the fine or penalty or after the administrative hearing officer's determination
of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any
administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to
appear at the administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the
date and at the time and place specified in a previously served or mailed
notice pursuant to Section
2-6107, the hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final
either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or
upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having
been made.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6108 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6109.   JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final decision by a hearing officer that a Code violation does or does
not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, and appeal from such
decision shall be in strict conformance with said Law.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6109 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6110.   ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
   (a)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (b)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
Code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (c)   In any case in which a hearing officer finds that a defendant has
failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a Code
violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a Code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs and costs related
to property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the hearing
officer, shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing
officer pursuant to this subsection (c), the code enforcement coordinator shall
provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at
a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the
defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date
for such a hearing which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date
the notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall
begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   (d)   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or
both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the municipality
under this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as
a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No
lien may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the
manner provided by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform
Commercial Code.
   (e)   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within twenty-one (21) days after
the issuance of the order of default if the hearing officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper
service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection
(e), the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing
any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the municipality as
a result of the vacated default judgment.
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6110 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6111.   JURISDICTION; SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.
   The ordinances which may be adjudicated through the RICCES pursuant to the
provisions of this article and the minimum penalties in addition to court costs
to be imposed by the hearing officer for violations thereof are shown in
Table 2-6111, as follows:
Table 2-6111
Ordinance Section No. Offense Minimum Fine
Ordinance
Section   Offense                                                                 Minimum Fine
No.
Chapter 3 Advertising and Signs
Article   In General
I.
Division  Handbills
1.
3-1102    Posting Notice, Placard, Bill, etc. Prohibited in Certain Cases         No Minimum Fine
3-1103    Throwing Handbills, Broadcast in Public Places Prohibited               No Minimum Fine
3-1104    Placing in Vehicles Commercial and Non-Commercial Handbills             No Minimum Fine
3-1105    Distribution on Uninhabited or Vacant Premises, Private Premises, of    No Minimum Fine
          Commercial or Non-Commercial Handbills
3-1106    Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted                          No Minimum Fine
3-1107    Distribution on Inhabited Private Premises - Commercial or Non-         No Minimum Fine
          Commercial Handbills
3-1108    Time of House to House Distribution and/or Solicitation                 No Minimum Fine
Division  Sound Trucks
2.
3-1201    Use of Sound Trucks                                                     No Minimum Fine
Article   Signs
II.
                                                                                  $50 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100 for
                                                                                  second offense;
                                                                                  $200 for third
                                                                                  offense; $400 for
                                                                                  fourth offense
                                                                                  and each offense
                                                                                  thereafter.
                                                                                  Proven costs of
3-2108    Signs in Public Right-of-Way                                            collection and
                                                                                  storage, if any,
                                                                                  shall apply to
                                                                                  each offense.
                                                                                  These fines are
                                                                                  in addition to
                                                                                  any imposed for
                                                                                  violation of
                                                                                  Section
                                                                                  3-1102.
          (Ord. No. 3032-2019; Sec. 3-2108(3) amended, Sec. 3-2108(4) added; 12/
          10/19)
Chapter 4 Alcoholic Beverages
Article   In General
I.
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-1101    Misbranding                                                             offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
4-1102    Possession of Alcoholic Liquor on Public Right-of-Way; in Motor Vehicle $50.00
Article   Retail Licensed
III.
Division  In General
I.
4-3100    When Required                                                           $330.00
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-3104    Licenses to be Used Only for Premises for Which Issued                  offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-3205    Premises Ineligible for License                                         offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Division  Privileges Conferred by Various Classes of Licenses
3.
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-3301    Compliance Required                                                     offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Article   Operation
IV.
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4100    Posting                                                                 offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4101    Persons Not to Remain on Premises After Closing Hour                    offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4102    Licensed Premises Shall be Public Accommodation                         offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4103    Credit Sales                                                            offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4104    Restraint of Trade                                                      offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4105    Pandering by Licensee                                                   offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
4-4106    Self Service                                                            offense; $150.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-4107    Drive-In or Walk-In Service Windows                                     offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $150.00 for first
4-4108    Operation within Enclosed Buildings                                     offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Article   Minors
V.
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
4-5102    Preparation of Alcoholic Beverages                                      for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
4-5103    Possession                                                              for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
4-5104    Purchase                                                                for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
4-5105    Consumption                                                             $100.00
4-5106    Giving Alcoholic Beverages to Minors                                    $250.00
4-5107    Authority and Duty of Licensee Under this Chapter to Require Proof of   $250.00
          Age
4-5108    Fraudulent Identification Cards                                         $50.00
4-5110    Minor on Premises                                                       $50.00
4-5111    Licensee Permitting a Minor on Premises                                 $250.00
4-5112    Parental Responsibility                                                 $250.00
4-5113    Responsibility of Owner or Occupant of Premises                         $250.00
Chapter 7 Animals and Fowl
Article   In General
I.
7-1101    Cruelty to Animals                                                      $25.00
7-1102    Animals for Use in Entertainment                                        $25.00
7-1103    Shooting or Molesting Birds                                             $25.00
7-1104    Livestock and Domestic Foul Prohibited in City; Running-at-Large;       $25.00
          Nuisance
7-1105    Beekeeping within the City Prohibited                                   $25.00
7-1106    Dangerous Animals, in General                                           $75.00
7-1107    Impoundment and Disposition of Dangerous Animals                        $75.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 7-1106 and 7-1107
          enacted; 09/10/02)
7-1108    Number of Rabbits Restricted                                            $25.00
7-1109    Wild Animals                                                            $25.00
7-1110    Non-Resident Not To Have Animals in the City; Exceptions                $25.00
7-1111    Reporting Animal Bites and Attacks                                      $25.00
7-1112    Control of Animal Wastes                                                $25.00
7-1113    Liberation of Confined Animals Prohibited                               $25.00
7-1114    Dead Animals                                                            $25.00
7-1115    Animal Trapping                                                         $25.00
7-1116    Animal Cages, Runs, Pens, etc.                                          $25.00
7-1117    Stray Animals                                                           $25.00
Article   Dogs and Cats
II.
Division  In General
1.
7-2100    Dogs and Cats Running at Large; Impoundment                             $25.00
7-2101    Removal of Collars, Tags and Leashes from Dogs or Cats Prohibited;      $25.00
          Exceptions
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
7-2102    Excessive Barking, Howling or Yelping                                   for second
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
7-2104    Dangerous and Vicious Dogs – Hearing and Determination                $25.00
7-2105    Keeping of Dangerous Dogs                                               $75.00
7-2106    Keeping of Vicious Dogs Prohibited                                      $75.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 7-2105 and 7-2106
          enacted; 09/10/02)
7-2107    Female Dogs or Cats in Heat                                             $25.00
7-2108    Limitation Upon Dogs or Cats Per Residence                              $25.00
7-2109    Neutering of Dogs or Cats                                               $25.00
7-2111    Use or Possession of Dogs in Conjunction with Criminal Activity         $500.00
7-2112    Police Dogs
7-2112(a)                                                                         $300.00
7-2112(b)                                                                         $500.00
7-2113    Guide and Support Dogs
7-2113(a)                                                                         $300.00
7-2113(b)                                                                         $500.00
7-2113(c)                                                                         $500.00
7-2114    Guard and Sentry Dogs                                                   $25.00
Division  Licensing
2.
                                                                                  $25.00 for first
7-2200    Licensing Required                                                      offense; $50.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Division  Rabies Control
3.
7-2302    Dogs or Cats without Collar and Inoculation Tag Subject to Impoundment  $25.00
          and Disposal
7-2303    Certain Dogs or Cats Subject to Confinement or Impoundment; Not To Be   $25.00
          Removed from City
Article   Kennels and Pet Shops
IV.
7-4100    License Required                                                        $100.00
Article   Enforcement
V.
7-5201    Hindering Community Service Officer Duties                              $25.00
Chapter 8 Buildings and Other Construction and Building Services
Article   Division of Inspections
I.
Division  Licensing
8.
8-1800    General Contractor License                                              No Minimum Fine
8-1801    Electrical Contractor License                                           No Minimum Fine
8-1802    Mechanical Contractor License                                           No Minimum Fine
8-1803    Plumbing License                                                        No Minimum Fine
8-1804    Roofing Contractor License                                              No Minimum Fine
8-1805    Sewer Service and Maintenance Business License                          No Minimum Fine
8-1806    License and Registration Not Transferable                               No Minimum Fine
8-1807    Change of Status                                                        No Minimum Fine
Article   Administration
II.
8-2100    Uniform Administrative Code Adopted                                     No Minimum Fine
8-2101    Amendments to Moline Building and Building Services Administrative Code No Minimum Fine
Article   Building Code
III.
8-3100    Uniform Building Code Adopted                                           No Minimum Fine
8-3101    Amendments to the Building Code                                         No Minimum Fine
Article   Mechanical Code
IV.
8-4100    Uniform Mechanical Code Adopted                                         No Minimum Fine
8-4101    Amendments to Uniform Mechanical Code                                   No Minimum Fine
Article   Housing Code
V.
8-5100    Uniform Housing Code Adopted                                            No Minimum Fine
8-5101    Amendments to Moline Housing Code                                       No Minimum Fine
Article   Dangerous Building Abatement
VI.
8-6100    Dangerous Building Code Adopted                                         No Minimum Fine
8-6101    Amendments to Dangerous Building Abatement Code                         No Minimum Fine
Article   Plumbing Code
VII.
8-7100    Illinois State Plumbing Code Adopted                                    No Minimum Fine
8-7101    Amendments to Moline Plumbing Code                                      No Minimum Fine
Article   Electrical Code
VIII.
8-8100    General Reference                                                       No Minimum Fine
8-8101    Electrical Code Adopted                                                 No Minimum Fine
8-8102    Amendments to Electrical Code                                           No Minimum Fine
Article   Miscellaneous
IV.
Division  Privately Owned Swimming Pools
1.
8-9103    Safety Requirements                                                     No Minimum Fine
8-9105    Persons with Contagious Diseases Not to Use Pools                       No Minimum Fine
8-9106    Permit Required; Application                                            No Minimum Fine
8-9107    Construction Bond Required; Exception                                   No Minimum Fine
8-9108    Concrete Construction                                                   No Minimum Fine
8-9109    Approval of Other Types of Construction                                 No Minimum Fine
8-9110    Aprons; Scum Disposal                                                   No Minimum Fine
8-9111    Plumbing                                                                No Minimum Fine
8-9112    Water Supply                                                            No Minimum Fine
Division  Hotels and Motels
2.
8-9201    Conformity to this Chapter Required; Exceptions                         No Minimum Fine
8-9202    License Required                                                        No Minimum Fine
8-9206    Transferability                                                         No Minimum Fine
8-9207    Display                                                                 No Minimum Fine
8-9208    Notice of Transfer or Sale of Business                                  No Minimum Fine
Chapter 9 Body Art Code
Article   In General
I.
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1101    License Required                                                        for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
9-1104    Existing Establishments and Technicians                                 for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
9-1105    Body Art Establishment Premises Standards                               for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1106    Prohibitions                                                            for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
9-1107    Body Art Notice and Reporting Requirements                              for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1108    Client Medical History                                                  for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1109    Performance of Body Art Procedures                                      for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
9-1110    Records                                                                 for second
                                                                                  offense; $400.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1111    Equipment, Instruments, and Supplies;                                   for second
          Sanitation and Sterilization Procedures                                 offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-1112    Storage and Disposal of Waste                                           for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Article   Temporary Body Art Establishments and Technicians, and Mobile Body Art
II        Vehicles
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-2101    Temporary Body Art Establishments                                       for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-2103    Mobile Body Art Vehicles                                                for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Article   Administration and Enforcement
III
Division  In General
1.
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-3102    Renewal of License                                                      for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
Division. Inspections
2.
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
9-3200    Right to Inspect and Examine Records                                    for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2001-12-04; new penalty provisions for Chapter 9 to Table 2-
          6110.1 enacted; 12/11/01)
Chapter   Fire Prevention and Protection
11
Article   Fire Prevention
I.
11-1100   Fire Code Adopted                                                       No Minimum Fine
11-1101   Local Amendments to Fire Code
11-1101   Fire Marshall                                                           No Minimum Fine
(a)
11-1101   Board of Appeal                                                         No Minimum Fine
(b)
11-1101   Citations                                                               $10.00
(c)
11-1101   (Reserved)                                                              No Minimum Fine
(d)
11-1101   Unlawful Possession of Fireworks                                        $100.00
(e)
11-1101                                                                           $100.00
(f)
11-1101                                                                           $10.00
(g)
11-1101                                                                           $10.00
(h)
11-1101                                                                           $10.00
(i)
11-1101   Location of Containers                                                  $10.00
(j)
11-1101   Refilling Tanks                                                         $10.00
(k)
          (2002-09-05; new penalty provisions for Sec. 11-1102 in Table 2-6110.1
          enacted; 09/17/02)
Chapter   Food and Food Handlers
14
Article   Adoption by Reference
I.
14-1100   Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations                           No Minimum Fine
14-1101   Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations                      No Minimum Fine
Article   Restaurants and Other Food Service Establishments
II.
14-2200   In General                                                              No Minimum Fine
14-2201   Issuance of Food Service Establishment & Retail Food Store Licenses     No Minimum Fine
14-2202   Issuance of Temporary & Mobile Licenses                                 No Minimum Fine
                                                                                  Two times the
14-2203   License Fees & Payment                                                  applicable fee
                                                                                  for such license
14-2204   Limitation on Duration of Licenses for Temporary Food Service           No Minimum Fine
          Establishments
Division  Door-to-Door Sales of Food
3.
14-2300   Guidelines                                                              No Minimum Fine
14-2301   Food Sources                                                            No Minimum Fine
14-2302   Equipment and Supplies                                                  No Minimum Fine
14-2303   Temperature Control                                                     No Minimum Fine
14-2304   Cleaning & Maintenance                                                  No Minimum Fine
14-2305   Labeling                                                                No Minimum Fine
Article   Administration and Enforcement
III.
Division  Inspections
2.
14-3201   Access into Food Service Establishment                                  No Minimum Fine
14-3204   Examination & Condemnation of Food and/or Equipment                     No Minimum Fine
14-3205   Food Service Establishments Outside of City Jurisdiction                No Minimum Fine
Article   Equipment & Plan Approval
IV.
14-4100   Plan Review of Future Construction                                      No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Garbage and Trash
15
Article   In General
I.
15-1101   Tampering with Containers                                               No Minimum Fine
15-1102   Vacation of Premises                                                    No Minimum Fine
15-1103   Vehicles Carrying Refuse                                                No Minimum Fine
15-1104   Dumping in the City                                                     No Minimum Fine
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  $100.00 for
15-1105   Scavenging or Theft of Recyclable Materials                             second or each
                                                                                  subse-quent
                                                                                  offense committed
                                                                                  within a 180-day
                                                                                  period
Article   Containers and Collections
II.
Division  Refuse Containers
1.
15-2100   Required Containers for Property Type                                   No Minimum Fine
15-2101   Automated Tipper Carts                                                  No Minimum Fine
15-2102   Time for Making Containers Available for Collection                     No Minimum Fine
15-2103   Placing Containers on Right-of-Way Prohibited                           No Minimum Fine
Division  Refuse Collection
2.
15-2200   Preparation and Collection of Residential Refuse                        No Minimum Fine
                                                                                  $200.00 for first
                                                                                  offense;
                                                                                  $300.00 for
15-2200   Sharps                                                                  second or each
(a)(3)                                                                            subse-quent
                                                                                  offense committed
                                                                                  within a 180-day
                                                                                  period
Article   Private Scavengers
III.
Division  In General
1.
15-3100   Equipment Requirements                                                  No Minimum Fine
15-3101   Hours of Operation                                                      No Minimum Fine
15-3102   Overnight Parking                                                       No Minimum Fine
15-3103   Compliance with Laws                                                    No Minimum Fine
15-3104   Vehicle and Container Marking                                           No Minimum Fine
Division  Licenses
2.
15-3200   License Required                                                        No Minimum Fine
15-3203   Each Vehicle Licensed; Fees; Assignments                                No Minimum Fine
15-3205   Display of License                                                      No Minimum Fine
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; penalty provisions for Sec. 16-1104, “Libraries,”
          “Disorderly Conduct,” repealed and deleted; 09/10/02)
Chapter   Licenses and Business Regulations
17
Article   Sales Regulations, Itinerant Vendors and Transient Merchants
II.
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
17-2200   License Required                                                        for second
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
17-2201   Display of License                                                      No Minimum Fine
17-2202   Sales Regulations                                                       No Minimum Fine
17-2203   Fixed Location Transient Merchants                                      No Minimum Fine
17-2207   Duplicate and Individual Licenses; When Each Required                   No Minimum Fine
17-2208   Charitable and Non-Profit Organizations                                 No Minimum Fine
17-2209   Blanket Licenses                                                        No Minimum Fine
Article   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
III.
Division  Licenses
2.
17-3200   Required                                                                No Minimum Fine
17-3201   Transferability                                                         No Minimum Fine
17-3205   Extension of License for Weekly Auction Sales; Fee                      No Minimum Fine
Article   Reserved
IV.
Article   Regulations for Sexually Oriented Business
V.        Activities
17-5104   Adult Establishment Licenses Generally                                  $100.00
17-5108   Inspections by the City                                                 $100.00
17-5109   Change of Information                                                   $100.00
17-5110   Regulations Applicable to All Adult Entertainment Establishments        $100.00
17-5111   Special Regulations for Adult Booths                                    $100.00
17-5112   Special Regulations for Adult Cabarets                                  $100.00
17-5113   Regulations for Adult Motels                                            $100.00
17-5114   Special Regulations for Adult Stores                                    $100.00
17-5115   Special Regulations for Adult Theaters                                  $100.00
17-5116   Special Regulations for Nude Model Studios                              $100.00
17-5117   Special Regulations for Escort Agencies                                 $100.00
17-5118   Licensee Responsibility for Employees                                   $100.00
17-5121   Record Keeping by Licensee                                              $100.00
Article   Pawnbrokers
VI.
17-6101   License Required                                                        No Minimum Fine
17-6105   Registered                                                              No Minimum Fine
17-6106   Memorandum of Transaction                                               No Minimum Fine
17-6107   Inspection                                                              No Minimum Fine
17-6108   Buying Certain Articles Prohibited                                      No Minimum Fine
17-6109   Transactions with Minors                                                No Minimum Fine
17-6110   Transactions with Intoxicated Persons or Thieves                        No Minimum Fine
17-6111   Employment of Persons under Sixteen                                     No Minimum Fine
Article   Motor Vehicle Towing Services
VII.
17-7101   Ownership and Management                                                No Minimum Fine
17-7102   Prohibited Financial Transactions                                       No Minimum Fine
17-7103   Premises From and Circumstances Under Which Unauthorized Vehicles May   No Minimum Fine
          or May Not be Towed
17-7104   Release of Motor Vehicles From Custody of Relocators                    No Minimum Fine
17-7105   Notification to Law Enforcement Agencies                                No Minimum Fine
17-7109   Vehicle Identification                                                  No Minimum Fine
17-7110   Construction, Erection, Placement, Design and Illumination of Signs     No Minimum Fine
17-7111   Application for Renewal of Relocator’s License                        No Minimum Fine
17-7113   Posting of Rates and Charges                                            No Minimum Fine
17-7114   Illegal Parking                                                         $25.00
Article   Burglar, Hold-Up and Fire Alarm Systems and Users
VIII.
17-8103   Standards and Regulations Authorized                                    $25.00; 500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8104   Audible Alarm Requirements                                              $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8105   Automatic Dialing Device, Intermediary Services                         $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8017   Radio Alarms                                                            $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8109   Permits Required                                                        $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8111   Notice of Application/Information Change                                $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8113   Permit Renewal                                                          $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
17-8122   Responsibility for Alarm Response                                       $25.00; $500.00
                                                                                  maximum
Article   Raffles
IX.
17-9102   License Required                                                        $25.00
17-9105   Conduct of Raffles                                                      $25.00
17-9107   Records                                                                 $25.00
Chapter   Motor Vehicles
20
20-4120   Sound Amplification Regulation                                          $75.00
20-5100   Prohibited Parking Zones; Establishment                                 $25.00
20-5101   Prohibited Parking Areas at Certain Times;                              $35.00
20-5102   Improper Parking Purposes                                               $35.00
20-5103   Unattended Motor Vehicles                                               $35.00
20-5104   Double Parking                                                          $25.00
20-5105   Designation of Parking Spaces; Conformity with Markings
20-5105                                                                           $25.00
(d)
20-5105                                                                           $25.00
(e)
20-5105                                                                           $50.00
(f)
20-5105                                                                           $25.00
(g)
20-5107   Manner of Parking                                                       $25.00
20-5108   Backing to the Curb                                                     $25.00
20-5109   Parking Time Limits/Restrictions Established                            $25.00
20-5110   Parking Wide Vehicles in Residential Areas                              $25.00
20-5112   Public Carrier Stands                                                   $25.00
20-5113   Manner of Picking Up and Discharging Bus Passengers                     $35.00
20-5114   Loading Zones                                                           $35.00
20-5115   Restrictions on Parking for Cleaning of Streets                         $35.00
20-5116   Official Municipal Parking Zones                                        $50.00
20-5117   Fire Lanes                                                              $35.00
20-5118   Regulations on Private Property                                         $250.00
20-5123   Persons with Disabilities Parking Included in Contracts                 $250.00
20-5124   Unauthorized Persons Using Persons with Disabilities Spacing; a         $250.00
          Violation
20-5201   When Parking along Snow Routes is Unlawful                              $35.00
20-5206   Unattended Vehicles Parked on Streets in Excess of 48-Hours Subject to  $35.00
          Removal by Police; Cost of Removal
20-5300   Operation of Parking Meters                                             $25.00
20-5303   Parking When Meters are Not Required to be Operated                     $35.00
20-5304   Improper Coins or Tokens                                                $50.00
20-5305   Time Limits in Zones Established                                        $35.00
20-5309   Vandalism                                                               $50.00
20-6100   Obedience to Traffic-Control Devices and Traffic Regulations            $35.00
20-6103   To Use Right Half of Crosswalks                                         $35.00
20-6104   Soliciting Rides or Business                                            $35.00
20-6105   Walking on Roadways                                                     $35.00
20-6107   Skateboarding, In-Line Skating and Roller-Skating                       $35.00
20-7501   Parking of Trucks and Other Vehicles on Public Right-of Way Prohibited  $35.00
Chapter   Nuisances in General
21
21-1100   Defined                                                                 No Minimum Fine
21-1101   Nuisances Constitute Violation                                          No Minimum Fine
21-1102   Standing to Complain                                                    No Minimum Fine
21-1103   Abatement Proceedings in General                                        No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Offenses - Miscellaneous
22
Article   In General
I.
                                                                                  $200.00 and/or
22-1100   Impersonating City Officer or Police Officer                            imprisonment and/
                                                                                  or not to exceed
                                                                                  6 months; or both
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provision for Sec. 22-1100 enacted;
          09/10/02)
22-1101   Fortunetelling; Defined; Prohibited                                     No Minimum Fine
                                                                                  $25.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $50.00
22-1102   Curfew: Imposed Upon Minors; Duties of Parents; Enforcement             for second
(b)                                                                               offense; $100.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
22-1103   Clinging to Railroad Cars and Other Vehicles                            $75.00
22-1104   Abandoned Refrigerators and Similar Appliances                          $150.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-1103 and 22-
          1104 enacted; 09/10/02)
22-1105   Tobacco Products, Tobacco Accessories and Smoking Herbs
22-1105   License required                                                        No Minimum Fine
(b)
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
22-1105                                                                           offense; $500.00
(e)       Prohibited sales, delivery - signs                                      for second or
                                                                                  subsequent
                                                                                  offense
22-1105   Minimum age to sell tobacco products                                    No Minimum Fine
(f)
22-1105   Purchase by minors prohibited                                           $100.00
(g)
22-1105   Possession of minors prohibited                                         $100.00
(h)
22-1105   Proximity to certain institutions                                       No Minimum Fine
(i)
22-1105   Certain free distributions prohibited                                   No Minimum Fine
(j)
22-1105   Vending machines - locking devices                                      No Minimum Fine
(k)
22-1105   Responsibility for agents and employees                                 No Minimum Fine
(l)
          (Ord. No. 2002-06-16; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-1105; 06/25/
          02)
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $500.00
22-1106   Possession of Cannabis                                                  for second
                                                                                  offense; $750.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
22-1107   Use/Sale of Intoxicating Compounds Prohibited                           $300.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provision for Sec. 22-1107 enacted;
          09/10/02)
22-1108   Swimming in River - Prohibited                                          $100.00
22-1109   Unlawful Use/Possession of Laser Pointing Device                        No Minimum Fine
22-1110   Endangering the Life or Health of a Child$250.00 for first offense; $500.00 plus six (6)
          months conditional discharge for second or subsequent offense
          (Ord. No. 2002-10-06; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-1110 enacted; 10/22/02)
Division  Drug Paraphernalia
2.
22-1201   Possession of Drug Paraphernalia$350.00 for first offense; $550.00 for second offense;
          $750.00 for each offense thereafter
22-1202   Manufacturing or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia$350.00 for first offense; $550.00 for
          second offense; $750.00 for each offense thereafter
22-1203   Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia to a Minor$350.00 and/or jail term not to exceed 6 months,
          or both
22-1204   Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia$100.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-1202, 22-1203, 22-1204 enacted;
          Sec. 22-1205 “Penalties” repealed; 09/10/02)
Division  Parental Responsibilities
3.
22-1302   Parental DutiesNo Minimum Fine
22-1303   Parental Violation and Penalty$100.00
22-1305   Liability of Parents; Record of NotificationNo Minimum Fine
Division  Motor Vehicle Responsibilities
4.
          (Ord. No. 2003-11-08; Penalty Provisions for Sec. 22-1401, as set forth in Table 2-6110.1
          repealed; 11/18/03)
Division  Neglected and Delinquent Children Offenses
5.
22-1502   Contributing to the Dependency or Neglect of a ChildNo Minimum Fine
22-1503   Contributing to the Delinquency of a ChildNo Minimum Fine
Division  Look-Alike Substances
6
          Unlawful Possession of a Look-Alike Substance$100.00 for first offense;
          $200.00 for second offense;
          $400.00 for each offense thereafter.
22-1602   Fines are doubled if offense occurs
          Within 1000 feet of any property owned or leased by any public or private elementary,
          middle or secondary school, public park, public housing authority, church or other
          religious organization.
Article II.                                                                       Disorderliness
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense;
22-2100                                                                           $100.00 for
(a)(1)                                                                            second offense;
                                                                                  $350.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  or subsequent
22-2100                                                                           offense plus
(a)(2)                                                                            restitution
                                                                                  (restitution not
                                                                                  to exceed
                                                                                  $750.00)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  or subsequent
22-2100                                                                           offense plus
(a)(3)                                                                            restitution
                                                                                  (restitution not
                                                                                  to exceed
                                                                                  $750.00)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  or subsequent
22-2100                                                                           offense plus
(a)(4)                                                                            restitution
                                                                                  (restitution not
                                                                                  to exceed
                                                                                  $750.00)
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
22-2100                                                                           offense;
(a)(5)                                                                            $500.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(a)(6)                                                                            second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $100.00 for
(a)(7)                                                                            second offense
                                                                                  $350.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(a)(8)                                                                            second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(a)(9)                                                                            second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $100.00 for
(a)(10)                                                                           second offense
                                                                                  $350.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
22-2100                                                                           offense
(a)(11)                                                                           $500.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $250.00 for first
22-2100                                                                           offense
(a)(12)                                                                           $500.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  I$100.00 for
                                                                                  first offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(b)       ntimidation                                                             second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(c)       Harassment by Telephone                                                 second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense
22-2100                                                                           $200.00 for
(d)       Harassment by Electronic Communication                                  second offense
                                                                                  $400.00 for each
                                                                                  offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-01-03; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-2100; 01/15/
          02)
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-2101   Assault                                                                 for second
                                                                                  offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $200.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $350.00
22-2102   Battery                                                                 for second
                                                                                  offense; $550.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-2101 and Sec.
          22-2102 enacted; 09/10/02)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
22-2103                                                                           for second
(d)                                                                               offense; $200 for
                                                                                  each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
22-2104   Unnecessary Repetitive Driving Prohibited; Penalty                      $100.00
Article   Offenses Against Property
III.
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-3100   Criminal Damage to Property                                             for second
                                                                                  offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-3100 enacted;
          09/10/02)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
22-3101   Criminal Trespass to Vehicles                                           for second
                                                                                  offense; $250.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
22-3102   Criminal Trespass to Land                                               $100.00
          (2002-09-05; new penalty provision for Sec. 22-3102 in Table 2-6110.1;
          09/17/02)
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-3103   Unlawful Damage to City Supported Property                              for second
                                                                                  offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-3103 enacted;
          09/10/02)
22-3104   Unlawful Trespass on City Supported Lands                               No Minimum Fine
                                                                                  First offense:
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  less than $50.00:
                                                                                  $50.00;
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  more than $50.00:
                                                                                  double value of
22-3105   Theft                                                                   property
                                                                                   Second offense:
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  less than $50.00:
                                                                                  $150.00;
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  more than $50.00:
                                                                                  triple value of
                                                                                  property
22-3106   Theft from Coin-Operated Machines                                       $100.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provision for Sec. 22-3106 enacted;
          09/10/02)
                                                                                  First offense:
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  less than $50.00:
                                                                                  $50.00;
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  more than $50.00:
                                                                                  double value of
22-3107   Retail Theft                                                            property
                                                                                  Second offense:
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  less than $50.00:
                                                                                  $150.00;
                                                                                  Property value
                                                                                  more than $50.00:
                                                                                  triple value of
                                                                                  property
Article   Weapons
IV.
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-4100   Unlawful Use of Weapons                                                 for second
                                                                                  offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-4101   Unlawful Sale of Firearms                                               for second
                                                                                  offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-4100 and Sec.
          22-4101 enacted; 09/10/02)
22-4102   Confiscation and Disposition of Weapons                                 No Minimum Fine
22-4103   Discharge of Weapons
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
22-4103                                                                           for second
(a)                                                                               offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
22-4103                                                                           for second
(b)                                                                               offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-4103 (a) and
          Sec. 22-4103 (b) enacted; 09/10/02)
Article   Gambling
V.
22-5101   Gambling Declared an Offense; Acts Constituting Gambling Enumerated     $200.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provision for Sec. 22-5101 enacted;
          09/10/02)
Article   Littering
VI.
                                                                                  $100.00, plus
                                                                                  $75.00
22-6100   Prohibited on Public Property                                           administrative
                                                                                  fee (cost to
                                                                                  remedy)
                                                                                  $100.00, plus
                                                                                  $75.00
22-6101   When Prohibited on Private Property                                     administrative
                                                                                  fee (cost to
                                                                                  remedy)
                                                                                  $100.00, plus
                                                                                  $75.00
22-6102   Violations of this Article Declared to be a Nuisance                    administrative
                                                                                  fee (cost to
                                                                                  remedy)
          (2002-09-05; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-6100, 22-6101 and Sec.
          22-6102 in Table 2-6110.1; 09/17/02)
Article   Offenses Against Public Decency
VII.
Division  In General
1.
22-7100   Prostitution                                                            No Minimum Fine
22-7101   Patronizing a Prostitute                                                No Minimum Fine
22-7102   Soliciting for a Prostitute                                             No Minimum Fine
22-7103   Pimping                                                                 No Minimum Fine
22-7104   Pandering                                                               No Minimum Fine
Division  Obscenity
2.
22-7201   Acts Constituting Obscenity Enumerated                                  No Minimum Fine
Article   Vandalism
VIII.
22-8101   Offenses                                                                No Minimum Fine
22-8103   Liability of Parent or Legal Guardian of Minor Offender                 No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Parks and Recreation
23
Article   Operation of Parks and Recreational Facilities
II.
23-2102   Rules of Conduct Applicable to All Parks
23-2102                                                                           $25.00
(c)(1)
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(2)                                                                            offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(3)                                                                            offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(4)                                                                            offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(5)                                                                            offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(6)                                                                            offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $100.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $200.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(7)                                                                            offense; $300.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
23-2102                                                                           $25.00
(c)(8)
23-2102                                                                           $25.00
(c)(9)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(10)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(11)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(12)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(13)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(14)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(15)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(16)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(17)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
23-2102                                                                           See  
(c)(18)                                                                           22-2100(e)
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(19)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(20)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
                                                                                  $50.00 for first
                                                                                  offense; $100.00
23-2102                                                                           for second
(c)(21)                                                                           offense; $200.00
                                                                                  for each offense
                                                                                  thereafter
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 22-2102 (c)(1-21)
          enacted; 09/10/02)
Article   Watercraft, Docks and Waterways
III.
Division  In General
1.
23-3101   Conduct of Persons in Watercraft Launching or Pier Areas                No Minimum Fine
23-3101.1 Restricted Areas of Parking/Boat Ramps                                  No Minimum Fine
Division  Operation of Watercraft
2.
23-3200   Careless and Reckless Operation                                         No Minimum Fine
23-3201   Interference with Navigation                                            No Minimum Fine
23-3202   Overloading                                                             No Minimum Fine
23-3203   Incapacity of Operator; Intoxication                                    No Minimum Fine
23-3204   Overpowering                                                            No Minimum Fine
23-3205   Observance of Restricted Areas                                          No Minimum Fine
23-3206   Rules of the Road                                                       No Minimum Fine
23-3207   Water-skiing and Similar Operations                                     No Minimum Fine
23-3208   Boat Harbor Area Defined; Conduct Within                                No Minimum Fine
23-3209   No-Wake Zone Established                                                No Minimum Fine
Article   Cemetery Operation
IV.
23-4106   Manner of Sale of Interment Rights; Assignability                       No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Police
26
Article   In General
I.
26-1101   Resisting or Obstructing the Mayor or Peace Officer                     $75.00
26-1102   Obstructing Service of Process                                          $250.00
          (Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new penalty provisions for Sec. 26-1101 and 26-
          1102 enacted; 09/10/02)
26-1103   Refusing to Aid a Peace Officer                                         No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Streets and Sidewalks
28
Article   In General
I.
28-1100   Duties of Abutting Property Owners                                      No Minimum Fine
28-1101   Discharge of Water Prohibited                                           No Minimum Fine
Article   Street Use
II.
28-2104   When Continuing Guaranty Bond is Required for Excavations               No Minimum Fine
28-2105   Barricades                                                              No Minimum Fine
28-2106   Openings on Public Ways to be Prohibited                                No Minimum Fine
28-2107   Underground Areas to be Filled                                          No Minimum Fine
Division  Permits
3.
28-2300   When Required                                                           No Minimum Fine
Article   Sidewalks
III.
Division  In General
1.
28-3101   Water Not to be Conducted to Sidewalks                                  No Minimum Fine
28-3104   Duty of Abutting Owner to Maintain                                      No Minimum Fine
Article   Encroachments
IV.
Division  In General
1.
28-4100   Display of Motor Vehicles for Sale                                      No Minimum Fine
28-4101   Placing Bus Benches, Refuse Containers, or Vending Machines on Public   No Minimum Fine
          Ways
28-4201   Encroachments Prohibited                                                No Minimum Fine
Article   Interring of Utility Facilities
VI.
28-6100   Interring Required                                                      No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Vegetation
32
Article   In General
I.
                                                                                  $25.00, plus
                                                                                  costs of abating
32-1100   Weed Abatement                                                          weeds, plus
                                                                                  $100.00
                                                                                  administrative
                                                                                  fee
Article   Trees
II.
32-2102   Licenses                                                                No Minimum Fine
32-2103   Permits                                                                 No Minimum Fine
32-2104   Obstructions to Trees                                                   No Minimum Fine
32-2105   Excavations and Construction                                            No Minimum Fine
32-2107   Public Nuisances and Abatement                                          No Minimum Fine
32-2108   Abuse/Mutilation of Public Trees                                        No Minimum Fine
32-2109   Interference with City Foresting Operations                             No Minimum Fine
32-2110   Violation and Penalty                                                   No Minimum Fine
Chapter   Zoning
35
Article   In General
I.
35-1104   General Provisions                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-1105   Accessory Buildings                                                     No Minimum Fine
Article   Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
II.
35-2100   Continuance of Use                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-2101   Discontinuance of Use                                                   No Minimum Fine
35-2102   Change of Use                                                           No Minimum Fine
35-2103   Termination and Removal of Non-Conforming Uses                          No Minimum Fine
35-2104   Repairs and Alterations                                                 No Minimum Fine
35-2105   Damage and Destruction                                                  No Minimum Fine
35-2106   Additions and Enlargements                                              No Minimum Fine
Article   Off-Street Parking and Loading
III.
35-3101   General Provisions - Parking and Loading                                No Minimum Fine
35-3102   Additional Regulations - Loading; Design                                No Minimum Fine
35-3105   Location of Parking Areas                                               No Minimum Fine
35-3106   Schedule of Parking Requirements                                        No Minimum Fine
35-3107   Off-Street Loading and Unloading Facilities                             No Minimum Fine
Article   Special Uses, Special Districts, and Overlay Districts
IV.
Division  Planned Unit Development District
2.
35-4203   Service Improvements                                                    No Minimum Fine
Article   Use Districts
V.
35-5101   R-1 One-Family Dwelling District (6 units per acre)                     No Minimum Fine
35-5102   Height of Buildings                                                     No Minimum Fine
35-5103   Lot Size                                                                No Minimum Fine
35-5104   Yard Areas                                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5105   Dwelling Standards                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-5106   R-2 One-Family Dwelling District; (7 units per acre) Permitted Uses     No Minimum Fine
35-5107   Height of Buildings                                                     No Minimum Fine
35-5108   Lot Size                                                                No Minimum Fine
35-5109   Yard Areas                                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5110   Dwelling Standards                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-5111   R-3 One-Family Dwelling District; (8 units per acre) Permitted Uses     No Minimum Fine
35-5112   Height of Buildings                                                     No Minimum Fine
35-5113   Lot Size                                                                No Minimum Fine
35-5114   Yard Areas                                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5115   Dwelling Standards                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-5116   R-4 Two-Family Dwelling District; (7 single family units/acre; 6        No Minimum Fine
          duplexes/acres) Permitted Uses
35-5117   Height of Buildings                                                     No Minimum Fine
35-5118   Lot Size                                                                No Minimum Fine
35-5119   Yard Areas (Minimum Standards)                                          No Minimum Fine
35-5120   Dwelling Standards                                                      No Minimum Fine
35-5121   R-4A Townhouse Dwelling District; Permitted Uses                        No Minimum Fine
35-5122   R-4B Low Density Multiple Family District; Permitted Uses               No Minimum Fine
35-5123   Area                                                                    No Minimum Fine
35-5124   Height                                                                  No Minimum Fine
35-5125   R-5 Multiple Family Dwelling District; Permitted Uses                   No Minimum Fine
35-5126   Height                                                                  No Minimum Fine
35-5127   Area                                                                    No Minimum Fine
35-5128   R-6 Mobile Home Park District; Permitted Uses                           No Minimum Fine
Division  Agricultural District
2.
35-5201   A-1 Agricultural District; Permitted Uses                               No Minimum Fine
35-5202   Height                                                                  No Minimum Fine
Division  Business Districts
3.
35-5301   B-1 Business District - Limited Retail; Permitted Uses                  No Minimum Fine
35-5302   B-2 Business District - General Retail; Permitted Uses                  No Minimum Fine
35-5303   B-3 Business and Wholesale District; Permitted Uses                     No Minimum Fine
35-5304   Area Requirements - B-1, B-2, and B-3                                   No Minimum Fine
35-5305   B-1R Business District - Limited Retail Restricted; Permitted Uses      No Minimum Fine
35-5306   Area Regulations                                                        No Minimum Fine
35-5307   B-2R Business District - General Retail Restricted; Permitted Uses      No Minimum Fine
35-5308   Area Regulations                                                        No Minimum Fine
35-5309   B-3R Business District - Wholesale Restricted; Permitted Uses           No Minimum Fine
35-5310   Area Regulations                                                        No Minimum Fine
35-5311   O-1 Office District                                                     No Minimum Fine
35-5312   Permitted Uses                                                          No Minimum Fine
35-5313   Signs                                                                   No Minimum Fine
35-5314   Sales of Products Prohibited                                            No Minimum Fine
35-5315   Yard Areas                                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5316   Height Restrictions                                                     No Minimum Fine
Division  Manufacturing Districts
4.
35-5401   M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited; Permitted Uses                     No Minimum Fine
35-5402   Height                                                                  No Minimum Fine
35-5403   Performance Standards                                                   No Minimum Fine
35-5404   M-1R Manufacturing District, Limited, Restricted; Permitted Uses        No Minimum Fine
          (Manufacturing)
35-5405   Performance Standards                                                   No Minimum Fine
35-5406   Yard Signs                                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5407   Signs                                                                   No Minimum Fine
35-5408   M-2 Manufacturing District; General, Permitted Uses                     No Minimum Fine
35-5409   Conditional Permitted Uses                                              No Minimum Fine
35-5410   Height                                                                  No Minimum Fine
35-5411   Performance Standards                                                   No Minimum Fine
Article   Administration
VI.
Division  Administrative Officers; Zoning Certificates; Certificates of Occupancy
1.
35-6105   Certificates of Occupancy; Scope of Permits; New Buildings and Uses     No Minimum Fine
 
(Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec. 2-6111 amended; 7/12/22)
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFIT
CLAIMS
SEC. 2-6200.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of a former public safety employee for the benefits
enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq.) through the process of administrative hearings. All benefits provided
former employees pursuant to the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act ("Act")
will be consistent with the Act and consistent with the basic health insurance
plan designated by the city administrator pursuant to this Article.
(Ord. No. 3005-2020; Sec. 2-6200 repealed; new Sec. 2-6200 enacted; 03/17/20)
SEC. 2-6201.   ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   (a)   The hearing officer shall preside over all hearings involving the
Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.) and shall have all
of the following powers and duties:
   (1)   Administer oaths;
   (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under the Act;
   (3)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
   (4)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
   (5)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   (6)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing,
the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written
finding of fact, decision and order.
   (b)   The city administrator is hereby authorized to appoint a person or
persons to hold the position of a hearing officer for each and every individual
hearing that shall come before this City. In making said selection, the city
administrator shall consider all pertinent information including, at a minimum:
   (1)   The candidate’s ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein;
   (2)   Background and performance data made available to the City or
otherwise obtained by the City;
   (3)   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have knowledge of and
experience in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of
evidence, and administrative practice.
   (c)   The system of administrative hearings for determination of eligibility
for benefits under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq.) shall be initiated by the serving of a written notice on the city
administrator by any former public safety employee stating in full detail the
nature of the former employee’s claim, giving full particulars thereof, i.e.,
date, time, place, nature of injury, and any other factual circumstances
surrounding said incident giving rise to said claim; requesting the benefits
enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq.), and requesting the setting of a hearing for the eligibility to receive
said benefits. The claim shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of the date
the disability has been approved by the pension board and upon a form as
provided by the City of Moline. In the event a disability pension has been
awarded thirty (30) days prior to passage of this ordinance, the former public
safety employee shall have thirty (30) days after passage and publication of
the ordinance to submit a claim.
   (d)   An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine
whether the former public safety employee is eligible for benefits under the
Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.). If the former
employee is found eligible, the employee benefits shall be consistent with the
Act and consistent with the basic health insurance plan designated by the city
administrator pursuant to this Article.
   (1)   Time and Date. Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as
established by the City, with appropriate notice served upon the former public
safety employee.
   (2)   Record. All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
   (3)   Procedures. The City and the petitioning former public safety employee
shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may present
witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing
witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance
of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
   (4)   Evidence. The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois Rules of
Evidence shall apply.
   (5)   Final Determination. The determination by the hearing officer of
whether the petitioning former public safety employee is eligible for the
benefits under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.)
shall constitute a final determination for the purpose of judicial review
pursuant to administrative review as found in the Code of Civil Procedure (735
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 3047-2015; new Div. 2, "ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC
SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFIT CLAIMS," enacted; 12/01/15; Ord. No. 3005-2020; Sec. 2-
6201(d) repealed; Sec. 2-6201(d) enacted; 03/17/20; (Ord. No. 3016-2022; Sec.
2-6201 amended; 7/12/22)
SEC. 2-6202.   DESIGNATION OF BASIC GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
   The city administrator shall, from time to time, designate a basic group
health insurance plan, which shall be the health insurance available to
employees qualifying for benefits under the Public Safety Employee Benefits
Act. Where the City offers employees a choice of benefits and deductibles, the
city administrator shall designate the basic group health insurance plan as the
choice which has the lowest premium and the highest deductibles. Any other
insurance option or choice shall be considered a supplemental plan under the
terms of the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act.
(Ord. No. 3005-2020; Sec. 2-6202 enacted; 03/17/20)
NOTE:    Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees repealed
throughout the Code and updated with “City Council” or “Committee-of-the-
Whole;” 05/13/03)
CHAPTER 3
ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
   Art. I.   In General
      Div. 1. Handbills, §3-1100 - §3-1108
      Div. 2. Sound Trucks, §3-1200 - §3-1201
   Art. II.   Signs, §3-2100 - §3-2116
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. HANDBILLS
SEC. 3-1100.   PURPOSE.
   That to protect the people against the nuisance of an incident to the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills as herein defined, with the resulting detriment and danger to public
health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the
regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this ordinance are
specifically declared to be as follows:
   (1)   To protect the people against unlawful activities or operations of
dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies representing themselves as
solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors by requiring the registration
of all such solicitors, canvassers, or handbill distributors together with the
names of their employers.
   (2)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors,
canvassers, or handbill distributors upon the private property of such
residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be
solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising
matter.
   (3)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial
handbills.
   (4)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and
good morals and public order by distinguishing between the nuisance created by
the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the
right to deliver non-commercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the
same.
SEC. 3-1101.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this ordinance have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   (1)   Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter or literature:
      a.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
      b.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      c.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. The terms of this clause
shall not apply where admission fee is charged or collection is taken up for
the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind when either of the same is held,
given, or takes place in connection with dissemination of information which is
not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace,
safety, and good order, provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be
deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place of any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any
ordinance of this City; or
      d.   Which while containing reading material other than advertising
matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; or
      e.   Which is not covered by the definition of sign contained in this
Code.
   (2)   Handbill distributor shall mean and include any person engaging or
engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or non-
commercial handbills other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof
and any person receiving compensation, directly or indirectly, for the
distribution of such handbills.
   (3)   Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation
as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office
department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as
provided by general law. And, in addition thereof, shall mean and include any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4)
issues per year and sold to the public.
   (4)   Non-commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper booklet or any printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a sign, commercial handbill or newspaper.
   (5)   Private premises shall mean and include any dwelling, house, building
or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private
residential purposes whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or pertinent to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
   (6)   Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards,
avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, plazas, grounds, and buildings.
SEC. 3-1102.   POSTING NOTICE, PLACARD, BILL, ETC. PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN CASES.
   No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix or cause the same
to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of
the public to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone, or
any other portion or part of any public way or public place or any lamppost,
electric light, telegraph, telephone pole or railway structure, hydrant, shade
tree, or tree box or upon the piers, columns, tresses, girders, railings,
gates, or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct or other public structure
or building or upon any pole, box, or fixture of the fire alarm or police alarm
system, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United
States or state and the ordinances of the City.
SEC. 3-1103.   DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in Section 20-6109 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter, cast, sell or otherwise
distribute any handbill in, on, or around any sidewalk, way, place or public
places within the City in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 3008-2021: Sec. 3-1103 amended; 04/20/21)
SEC. 3-1104.   PLACING HANDBILLS IN VEHICLES.
   Except as provided in Section 20-6109 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any handbill
in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section
shall not be deemed to prohibit handing, transmitting, or distributing of any
handbill to a person who is willing to accept the same in a manner that does
not completely or substantially impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
(Ord. No. 3008-2021: Sec. 3-1104 amended; 04/20/21)
SEC. 3-1105.   DISTRIBUTION ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES, PRIVATE
PREMISES, OF COMMERCIAL OR NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously vacant.
SEC. 3-1106.   PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter, or cast any commercial or non-commercial handbill upon any premises if
requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or, if there is placed on said
premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the
words "No Trespassing, No Peddlers or Agents, No Advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left on such premises.
SEC. 3-1107.   DISTRIBUTION ON INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES - COMMERCIAL OR NON-
COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS.
   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any
commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the
owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private
premises; provided, however, that in the case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in this ordinance, the aforesaid licensed or
other person unless requested by any one upon such premises not to do so, may
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except
that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.
SEC. 3-1108.   TIME OF HOUSE TO HOUSE DISTRIBUTION AND/OR SOLICITATION.
   No person may go from residence to residence for the purpose of distributing
commercial or non-commercial handbills or for the purpose of soliciting
business or for the purpose of soliciting charitable contributions before the
hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. on any day.
DIVISION 2. SOUND TRUCKS
SEC. 3-1200.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this ordinance, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   Sound Truck . The word sound truck as used herein shall mean any motor
vehicle or animal-drawn vehicle having mounted thereon or attached thereto any
sound amplifying equipment.
   (2)   Sound amplifying equipment . The words sound amplifying equipment as
used herein shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the
human, music, or any other sound. Sound amplifying equipment as used herein
shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and
heard by only occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on
authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other
vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
SEC. 3-1201.   USE OF SOUND TRUCKS.
   (a)   Registration required. No person shall use or cause to be used a sound
truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation in the City before
filing a registration statement with the city clerk in writing. This
registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the
following:
   (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
   (2)   Address of place of business of applicant;
   (3)   License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by
applicant;
   (4)   Name and address of person who owns the sound truck;
   (5)   Name and address of person having direct charge of sound truck;
   (6)   Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound
truck;
   (7)   The purpose for which the sound truck will be used;
   (8)   A general statement as to the section or sections of the City in which
the sound truck will be used;
   (9)   The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck;
   (10)   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck;
   (11)   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to
be used;
   (12)   The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment
to be used in or on the sound truck. State the following:
      a.   Wattage to be used;
      b.   The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced;
      c.   The appropriate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from
the sound truck.
   (b)   Registration statement amendment. All persons using or causing to be
used sound trucks shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to
Section
3-1201(a) within forty-eight (48) hours after any change in the information
therein furnished.
   (c)   Registration and identification. The city clerk shall return to each
applicant under Section
3-1201(a) of this ordinance one copy of said registration statement duly
certified by the city clerk as a correct copy of said application. Said
certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person
operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck sound amplifying
equipment is in operation, and said copy shall be promptly displayed and shown
to any police officer of the City upon request.
   (d)   Regulations for use. Use of sound trucks in the City with sound
amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following
regulations:
   (1)   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
   (2)   Operations are permitted between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
but in no case shall exceed four (4) hours on any day.
   (3)   Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound
truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least
ten (10) miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded by
traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the said sound amplifying equipment shall
not be operated for longer than one (1) minute at each stop.
   (4)   Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals,
schools, churches, or court houses.
   (5)   No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be
operated on the following streets between the points designated:
      a.   7th Street from 12th Avenue to the Rock River;
      b.   16th Street from 19th Avenue to the Rock River;
      c.   15th Street Place from 16th Avenue to 19th Avenue;
      d.   19th Street from the Mississippi River to 26th Avenue;
      e.   27th Street from 26th Avenue to U.S. Route 6;
      f.   River Drive from 1st Street to 25th Street;
      g.   River Drive from 25th Street to 55th Street;
      h.   4th Avenue from 1st Street to 55th Street;
      i.   5th Avenue from 1st Street to 11th Street;
      j.   5th Avenue Place from 11th Street to 6th Avenue;
      k.   6th Avenue from 5th Avenue Place to 27th Street;
      l.   5th Avenue Place from 27th Street to 5th Avenue;
      m.   5th Avenue from 5th Avenue Place to 35th Street;
      n.   12th Avenue from 7th Street to East Moline City limits;
      o.   19th Avenue from 1st Street to 16th Street;
      p.   23d Avenue from 12th Street to 16th Street;
      q.   Avenue of the Cities from 16th Street to East Moline City limits;
      r.   36th Avenue from 16th Street to 27th Street;
      s.   38th Avenue from 27th Street to 38th Street; and
      t.   52nd Avenue from 3rd Street to 27th Street.
   (6)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible
for a distance of seventy-five (75) feet or more from the sound truck and so
that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a
nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
   (7)   No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of
fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification.
ARTICLE II. SIGNS
SEC. 3-2100.   PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes: to maintain and
enhance the aesthetic environment and the City’s ability to attract sources of
economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to
minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations; to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land usage; to
conserve property values in all districts; and to improve pedestrian and
traffic safety and the recreational value thereof.
   The intent of this ordinance is to provide comprehensive regulations for the
regulation of signs; however, other ordinances of the City relate to similar
matter and in some cases the regulation of signs is addressed in said
ordinances. Therefore, where different sections or chapters of the Moline Code
of Ordinances or Moline Zoning Ordinance apply to subject matter addressed in
this ordinance, the most restrictive provision shall govern.
SEC. 3-2101.   APPLICABILITY – EFFECT.
   A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained
in the City only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and
other requirements of this ordinance. The effect of this ordinance, as more
specifically set forth herein, is:
   (1)   To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones,
subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this ordinance;
   (2)   To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to
the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to
the substantive requirements of this ordinance, but without a requirement for
permits;
   (3)   To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this ordinance; and
   (4)   To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 3-2102.   DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   Words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth
in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in
the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Moline shall be given the meanings set
forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are
contained in Sec.
3-2106 of this ordinance. All other words and phrases shall be given their
common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be
used in the interpretation of this ordinance.
   (1)   Administrator . The Zoning Administrator of the City or his or her
designee as defined in the Zoning and Land Development Code of the City of
Moline.
   (2)   Animated Sign . Any sign that uses or displays movement, change of
lighting, audio, video, or image sequences to depict action or create a special
effect or scene, or any form of message transition such as scrolling or fading.
   (3)   Banner . Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole, building, or wall structure by one or more edges.
   (4)   Beacon . Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot of record as the light
source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
   (5)   Building Marker . Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
   (6)   Building Sign . Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
   (7)   Canopy Sign . Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning,
canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
   (8)   Changeable Copy Sign . A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign.
   (9)   Commercial Message . Any sign wording, logo or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a
business, product, service or other commercial activity.
   (10)   Dwell Time . The length of time during which a changeable copy sign’s
message is continuously displayed prior to changing or displaying a new
message.
   (11)   Dynamic Display Sign . A programmable, changeable copy sign that can
display variable messages and diversified content via electronic means.
   (12)   Flag . The flag of the United States, the State of Illinois, the City
of Moline, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States,
and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of
competent jurisdiction, provided that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square
feet in area and shall not be flown from a pole the top of which is more than
40 feet in height. Any flag not included above shall be considered a sign and
shall be subject to regulation as such.
   (13)   Freestanding Sign . Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
   (14)   Identification Sign . A sign that has only the name and address of
the occupant.
   (15)   Illuminance . The total brightness of all illumination at a point of
measurement, including ambient light.
   (16)   Illumination, Exposed Bulbs, Sign . A static sign with one or more
faces that are composed of or accentuated by one or more light-emitting sources
of any type such that the source(s) of illumination itself is intended to be
directly visible as a part of the sign face.
   (17)   Illumination, External, Sign . A static sign with one or more faces
that are illuminated by one or more light sources located in front of and
shining directly upon the face(s) such that the source(s) of illumination
itself is not intended to, but may nonetheless, be directly visible apart from
the sign.
   (18)   Illumination, Internal, Sign . A static sign with one or more faces
that are illuminated by one or more light sources located behind the face(s)
and within the sign structure such that the source(s) of illumination itself is
not directly visible from outside of the sign structure.
   (19)   Incidental Sign . A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot of record on which it is located, such as “no
parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
lot of record on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
   (20)   Licensing Agreement . An agreement made between the City and a
property owner or tenant for the purpose of temporarily licensing the use of a
portion of City right-of-way (i.e., for a projecting sign that overhangs right-
of-way). Said agreements shall be in accordance with and subject to City code
and state laws.
   (21)   Lot . Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the
boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record,
that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, and recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County,
Illinois, in accordance with state law.
   (22)   Lot of Record . An area of land designated as a lot on a plat
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois, in
accordance with state law. A lot of record shall not include a lease holding
parcel nor lots that are combined or split by the County Tax Assessor strictly
for taxation purposes.
   (23)   Luminance . The total amount of illumination emitted from a specific
light source, excluding ambient light.
   (24)   Marquee . Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
   (25)   Marquee Sign . Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of
a marquee.
   (26)   NIT . The total amount of light emitted from a specific light source
(luminance), excluding ambient light, measured in candelas per square meter.
   (27)   Non-conforming Sign . Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance.
   (28)   Off-premises Advertising Sign.  A sign which publicizes a service,
event, product, commodity, business, entertainment, or activity not exclusively
related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. A
billboard is a common example of an off-premises advertising sign.
   (29)   Pennant . Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   (30)   Person . Person shall mean that definition provided in Sec.
1-1101 of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (31)   Portable Sign . Any sign designed and manufactured or constructed to
be self-supporting, self-contained, portable, and not permanently attached to
the ground or other permanent structure; including signs designed to be
transported, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs;
balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to
or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
   (32)   Principal Building . The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot of record on which it is located. Lots of record with multiple
principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings,
garages and other clearly accessory structures and uses shall not be considered
principal buildings.
   (33)   Projecting Sign . Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches (6") beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
   (34)   Residential Sign . Any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for
goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if
offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
   (35)   Roof Sign . Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the    highest portion of the roof.
   (36)   Roof Sign, Integral . Any sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such
that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof
by a space of more than six inches (6").
   (37)   Sequential Message Sign . A sign, or group of signs, which displays
incomplete segments of a communication message in a prearranged series so that
a complete or comprehensible message is obtained only after viewing the series
in full.
   (38)   Setback . The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
   (39)   Sign . Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color,
form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purposes of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
   (40)   Spacing . The distance between the nearest parts of two signs which
are on the same lot or on adjacent lots.
   (41)   Spinner . A device, or series of devices, that have the capability to
achieve rotational movement by wind or other means.
   (42)   Streamer . A flag, pennant, or long narrow strip that flows via the
wind.
   (43)   Static Sign . A sign whose characters, letters, or illustrations
cannot be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the
sign.
   (44)   Street . A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well
as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property,
including, but not limited to, public alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts,
drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails or other public
thoroughfares and similar private ways as approved and recognized by the City.
   (45)   Street Frontage . The distance for which a lot line of a lot of
record adjoins a public street, from one lot line (see definition of “lot line”
in Sec.
35-1102 of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances) intersecting said streets to
the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
   (46)   Suspended Sign . A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
   (47)   Temporary Sign . Any sign that is used only temporarily and is
designed to be    affixed, mounted, or installed to a wall, pole, or other
mounting or support structure for purposes of non-permanent display.
   (48)   Wall Sign . Any sign attached parallel to, but within six (6) inches
of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the
limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by
such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
   (49)   Window Sign . Any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes
or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SEC. 3-2103.   SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION UNDER THIS ORDINANCE.
   The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this ordinance:
   (1)   Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public
utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the
public right-of-way.
   (2)   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes, or facilities.
   (3)   Any other public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance.
   (4)   Traffic control signs on public or private property, such as Stop,
Yield and similar signs, the face of which meets Department of Transportation
standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort.
   (5)   Transit signs erected by a public transit authority.
   (6)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is
not legible from a distance of more than three (3) feet beyond the lot line of
the lot of record or parcel on which such sign is located.
   (7)   Works of art that do not include a verbal or textual message.
   (8)   Holiday lights and decorations which are not displayed for a total
period exceeding six (6) weeks during any calendar year.
   (9)   Handbills, which are regulated in Sec.
3-1100 et. seq. of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (10)   Signs of any type directly associated with an approved Special Event
in accord with City policy and procedure for Special Events located in the area
in which the Special Event takes place that are put up no more than fifteen
(15) days prior to the event and taken down no more than forty-eight (48) hours
after the end of the event.
SEC. 3-2104.   SIGNS PROHIBITED UNDER THIS ORDINANCE.
   All signs not expressly permitted under this ordinance or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in
the City. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
   (1)   Except for traffic warning devices, any sign which incorporates in any
manner moving, oscillating, revolving, strobing, or flashing lights.
   (2)   Signs that do not conform to the illumination performance standards
provided in Section
35-5302.
   (3)   Animated signs.
   (4)   Dynamic display signs located in any historic district or on a
historic landmark.
   (5)   Pennants, spinners and streamers, inflatable signs, tethered balloons,
and banners that do not conform with the definition of a "banner" as provided
in Section
3-2102 of this Code, except where such signs are displayed during one temporary
occurrence not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days per calendar year.
   (6)   Portable signs, except as provided in
Table 3-2105.3 of this Code.
   (7)   Revolving signs.
   (8)   Sequential message signs.
   (9)   String lights other than holiday decorations.
   (10)   Signs that are designed to achieve movement by action of normal wind
currents.
   (11)   Any sign or structure that:
      a.   is structurally unsafe;
      b.   constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment;
      c.   is not kept in good repair; or
      d.   is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in
contact with it.
   (12)   Any sign that obstructs free ingress or egress from a required door,
window, fire escape or other required exit-way.
   (13)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
(Ord. No. 3007-2025: Sec. 3-2104(2) added; subsequent subdivisions renumbered;
passed 02/4/25)
SEC. 3-2105.   SIGNS ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITH AND WITHOUT PERMITS.
   (1)   Signs shall be allowed on private property in the City in accordance
with, and only in accordance with,
Table 3-2105.1. If the letters “NP” appear for a sign type in a column, such
sign is allowed without prior permit approval in the zoning districts
represented by that column. If the letters “SP” appear for a sign type in a
column, such sign is allowed only with prior permit approval in the zoning
districts represented by that column. Special conditions may apply in some
cases. If the letters “NO” appear for a sign type in a column, such a sign is
not allowed in the zoning districts represented by that column under any
circumstances.
   (2)   Although permitted under the previous paragraph, a sign designated
“NP” or “SP” in
Table 3-2105.1 shall be allowed only if:
      a.   The sum of the area of all building and freestanding signs on the
lot of record conforms with the maximum permitted sign area as determined by
the formula for the zoning district in which the lot is located as specified in
Table 3-2105.2;
      b.   The size, location, and number of signs on the lot conform with the
requirements of
Table 3-2105.2, which establishes permitted sign dimensions by sign type, and
with any additional limitations listed in
Tables 3-2105.1 and
3-2105.3;
      c.   The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of
Table 3-2105.1, and with any additional limitations on characteristics listed
in
Table 3-2105.3.
   (3)   Where any provision of this ordinance conflicts with the regulations
or standards of an adopted zoning or design overlay district, the provisions of
the overlay district shall prevail.
A KEY TO TABLES 3-2105.1 THROUGH 3-2105.3
On the tables in this ordinance, the headings have the following meanings,
which correspond with the zoning districts in the Zoning and Land Development
Code of the City of Moline.
RS   Residential, One to Six-Family Districts (R-2, R-4); and Resource
     Districts: Conservation/Agriculture (C-2, AG-2)
R-6  Multi-Family Residence District
R-7  Mobile Home/Park District
INS* Institutional & Nonconforming Uses Permitted in Residential Districts
B-1  Neighborhood Business District
NC   Neighborhood Center District
B-2  Central Business District
SX-1 Moline Centre District, Mixed-Use Storefront Core
SX-2 Moline Centre District, Mixed-Use Storefront Core
GX-1 Moline Centre District, General Residential - Office Mix Core
GX-2 Moline Centre District, General Residential - Office Mix Edge
RX   Moline Centre District, Residential Mix
CV-1 Moline Centre District, Civic & Institutional - Buildings
CV-2 Moline Centre District, Civic & Institutional - Parks
B-3  Community Business District
B-4  Highway/Intensive Business District
O-1  Office District
ORT  Office/Research Park and Technology District
I-1  Light Industrial District
I-2  General Industrial District
* This is not a zoning district but applies to institutional uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance in residential districts (i.e. churches, schools,
cemeteries). Also applies to lawful nonconforming uses in residential
districts (i.e. neighborhood businesses) but does not apply to home
occupations.
 
TABLE 3-2105.1 SIGNS ALLOWED BY TYPE, CHARACTERISTICS AND ZONING DISTRICT
                               SX-2 SX-1     GX-1
Sign Type a All RS R-X R-7 INS B-1  B-2  B-4 GX-2 I-1 I-2
                   R-6         NC   B-3      CV   ORT
                                             O-1
                                                  SX-2 SX-1     GX-1
Sign Type a                    All RS R-X R-7 INS B-1  B-2  B-4 GX-2 I-1 I-2
                                      R-6         NC   B-3      CV   ORT
                                                                O-1
Freestanding                                                     
Banner g                       NO     SP  SP  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Residential b                  NP     NP  NP  NO  NO   NO   NO  NO   NO  NO
Other                          NO     SP  SP  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Incidental                     NO     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Temporary f                    NP     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Building                                                         
Banner g                       NO     SP  SP  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Building Marker                NP     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Canopy                         NO     NO  NO  NO  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Identification                 NP     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Incidental                     NO     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Marquee c                      NO     NO  NO  NO  NO   SP   SP  NO   NO  NO
Projecting c                   NO     NO  NO  NO  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Residential                    NP     NP  NP  NO  NO   NO   NO  NO   NO  NO
Roof                           NO     NO  NO  NO  NO   NO   NO  NO   NO  NO
Roof, Integral                 NO     NO  NO  NO  NO   SP   SP  NO   SP  NO
Suspended c                    NO     NO  NO  NP  NO   NO   NO  NO   NO  NO
Temporary d                    NP     NP  NP  NP  SNP  SNP  SNP SNP  SNP SNP
Wall                           NO     NO  NO  NP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Window, Temporary              NP     NP  NP  NP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  NO
Miscellaneous                                                    
Flag                           NP     NP  NP  NP  NP   NP   NP  NP   NP  NP
Characteristics                                                  
Changeable Copy                NO     NO  NO  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Dynamic Display                NO     NO  NO  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Illumination, Internal e       NO     NO  NO  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Illumination, External e       NO     SP  SP  SP  SP   SP   SP  SP   SP  SP
Illumination, Exposed Bulbs or NO     NO  NO  NO  NO   SP   SP  SP   SP  NO
Neon
 
NP = Allowed without sign permit      SP = Allowed only with sign permit   NO =
Not Allowed
a.   See Section
3-2102 for complete definition of each sign type.
b.   Includes Temporary Signs.
c.   If such a sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way, the
issuance and continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned upon the sign
owner obtaining and maintaining a valid license agreement from the City
Council.
d.   Temporary signs on private property shall be limited to those that are
directly associated with a temporary use as authorized in Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Moline. Such signage shall be allowed only in accordance with
signage standards for the authorized temporary use as identified in the zoning
ordinance and this ordinance.
e.   No direct light or significant glare from the sign shall be cast onto an
adjacent lot of record that is zoned and used for residential purposes.
f.   Each lot of record is permitted five (5) temporary signs. Said signs shall
not exceed twelve (12) sq. ft. in residentially zoned districts and shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) sq. ft. in non-residentially zoned districts, shall have
a minimum setback of two (2) feet, and shall not be displayed for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days. Temporary signs shall not require a sign permit and
shall not count towards a lot of record's total signage allotment.
   **Exception - video gaming: temporary signs for video gaming shall not be
allowed pursuant to the restrictions on video gaming advertising set forth in
Sec.
5-1105 of the Code.
g.   Banners shall not be displayed for more than one hundred eighty (180)
days. Exception - video gaming: banners for video gaming shall not be allowed
pursuant to the restrictions on video gaming advertising set forth in Sec.
5-1105 of the Code.
(Ord. No. 3006-2021: Table 3-2105.1 repealed; new Table 3-2105.1 enacted; 04/
13/21; Ord. No. 3014-2023; Table 3-2105.1 amended; 04/18/23; Ord. No. 3048-
2024; Sec. 3-2105(2)f. amended; Table 3-2105.3 amended; 12/3/24; Ord. No. 3007-
2025; Table 3-2105.1 amended; 02/4/25)
TABLE 3-2105.2 ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA AND SPECIFICATIONS PER LOT OF RECORD BY
ZONING DISTRICT
                                           GX-1
 R-2 R-4 R-X INS R-7 B-1 SX-2 SX-1 B-2 B-4 GX-2 I-1 I-2
         R-6         NC            B-3     CV   ORT
                                           0-1
On a Lot of Record with a single principal building, the maximum
total area of all signs (except incidental, building marker, and
identification signs, and flags) shall be the average of the
following two computations. For each additional principal building
on the Lot of Record, the maximum total area of all additional
signs (except incidental, building marker, and identification
signs, and flags) shall not exceed the lesser of the area as
computed in rows 1 and 2.
                                                              GX-1
                R-2 R-4 R-X INS  R-7 B-1  SX-2 SX-1 B-2  B-4  GX-2 I-1  I-2
                        R-6          NC             B-3       CV   ORT
                                                              0-1
On a Lot of Record with a single principal building, the maximum total area of
all signs (except incidental, building marker, and identification signs, and
flags) shall be the average of the following two computations. For each
additional principal building on the Lot of Record, the maximum total area of
all additional signs (except incidental, building marker, and identification
signs, and flags) shall not exceed the lesser of the area as computed in rows 1
and 2.
1. Square Feet
of Signage as a
Percentage of
Ground Floor    NA  NA  NA  NA   NA  4%   4%   6%   8%   4%   8%   8%   2%
area of
Principal
Building.
2. Square Feet
of Signage Per
Linear Foot of  NA  NA  .5  .5   .5  2    2    3    3    4    2    4    NA
Street Frontage
Per Lot of
Record.
Individual sign dimensions shall be as follows:
Freestanding
Sign dimensions
for Lots of
Record with
street
frontages less
than 100 feet.
Max. Area (sq.  6   6   e   e    e   e    -    -    e    e    e    e    e
ft.)
Max. Height     5   5   15  15   15  15   -    -    15   15   15   15   15
(feet)
Min. Setback    2   2   2   2    2   2    -    -    2    2    2    2    2
(feet)a
Min. Spacing    50  50  40  40   50  50   -    -    50   75   50   75   75
(feet)
Sign dimensions
for Lots of
Record with
street
frontages of
100 feet or
greater.
Max. Area (sq.  6   6   24  40   12  60   -    -    110  225  60   225  225
ft.)
Max. Height     5   5   12  12   5   12   -    -    24   36   12   36   24
(feet)
Min. Setback    2   2   5   5    2   5    -    -    5    5    5    10   10
(feet)a
Min. Spacing    50  50  75  75   50  75   -    -    100  150  75   150  150
(feet)
Additional feet
of street
frontage after  NA  NA  300 NA   300 NA   NA   NA   100  300  300  300  700
first 100
required for a
second signb,f
Additional
increment of
street frontage
thereafter      NA  NA  200 NA   200 NA   NA   NA   100  200  200  200  400
required for
each additional
signf
Buildingc
Area (max. sq.  2   2   2   10   NA  NA   NA   NA   NA   NA   NA   NA   NA
ft.)
Wall Area       NA  NA  NA  NA   10% 10%  10%  10%  10%  20%  10%  20%  5%
(percent)d
Characteristics
Dynamic
Displayg
Area (max.
percent of      NA  NA  NA  25%  NA  25%  25%  50%  50%  50%  25%  50%  50%
sign)h
Min. Dwell Time NA  NA  NA  60   NA  12   12   12   12   12   12   12   12 sec.
(seconds)                   sec.     sec. sec. sec. sec. sec. sec. sec.
Min. separation
from any        NA  NA  NA  100  NA  100  10%  10%  100  100  100  100  100
residential
land use (feet)
 
   a.   In addition to the setback requirements on this table, signs shall be
located such that there is at every street intersection a clear view between
heights of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet in a triangle formed by the corner
and points on the curb twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection or
entranceway.
   b.   Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage
for each street frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one
street in excess of that allowed for lots with only one street frontage.
   c.   Allowed signs may be placed on any façade of the building with the
exception that wall signs shall not be located on walls that face immediately
abutting residentially zoned property, including those across an alley, but not
across a public street.
   d.   The percentage figure here shall mean the percentage of the area of the
wall of which such sign is a part or to which each such sign is more nearly
parallel.
   e.   Maximum freestanding sign area for Lots of Record with street frontages
less than one hundred (100) feet shall be determined on a basis whereby the
maximum sign face area is directly proportional to the subject lot of record’s
street frontage as a percentage of one hundred (100) feet multiplied by maximum
amount of sign face area allowed for a lot of record with 100 feet or greater
in the same zoning district as identified in
Table 3-2105.2 (e.g. a lot of record with seventy-five (75) feet frontage in a
B-2 zoning district would be allowed up to 83 sq. ft. of sign face (.75 x 110
sq. ft = 82.5 sq. ft.).
   f.   Lots of record with sufficient street frontage for two (2) or more
signs may elect to increase the area of the initial freestanding sign by up to
fifty percent (50%) in exchange for the ability to install an additional sign.
   g.   Also refer to Brightness Standards at Sec.
3-2107(4).
   h.   See exception for conversion of off-premises advertising signs in
Section
3-2111(1).
Note: NA = Not Applicable
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Table 3-2105.2 amended; 04/18/23)
TABLE 3-2105.3 ALLOWED NUMBER AND DIMENSIONS BY SIGN TYPE
                                               VERTICAL CLEARANCE
LOCATION/TYPE NUMBER ALLOWED MAXIMUM SIGN AREA From Sidewalk,   From Public
                             AND/OR HEIGHT     Private Drive or Street
                                               Parking
                                                  VERTICAL CLEARANCE
LOCATION/TYPE   NUMBER ALLOWED  MAXIMUM SIGN AREA From Sidewalk,   From Public
                                AND/OR HEIGHT     Private Drive or Street
                                                  Parking
Freestanding
                1 per 400 feet
Banner          of lot frontage 36 square feet    9 feet           12 feet
                not to exceed 2
                per frontage.a
Residential,    See             See
Other, and      Table 3-2105.2  Table 3-2105.2    NA               NA
Incidental
Building
Banner          See             See               9 feet           12 feet
                Table 3-2105.2  Table 3-2105.2
Building Marker 1 per building  4 square feet     NA               NA
Canopy          1 per building  25% of vertical   9 feet           12 feet
                                surface of canopy
Identification  1 per building  2 square feet     NA               NA
                face
Incidental      NA              NA                NA               NA
Marquee         1 per building  NA                9 feet           12 feet
Projecting      1 per building  40 square feet    9 feet           12 feet
Residential     1 per lot of    NA                NA               NA
                record
Roof, Integral  2 per principal NA                NA               NA
                building
Suspended       1 per entrance  NA                9 feet           NA
Temporaryb      5 per lot       NA                NA               NA
Wall            1 per entrance  NA                NA               NA
                                25% of total
Window          NA              ground floor      NA               NA
                                window area
Miscellaneous
Banner          See             See               9 feet           12 feet
                Table 3-2105.2  Table 3-2105.2
Flag            NA              60 square feet    9 feet           12 feet
                                9 square feet and
Portablec       1 per entrance  42 inches in      NA               NA
                                height
Characteristics
Dynamic         1 per lotd      See               NA               NA
                                Table 3-2105.2
 
   a.    Any lot with a changeable copy freestanding sign shall be limited to
one (1) banner per frontage regardless of the amount of frontage.
   b.   Temporary signs on private property shall be limited to those that are
directly associated with a temporary use as authorized in the zoning ordinance
of the City of Moline. Such signage shall be allowed only in accordance with
signage standards for the authorized temporary use as identified in the zoning
ordinance and this ordinance.
   c.   Portable signs shall be displayed during business hours only in non-
residential zoning districts and are prohibited in residential and resource
zoning districts.
   d.   Does not include off-premises advertising signs.
Note: NA = Not Applicable.
SEC. 3-2106.   COMPUTATIONS.
   The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height.
   (1)   Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one (1)
face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence
or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations
and is clearly incidental to the display itself. In determining the sign area
for a monument-style freestanding sign, the sign structure or base shall not be
included in the calculation of the sign area.
   (2)   Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one (1) face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the
same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are
not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by
the measurement of one (1) of the faces.
   (3)   Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower
of: 1) existing grade prior to construction, or 2) the newly established grade
after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating
solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade
cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the
assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is
equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or
the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on
the zoning lot, whichever is lower. The height limits contained in this
ordinance pertain to the sign itself, but in no case shall any portion of the
structure to which a freestanding sign is attached extend more than two (2)
feet higher than the permitted height of the sign.
   (4)   Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Lot of Record.
The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a lot of record shall
be computed by applying the formula contained in
Table 3-2105.2, Maximum Total Sign Area, to the lot frontage, building
frontage, or wall area, as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the
lot is located. Lots fronting on two (2) or more streets are allowed the
permitted sign area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that
is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot’s
total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building or wall area
frontage on that street.
SEC. 3-2107.   DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained at all times in
accordance with the following standards:
   (1)   The applicable provisions of the adopted building and electrical codes
of the City.
   (2)   Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming
in all respects with the requirements of this ordinance, all signs shall be
constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the
ground, a building or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall,
frame or structure.
   (3)   Banners shall not be used as a substitute for a permanent sign and
must be maintained or replaced as necessary to remain securely fastened and
free of tears, frayed edges, damage, or deterioration.
   (4)   Brightness Standards. The following standards shall apply to dynamic
display signs and electronic off-premises advertising signs erected after the
effective date of this ordinance:
      a.   The luminance of a sign shall not exceed 5,000 NITS during daytime
hours and 500 NITS from dusk until dawn. The sign manufacturer, vendor, or
installer shall submit written certification that the sign has been designed or
preset to not exceed these luminance levels and that the sign includes security
features to limit the end user’s ability to manipulate the preset luminance
levels.
      b.   A sign shall not exceed the minimum luminance necessary for clear
and adequate visibility during any given ambient condition. The sign
manufacturer shall submit written certification that a sign is equipped with a
sensor device so that the luminance of such sign will automatically adjust to
ambient light conditions.
      c.   The luminance of a dynamic off-premises advertising sign shall not
increase ambient light levels by more than 0.3 footcandles when measured
perpendicular to the sign at a distance of 250 feet. Furthermore, when adjacent
to a residential district, illuminance shall not exceed one footcandle when
measured at any boundary line with an adjoining property.
      d.   The sign installer shall file with the City complete contact
information for the sign manufacturer, vendor/installer, property owner, and
tenant, as applicable.
   (5)   Any illuminated sign shall not create such intensity or brilliance
that impairs vision, conflicts with an official traffic sign or device, or
causes unusual distraction which may interfere with the safe operation of a
motor vehicle or enjoyment of personal property. If a sign is perceived to
conflict with these visibility standards, as determined by the Administrator,
such sign’s luminance shall be adjusted to levels suitable for the surroundings
or circumstances regardless of the maximum allowable luminance level
established by this section. An appeal of the administrator’s decision may be
considered by the Plan Commission in accordance with Section
3-2113.
SEC. 3-2108.   SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the
following:
   (1)   Permanent signs, including:
      a.   Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, identify public property, convey information to the public, and
direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
      b.   Transit signs erected by a public transit authority;
      c.   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes, or facilities; and
      d.   Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public
right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of
Table 3-2105.1 of this ordinance and only after approval of a licensing
agreement by the City Council and compliance with all City codes, policies,
rules, and regulations pertaining to right-of-way restrictions and
encroachments, and shall include, but not be limited to, proof of insurance for
said licensing agreements as per City requirements with the City listed as an
insured in an amount as established, from time to time, by the City Council.
   (2)   Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public
utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the
public right-of-way.
   (3)   Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance
with the requirements of this section, shall be removed from the public right-
of-way and kept in the possession of the City for a period of at least thirty
(30) days during which time the City shall attempt to contact the owner of such
a confiscated sign for the purpose of notifying the owner that the sign has
been confiscated and may be retrieved by the owner from the City. If the owner
of said confiscated sign fails to retrieve the sign within thirty (30) days,
the City may discard any such confiscated sign without further notice to said
sign owner.
   (4)   In addition to other remedies and fines assessed hereunder or under
Section 3-1102, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or
person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign,
as may be substantiated by proof in the enforcement proceeding. This section
may be enforced by the administrative adjudication system. (Ord. No. 3032-2019;
Sec. 3-2108(3) amended; new Sec. 3-2108(4) enacted; 12/10/19)
SEC. 3-2109.   MASTER AND UNIFORM SIGNAGE PLANS.
   No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless
and until a Master Signage Plan or a Uniform Signage Plan for the lot of record
on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the administrator and
approved by the administrator as conforming with this section.
   (1)   Master Signage Plan. For any lot of record on which the owner proposes
to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, unless such lot of record is
included in a Uniform Signage Plan, the owner shall submit to the administrator
a Master Signage Plan containing the following:
      a.   An accurate site plan of the lot of record, at such scale as the
administrator may reasonably require including, but not limited to: the
location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas;
      b.   Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for
individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding signs
allowed on the lot of record(s) included in the plan under this ordinance; and
      c.   An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of
each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not,
except that incidental signs need not be shown.
   (2)   Uniform Signage Plan. The owners of two (2) or more contiguous
(disregarding intervening streets and alleys) lots of record, or the owner of a
single lot with more than one principal building or one (1) principal building
with multiple tenants, may file with the administrator a Uniform Signage Plan
for such lots of record. If the Uniform Signage Plan conforms with the
provisions of this section, a twenty-five (25) percent increase in the maximum
total sign area shall be allowed for each included lot of record, in accordance
with the following:
      a.   The bonus area shall be allocated within each lot of record as the
owner(s) elects.
      b.   The number of freestanding signs may be computed based on the total
feet of street frontage of all lots of record that are a part of the Uniform
Signage Plan.
      c.   Regardless of how the bonus is distributed, no individual sign shall
exceed fifty percent (50%) percent more area than it would otherwise have been
allowed had it not been a part of a Uniform Signage Plan.
   (3)   Provisions of Uniform Signage Plan. The Uniform Signage Plan shall
contain all of the information required for a Master Signage Plan and shall
also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the lots of record
affected by the Plan with regard to:
      a.   Color scheme;
      b.   Lettering or graphic style;
      c.   Lighting;
      d.   Location of each sign on the buildings;
      e.   Material; and
      f.   Sign proportions.
   (4)   Showing Window Signs on Uniform or Master Signage Plan. A Uniform
Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan including window signs may simply indicate
the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of
the window signs (e.g., paper affixed to window, painted, etched on glass, or
some other material hung inside window) and need not specify the exact
dimension or nature of every window sign.
   (5)   Limit on Number of Freestanding Signs Under Uniform Signage Plan. The
Uniform Signage Plan, for all lots of record with multiple uses or multiple
users, shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one (1) for
each street on which the lots of record included in the plan have frontage and
shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
   (6)   Other Provisions of Master or Uniform Signage Plans. The Master or
Uniform Signage Plan may contain such other elements or standards of
consistency as the owners of the lots of record may reasonably determine,
provided, that the most restrictive requirements shall apply.
   (7)   Consent. The Master or Uniform Signage Plan shall be signed by all
owners or their authorized agents in such form as the administrator shall
require.
   (8)   Amendment. A Master or Uniform Signage Plan may be amended by filing a
new Master or Uniform Signage Plan that conforms with all requirements of the
ordinance then in effect.
   (9)   Existing Signs Not Conforming to Uniform Signage Plan. If any new or
amended Uniform Signage Plan is filed for a property on which existing non-
conforming signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into
conformance, within seven (7) years, all signs not conforming to the proposed
amended plan or to the requirements of this ordinance in effect on the date of
submission.
   (10)   Binding Effect. After approval of a Master or Uniform Signage Plan,
no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained, except in conformance
with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision
of this ordinance. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a
plan and any other provision of this ordinance, the ordinance shall control.
SEC. 3-2110.   SIGN PERMITS.
   If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this ordinance is to be
placed, constructed, erected or modified on a lot of record, the owner of the
lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection
or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of this
section. The following procedures shall govern the application for, and
issuance of, all sign permits under this ordinance, and the submission and
review of Uniform Signage Plans and Master Signage Plans.
   (1)   Applicability. Sign permits shall be required for all of the
following:
      a.   Any sign type shown on
Table 3-2105.1 as requiring a sign permit.
      b.   Any modification of an existing sign that includes:
         1.   A change in the materials, size, shape or location of the sign.
This shall not include a material change in the sign face or message panel
area, but shall not include a change in message or graphic only.
         2.   Any change, other than a sign face, that results in an
expenditure of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the existing value of the
sign.
         3.   A change in any supporting or mounting component of an existing
sign (such as poles and brackets) that requires a building permit as per the
adopted building code.
         4.   A change in the electrical service to an existing sign that
requires an electrical permit as per the adopted electrical code.
      c.   A change of the approved Master or Uniform Signage Plan.
   (2)   Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from having to receive a
sign permit:
      a.   Signs that are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance as per
Sec.
3-2103.
      b.   Any sign type shown on
Table 3-2105.1 as being allowed but not requiring a sign permit, or any
modification to such an existing sign type providing that once modified, the
existing sign conforms with all applicable provisions of this ordinance.
      c.   Any routine maintenance, repairs or repainting of an existing sign
and any supporting or mounting components (such as poles and brackets)
provided:
   There is no change in the size, shape or location of the sign; and
   The cost of the repairs is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
existing value of the sign.
   (3)   Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for
approval of a Master or Uniform Signage Plan shall be submitted to the
administrator on an application form or in accordance with application
specifications published by the administrator.
   (4)   Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a Master
or Uniform Signage Plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees, which
shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
   (5)   Completeness. Within three (3) days of receiving an application for a
sign permit or for a Uniform Master Signage Plan, the administrator shall
review it for completeness. If the administrator finds that it is incomplete,
the administrator shall, within such three- (3-)day period, send to the
applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient,
with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this ordinance.
   (6)   Criteria for Approval. The administrator shall review each application
for a sign permit or Master or Uniform Signage Plan for consistency with the
following criteria:
      a.   Conformance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance;
      b.   If the permit is for an individual sign, conformance with the
approved Master or Uniform Signage Plan;
      c.   Conformance with all conditions or provisions included in any
applicable approved Temporary Use Permit, Special Use Permit, Conditional Use
Permit, Planned Unit Development, Development Agreement, Licensing Agreement,
Annexation Agreement, or Sign Variance; and
      d.   Conformance with all requirements of any applicable adopted zoning
or design overlay district.
   (7)   Action on Sign Permit Application. Within five (5) days of the
submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the administrator shall
either:
      a.   Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application    conforms in every respect with the requirements of this
ordinance and of the applicable Master or Uniform Signage Plan; or
      b.   Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this ordinance
or the applicable Master or Uniform Signage Plan. In case of a rejection, the
administrator shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the
ordinance or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent.
   (8)   Action on Master or Uniform Signage Plan Application. Within ten (10)
days of the submission of a complete application for a Master or Uniform
Signage Plan, the administrator shall either:
      a.   Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and
the plan itself conforms in every respect with the requirements of this
ordinance; or
      b.   Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the
plan itself fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this
ordinance. In case of a rejection, the administrator shall specify in the
rejection the section or sections of the ordinance with which the plan is
inconsistent.
   (9)   Other Permits Required. Upon approval of a sign permit, a building
and/or electrical permit may also be required as per adopted codes. In such
cases, neither a building nor electrical permit will be issued until the sign
permit is first approved, and all required permits must be obtained prior to
installation or modification of the subject sign.
   (10)   Inspection. The administrator shall inspect all signs issued a sign
permit within six (6) months of issuance or at such earlier date as the owner
may request but in any event, prior to passage of a final inspection or
issuance of a certificate of occupancy of any related structures. If the
construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the
permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is substantially
complete but not in full compliance with this ordinance and applicable codes,
the administrator shall give the owner an additional thirty (30) days from the
date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies
are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and the administrator
may initiate enforcement actions as provided for in this ordinance and
elsewhere in the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (11)   Validity of Sign Permits. Approved sign permits shall be valid for
six (6) months from the date of issuance or, if issued simultaneously with
building permits for a new or modified structure or other site improvements,
until such time as the structure or other improvements receive a final
inspection or certificate of occupancy.
   (12)   Validity of Master and Uniform Signage Plans. Approved Master and
Uniform Signage Plans shall be valid for as long as they are compliant with the
provisions of this ordinance, including any future amendments to this
ordinance.
   (13)   Assignment of Sign Permits. A current and valid sign permit that does
not also require a valid license agreement shall be freely assignable to a
successor as owner of the property provided there are no changes made to the
sign that would require a permit as per the provisions of this section.
   (14)   Amendments. Approved sign permits and Master or Uniform signage may
be amended by submitting a new application in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (15)   Expiration of Sign Permit. A sign permit shall expire immediately
upon a finding of the administrator of any of the following:
         a.   The sign has not been constructed in accordance with the sign
permit and the sign owner has failed to correct all deficiencies after being
provided sixty (60) days notice to do so by the administrator;
         b.   The sign is unsafe due to damage or a lack of maintenance and has
not been repaired after being provided sixty (60) days notice to do so by the
administrator;
         c.   The business the sign advertises has not operated for more than
ninety (90) days on the lot of record on which the sign is located;
         d.   The product the sign advertises has not been available for more
than ninety (90) days; and/or
         e.   The event the sign advertises occurred more than ninety (90) days
in the past.
   (16)   Removal of Signs. Upon the expiration of a sign permit, the sign face
shall be removed or covered. Within one year of the expiration of a sign
permit, all supporting poles, brackets, guy wires, frames, boxes and similar
appurtenant members shall be removed.
   (17)   Appeals of Action. Appeals of any action by the administrator on a
sign permit or Master or Uniform Signage Plan may be submitted as per Sec.
3-2113 of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3030-2025; 7/22/25)
SEC. 3-2111.   NON-CONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGNS WITHOUT PERMITS.
   A sign that would be permitted under this ordinance only with a sign permit,
but which was in existence prior to adoption of this ordinance or on a later
date when the property is annexed to the City, and which was constructed in
accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date
of its construction, but due to its size, height, location, design or
construction does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
deemed a legal, non-conforming sign. Such signs may remain in place and be
maintained for an indefinite period of time provided no modifications are made,
other than to the face of a sign, that necessitate the issuance of a sign
permit as per Section
3-2110 of this ordinance. Except for those signs exempted herein, any
modifications that necessitate a sign permit shall result in the loss of the
legal, non-conforming status of the sign and require its immediate full
compliance with all provisions of this ordinance.
   (1)   Conversion of Off-premises Advertising Signs to Dynamic Display. Any
existing off-premises advertising sign which is located in a B-4, I-1, or I-
2 zoning district, or located in a B-3 zoning district along a state or federal
highway, may be converted from a static sign to a fully dynamic display sign
without loss of the legal, non-conforming status of such sign, if applicable.
Sign and structure elements may be modified as necessary to accommodate a 100%
dynamic display provided that there will be no increase in total sign display
area following the conversion, unless such increases are allowable under this
section. The resulting dynamic, off-premises advertising sign may remain and be
maintained indefinitely as such provided that such sign complies with
brightness and visibility standards and all other requirements of this Code.
   (2)   Display Characteristics of Pre-existing Electronic Signs. Any
programmable, electronic sign which was lawfully erected prior to adopted
standards for dynamic display signs may be deemed a legal, non-conforming sign
due to its size, height, location, structural design, or construction. However,
such electronic sign shall under no circumstances function as an animated sign,
and the manner of display shall be adjusted so that the sign does not strobe,
flash, flicker, animate, or sequence messages. The sign display shall comply
with the minimum dwell time characteristic in
Table 3-2105.2 and also comply with the luminance standards at Sec.
3-2107(5) of this Code.
SEC. 3-2112.   AMORTIZATION OF NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   This section reserved for future use.
SEC. 3-2113.   APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (1)   Jurisdiction. The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
      a.   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by any person charged with the administration
of this ordinance, except appeals relating to construction which shall be taken
to the Building Board of Appeals or the
   Electrical Appeals Board. The Plan Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or may modify or amend the order,    requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, so long as supported by substantial evidence and
so long as such Plan Commission decision is compliant in all terms with this
ordinance and the standards and requirements set forth herein. To accomplish
its charge, the Plan Commission shall also have all the powers and
responsibilities of the officer from whom the appeals are taken.
      b.   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this ordinance.
      c.   To hear and pass upon applications for variations from a strict
application of this ordinance, in the manner and subject to the standards set
out in Section
3-2113(8).
      d.   All decisions and findings of the Plan Commission, on appeal, or
upon application for a variation after a hearing, shall, in all instances, be
final administrative determinations and shall be subject to the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, found generally at 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
   (2)   Right of Appeal.
      a.   Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any person charged with the
administration of this ordinance may take an appeal to the appropriate appeal
board: Plan Commission, Building Board of Appeals, or Electrical Appeals Board.
      b.   Appeals taken from requests relating to construction shall be filed
with the building official or the electrical inspector, as the case may be, and
shall be subject to the procedures established by those respective boards and
are not subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
   (3)   Hearing of Appeals.
      a.   Any appeal to the Plan Commission shall be taken within thirty-five
(35) days after the decision appealed is made and shall be filed with the
department of planning and development as clerk for the Plan Commission. A
notice of appeal shall specify the grounds therefore, together with any other
information as may be necessary.
      b.   Such appeal shall be reasonably taken upon forms provided by the
Plan Commission. The clerk shall transmit to the Commission all of the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
      c.   The Plan Commission shall fix a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of appeals and shall give notice thereof to the persons appealing and
to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. It shall hear and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, parties of interest may appear
in person or by agent or attorney.
   (4)   Stay of Proceedings. The appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building official or
electrical inspector certifies to the Plan Commission, after notice of appeal
has been filed with said official or inspector, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate, stay would in said official’s or inspector’s opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, the proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Plan Commission or by a Court of Record on application, with notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken and all due causes shown.
   (5)   Decisions on Appeal. In exercising its powers, the Plan Commission
may, upon the concurring vote of a majority of the members present that have
achieved a quorum for the purpose of holding said hearing, reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, so long as supported by substantial evidence and
so long as such Plan Commission decision is compliant in all terms with this
ordinance and the standards and requirements set forth herein. To accomplish
its charge, the Plan Commission shall also have all the powers and
responsibilities of the officer from whom the appeals are taken.
   (6)   Application for Variance and Notice of Hearing. An application for a
variance authorized by this section shall be filed with the department of
planning and development as clerk for the Plan Commission. The application
shall be in such form and shall contain such information as the Commission
shall prescribe by general rule. Upon receiving an application for a variation,
the Commission shall, according to its rules of procedure, fix a reasonable
time for a public hearing thereon and give notice of same by regular mail to
all interested parties as described and defined by City policy.
   (7)   Fee. Any application for a variance shall be accompanied by a fee as
shall be approved from time to time by the City Council.
   (8)   Authorized Variances.  
      a.   The Plan Commission may vary the application of this ordinance in
harmony with its general purpose and intent, in accordance with the procedure
set forth herein, where there are practical difficulties or particular
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any of the provisions
of this ordinance. Any such variance shall be granted only after a public
hearing before the Plan Commission.
      b.   A variance may be granted only when special circumstances are found
to be present. The Plan Commission shall consider the application for a
variance based on the following special circumstances and criteria:
         1.   The variance request involves special circumstances relating to
size, shape, topography, location or surroundings affect the property referred
to in the application, when denial of said application would cause unreasonable
or necessary hardship.
         2.   That in granting the variance, said sign will not cause
substantial injury to the value of other property in the vicinity nor be
detrimental to the public safety or welfare and the neighborhood in which it is
located.   
         3.   Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse
impacts, if any, created by granting the variance.
         4.   In addition, the Commission may include conditions on the site
where the sign is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve
the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed sign
and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of
the variance.
   (9)   Decisions on Variances. In exercising its powers, the Plan Commission
may, upon the concurring vote of a majority of the members present that have
achieved a quorum for the purpose of holding said hearing, grant the requested
variance in whole, in part, or with such narrowly construed or narrowly
tailored conditions as are absolutely necessary to meet the purpose and intent
of this ordinance or deny the variance.
   (10)   Validity of Approved Variance. Unless approved otherwise by the Plan
Commission, an applicant shall have six (6) months to submit a complete
application for a sign permit or Master or Common Signage Plan consistent with
the approved variance. Failure to do so without receiving an extension from the
Plan Commission shall result in the expiration of the approved variance.
   (11)   Special Exception for Installation of a Non-Conforming Sign.
      a.   In addition to the Plan Commission’s ability to consider and grant
variances as prescribed in the preceding section, the Plan Commission may also
grant a special exception for non-conforming signs. The purpose of the special
exception is to set forth a procedure whereby the Plan Commission may grant
approval to an applicant to install a non-conforming sign when the applicant is
able to demonstrate that two (2) or more of the following situations are
present:
         1.   The proposed non-conforming sign is replacing an existing non-
conforming sign and reducing the non-conforming sign’s size by at least ten
percent (10%) and does not increase any other existing non-conformity or create
any other new non-conformities.
         2.   The proposed non-conforming sign is replacing an existing non-
conforming sign and reducing the non-conforming sign’s height by at least ten
percent (10%) and does not increase any other existing non-conformity or create
any other new non-conformities.
         3.   The proposed non-conforming sign is reducing the overall number
of freestanding signs by at least twenty-five percent (25%) and the proposed
non-conforming sign does not exceed any size or location requirement by more
than twenty percent (20%).
         4.   The proposed non-conforming sign is part of a sign
standardization package where multiple signs will exhibit standards of
consistency as identified in Section
3-2109(3).
      b.   Application for and notice of hearing for a special exception for
the installation of a non-conforming sign shall be as described in Section
3-2003(6).
      c.   In exercising its powers, the Plan Commission may, upon the
concurring vote of a majority of the members present, grant or deny the
requested special exception for the installation of a non-conforming sign based
on the application of the criteria specified in 3-2113(11)(a); provided that
said request is otherwise consistent and in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this ordinance.
SEC. 3-2114.   VIOLATIONS.
   Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be
subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this ordinance,
by other applicable provisions of the Moline Code of Ordinances and by state
law:
   (1)   To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the lot of record
on which the sign is located;
   (2)   To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such a permit;
   (3)   To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this ordinance, or for which the sign permit has
lapsed; or
   (4)   To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation
shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of
this ordinance.
   (5)   Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of
this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this ordinance.
SEC. 3-2115.   ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   (1)   This ordinance shall be administered by the department of planning and
development. Upon a presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives may enter at reasonable times any building, structure, or
premises in the City to perform any duty imposed on them by this ordinance.
   (2)   Any violation or attempted violation of this ordinance or of any
condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected
or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings
pursuant to state law. A violation of this ordinance shall be considered a
violation of the zoning ordinance of the City. The remedies of the City
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      a.   Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the
same lot of record;
      b.   Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity;
      c.   Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the City
under the zoning ordinance;
      d.   Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed
by such court under the zoning ordinance; and
      e.   In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the City under the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code for such
circumstances.
      f.   The City shall reserve the right to process any violations of this
ordinance via    Administrative Code proceedings, pursuant to
Chapter 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (3)   The City shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to
time be provided for or allowed by law, ordinance, rule, or regulation for the
violation of the zoning ordinance.
   (4)   All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent
that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain
available for other violations or other parts of the same violation.
SEC. 3-2116.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid; such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in
this ordinance of any such invalid section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or word.
List of Chapter Amendments by Ordinance No.:
   Ord. No. 2000-06-03; Sec. 3-1201 (d)(6) repealed, new subsection (d)(6)
enacted; 06/06/2000;
   Ord. No. 2002-11-05; Art. II, “Signs,” repealed in its entirety; new Art.
II, “Signs,” enacted; 11/26/02;
   Ord. No. 2003-11-02; Table 3-2105.2 repealed; new Table 3-2105.2 enacted;
11/12/03;
   Ord. No. 3007-2005; Table 3-2105.2 repealed; new Table 3-2105.2 enacted; 02/
01/05;
   Ord. No. 3007-2005; Sec. 3-2106(1) repealed; new Sec. 3-2106(1) enacted; 02/
01/05;
   Ord. No. 3036-2005; new Sec. 3-2113(11) enacted; 05/24/05; codified 09/11/08
pursuant to omission from prior codification;
   Ord. No. 3020-2006; Table 3-2105.2 repealed; new Table 3-2105.2 enacted; 04/
18/06;
   Ord. No. 3021-2011; Chapter 3 repealed in its entirety; new Chapter 3
enacted; 06/07/11
   Ord. No. 3030-2011; Sec. 3-2102(3) repealed, new subsection (3) enacted; 08/
02/11;
   Ord. No. 3030-2011; Table 3-2105.1 repealed; new Table 3-2105.1 enacted; 08/
02/11;
   Ord. No. 3030-2011; Table 3-2105.3 repealed; new Table 3-2105.3 enacted; 08/
02/11;
   Ord. No. 3030-2011; Sec. 3-2107 repealed; new Sec. 3-2107 enacted; 08/02/11;
   Ord. No. 3009-2012; Chapter 3 repealed in its entirety; new Chapter 3
enacted; 03/06/12
   Ord. No. 3016-2019; Table 3-2105.1 subsections (f) and (g) by adding video
gaming exceptions/restrictions
   Ord. No. 3048-2024; Sec. 3-2105(2)f., Table 3-2105.3 amended; 12/3/24
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
   Art. I.   In General, §4-1100 - §4-1103
   Art. II.   Local Liquor Control Commissioner, §4-2100 - §4-2105
   Art. III.   Retail Licenses,
      Div. 1. In General, §4-3100 - §4-3104
      Div. 2. Licensing Procedure, §4-3200 - §4-3211
      Div. 3. Privileges Conferred By Various Classes of Licenses, §4-3300 -
§4-3320
      Div. 4. Administrative Proceedings, §4-3400 - §4-3407
   Art. IV.   Operation, §4-4100 - §4-4109
   Art. V.   Minors, §4-5100 - §4-5111
   Art. VI.   Vicarious Liability, §4-6100
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 4-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   (1)   Alcohol. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   (2)   Alcoholic liquor. Includes the four (4) varieties of liquor defined in
this section, i.e., alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by human beings.
   (3)   Bar. A counter or place where alcoholic liquor is served, poured, and/
or mixed.
   (4)   Beer. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   (5)   Caterer. A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption off-
site of the licensed premises, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed,
as an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are
sold at a package price agreed upon under contract, which may include a cash
bar.
   (6)   Civic Center. One or more buildings or structures, within the same
site, complex or campus, having a gross seating capacity of 8,000 persons or
more, in each of which space is regularly rented or licensed for the viewing of
or participation in conventions, exhibitions, sporting events, concerts or
performances of plays, circuses or similar presentations.
   (7)   Club. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests.
   (8)   Entertainment/Recreational Facility. A business conducted in any
indoor building, room, space or area whose principal purpose is as an
entertainment venue for activities such as live musical or theatrical
performances, art exhibitions or oral presentations; a facility for
recreational activities such as bowling, arcade games, simulated golf, and
billiards or pool; or a service establishment that offers and provides services
for sale to its patrons. An entertainment/recreational facility shall not
include a civic center, as defined in this chapter as having a gross seating
capacity of 8,000 persons or more. Video gaming shall not be considered as an
entertainment or recreational activity under this definition.
      Additionally, for bowling, the activity shall be conducted in any indoor
building, room, space or area with a minimum of 3,000 square feet dedicated to
bowling, which is open or frequented by the public and operated for gain. For a
billiards or pool hall, a pool table is a billiard table or other table for
playing billiards, pool, bumper pool, eight-ball or similar games.
   (9)   Hotel.    Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to
travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which
twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such
guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to
such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in
the same building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
   (10)   Incidental. Except as otherwise indicated in Section 4-3304, the term
“incidental” when describing a secondary business purpose of a liquor licensee
shall mean that the licensee intends such secondary business purpose to be
subordinate to the dominant business. Evidence of the intent of the licensee in
operating a secondary business purpose shall be initially determined based on
whether the gross revenue of the secondary or incidental purpose of the
business is less than fifty (50) percent of its gross, as compared to the
primary or dominant business operations of the licensee. Should the gross
revenue of the secondary or incidental purpose of the business exceed fifty
(50) percent of the gross revenue of the business in total, the Liquor
Commissioner, without hearing, may consider other factors in determining the
licensee’s intent relative to principal or secondary business purposes, such as
the comparison between incidental and principal business[es] based on the
layout or design and devotion of space to the business purposes in the
establishment, its inventory, equipment, assignment of staff and their
functions and training, and business advertising, along with any other relevant
indicia of intent of business purpose.
   (11)   Live entertainment. The offering or permitting of any amusement
feature, including music, vaudeville, singing, acting, dancing or contests,
whether by personal performance or instrumental device. In no instance shall
live entertainment include nude or semi-nude conduct.
   (12)   Minor.   Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years except for
persons under eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years of age who
are acting in pursuance of their employment at and with an establishment that
is licensed in accordance with this chapter.
   (13)   Motel.   See definition of hotel.
   (14)   Original package. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg,
hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped,
sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to
convey any alcoholic liquor.
   (15)   Package sale. A licensed retailer’s sale of alcoholic liquor in the
manufacturer’s unopened original package for off-premises consumption.
   (16)   Principal Purpose. Except as otherwise indicated in Section 4-3304,
the phrase “principal purpose” when describing the business operations of a
liquor licensee shall mean that the licensee intends such principal business
purpose to be dominant to any secondary or subordinate business[es]. Evidence
of the intent of the licensee in operating a principal business purpose shall
be whether the licensee derives fifty (50) percent or more of their gross
revenue from their principal business as compared to the incidental or
secondary business operations of the licensee. Should the gross revenue of the
principal purpose of the business be less than fifty (50) percent of the gross
revenue of the business in total for the prior year, the Liquor Commissioner,
without hearing, may consider other factors in determining the licensee’s
intent relative to principal business purpose, such as along with the
comparison between principal and incidental business[es] based on the layout or
design and devotion of space to the business purposes in the establishment, its
inventory, equipment, assignment of staff and their functions and training, and
business advertising, along with any other relevant indicia of intent of
business purpose.
   (17)   Private Function. A prearranged private party, function or event, for
a specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation or
paid admittance, and not open to the general public, where the guests and
attendants are served in a room, rooms, or area designated and used exclusively
for the private party, function, or event.
   (18)   Producer. Any brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, wine maker,
blender, processor, bottler or person who fills or refills an original package,
whether for himself or for another, and others engaged in brewing, fermenting,
distilling, rectifying or bottling alcoholic liquors as above defined.
   (19)   Rental Hall Business. A business that provides a place available for
rental by members of the general public for a private function by invitation,
reservation or paid admittance of attendees only, such as a wedding
celebration, open house, banquet, performance or similar event. The building
housing the business must be designed to accommodate a minimum of two hundred
fifty (250) persons safely and may include kitchen facilities for the
preparation of food and areas for dancing, dining and other entertainment
activities that customarily occur in association with such functions. The
liquor licensee/lessor is paid a fee by the lessee for the use of the rental
hall and for providing alcoholic liquor for the private function as an
incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold
at a package price agreed upon under contract, which may include a cash bar.
   (20)   Restaurant. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where the sale of food is the principal
business purpose and where meals are actually prepared and regularly served,
and without sleeping accommodations, the space being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed
therein sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve
suitable food for its guests. A restaurant for purposes of this chapter shall
also be considered a Category I facility pursuant to the Illinois Food Service
Sanitation Code.
   (21)   Retail sale. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale in
any form.
   (22)   Salon. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held
out to the public as a business that offers and provides services including
hair care, nail care, esthetics and/or barber services per the Barber,
Cosmetology, Esthetics, Hair Braiding, and Nail Technology Act of 1985, 225
ILCS 410/1-1 et. seq.
   (23)   Special Event. An event conducted by an educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious or non-profit organization.
   (24)   Special use permit. A license for use by a retailer to allow for the
transfer of alcoholic beverages from an existing licensed retail premises to a
designated site for a specific event.
   (25)   Spirits. Any beverage that contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   (26)   Tavern. Any public place kept, used, maintained or advertised and
held out to the public as a place where sale of alcoholic liquors is the
principal business carried on, primarily for consumption on the premises.
   (27)   Video Gaming Establishment. Any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a "licensed establishment" per the
Illinois Video Gaming Act, 235 ILCS 40/1 et. seq., where alcoholic liquor is
sold for consumption on the premises and whose principal purpose is the
operation of video gaming terminals as defined under the Act and Chapter 5 of
this Code. The sale of alcoholic liquor and/or food at a video gaming
establishment shall be incidental to the operation of video gaming terminals.
   (28)   Wine. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the
natural contents of fruits or, vegetables, or honey, containing sugar,
including mead and such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits, as defined in this section.
(Ord. No. 3026-2017; Sec. 4-1100(11) repealed; new Sec. 4-1100(11) enacted; 10/
10/17; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-1100(14) enacted; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3039-
2021; Sec. 4-1100(9.5) and (14.5) enacted; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-
1100 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-1101.   MISBRANDING.
   No person shall knowingly possess, sell or in any way dispose of any
alcoholic liquor under any name other than the proper name or brand known to
the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the package or
other container of alcoholic liquor. All misbranded packages and containers are
contraband and may be removed and destroyed by the City.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-1101 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-1102.   POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; IN MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (a)   No person shall carry, transport, possess or have any open alcoholic
liquor in or upon or about such person on a street, alley or public right-of-
way, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   When in attendance at a special event approved by the City for
which a special event liquor license has issued to the event sponsor.
      (2)   It shall not be a violation for any owner of a residence or such
owner’s lawful guest(s) to possess any alcoholic liquor on a public right-of-
way immediately adjacent to said residence; provided, however, that such owner
or guest(s), and each of them, are twenty-one (21) years old or older. For
purposes of this Sec.
4-1102, the term “owner of a residence” shall include tenants in control of the
premises.
   (b)   No person shall carry, transport, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
in or upon or about any motor vehicle in the City, except:
      (1)   in the original package with the seal unbroken;
      (2)   in accordance with Illinois state law regarding the removal of open
wine bottles from a restaurant pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/6-33;
      (3)   in accordance with Illinois state law regarding the to-go mixed
drinks, cocktails, and single-servings of wine pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8;
or
      (4)   in compliance with Section 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
ILCS 5/11-502.
(Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-1102 amended; 7/27/21)
SEC. 4-1103.   REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE CHAPTER.
   (a)   The local liquor control commissioner or a law enforcement officer
shall issue or cause to be issued to any person in violation of the specified
sections of this chapter a notice of ordinance violation. A person receiving a
notice of ordinance violation will be adjudicated through the City's
administrative adjudication system, MUNICES, or through circuit court.
   (b)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (c)   The above violation fees are directed at the person who committed the
ordinance violation and are separate and apart from the administrative
proceedings against the licensee for such a violation. The administrative
proceedings may include administrative fees and provisions for the suspension,
revocation or forfeiture of a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and
payment of said violation fee shall not constitute an admission of guilt or
innocence for purposes of such administrative proceedings for administrative
fees, and/or suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of license.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-1103 amended; 9/27/22)
ARTICLE II. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
SEC. 4-2100.   MAYOR TO BE LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; ENFORCEMENT
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner for the City and
shall be charged with the administration within the City of the laws of the
state as they relate to liquor licenses within the City, and with the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City relating to liquor.
The mayor shall serve in such position ex officio and without any additional
compensation.
SEC. 4-2101.   APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANTS.
   The local liquor control commissioner may appoint a qualified person or
persons to assist in the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties
imposed on the local liquor control commissioner by law and the provisions of
this Code or other City ordinances.
SEC. 4-2102.   COMPENSATION.
   The City Council may fix the compensation of the assistants and deputies of
the local liquor control commissioner as may be deemed necessary for the proper
performance of the duties vested in them by law.
SEC. 4-2103.   POWERS.
   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions and duties with respect to licenses, other than licenses of
manufacturers, importing distributors, non-beverage users, railroads, airplanes
and boats:
   (1)   To issue or refuse to issue licenses or options connected therewith in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   To renew or refuse to renew licenses or options connected therewith in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (3)   To suspend not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all
local licenses issued to persons for premises within the City.
   (4)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed pursuant to this chapter to determine whether
any of the provisions of this chapter or state law or any rules or regulations
adopted by the local liquor control commissioner or by the state commission
have been or are being violated and at such time to examine said premises of
the licensee in connection therewith.
      a.   That upon determination that provisions identified in subparagraph
(4) have been or are being violated, powers are hereby granted to the local
liquor control commissioner, any designee, and/or any authorized law enforcing
officer, to order the licensed premises to cease and automatically suspend any
and all sales of alcohol, and is automatically subject to a hearing on
revocation or suspension of liquor license.
      b.   Violations of subsection (4) above include, but are not limited to,
operating with an invalid State of Illinois liquor license, and failure to
provide dram shop insurance or other proof of financial responsibility on file
to the local liquor control commissioner’s office.
   (5)   To receive complaints from any resident within the City that any of
the provisions of the state law or this chapter or any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant hereto have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
   (6)   To reduce or rescind the privilege for cause and after a local liquor
control commission hearing, any local option issued to persons for premises
within the City. Any reduction or rescission shall be effective upon the annual
renewal period of the license.
   (7)   To grant a variance to Class A licensees to allow up to three (3)
private events per calendar year at the licensed premises during which time the
entire premises may be closed to the general public. Such a request must be
made in writing no less than ten (10) days prior to the event.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-2103 amended; 9/27/22 ; Ord. No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-
2103 amended; 9/12/23)
SEC. 4-2104.   AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE APPLICANTS FOR LIQUOR LICENSES AND
LICENSEES.
   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine or
cause to be examined under oath any applicant for a license required by this
chapter or for renewal thereof or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation
or suspension has been served in the manner provided in this chapter and to
examine and cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee and to hear testimony and take proof for said commissioner's
information in the performance of the commissioner's duties and, for such
purpose, to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state.
For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor
control commissioner under this section, said commissioner may authorize said
commissioner's deputies or designees to act on the commissioner's behalf.
SEC. 4-2105.   RECORDS.
   (a)   The local liquor control commissioner shall keep a separate file for
each license issued pursuant to this chapter, which file shall contain the
following material:
   (1)   A duplicate original of the license certificate;
   (2)   Certificate of dram shop insurance or other proof of financial
responsibility;
   (3)   The application and attached documents;
   (4)   A receipt or verification of payment of the application fee, annual
license fee and any options fees;
   (5)   Property consents, if required;
   (6)   A duplicate City of Moline certificate of occupancy showing zoning,
occupancy load, use, and compliance with building and related Codes, if
applicable;
   (7)   A duplicate City of Moline food license and, for Class A and Class AA
liquor licensees, a duplicate of a current Illinois Food Service Sanitation
Manager Certification or a duplicate of a current ANSI accredited Certified
Food Protection Manager certification for each applicable employee as required
for a Category I facility under Illinois state law;
   (8)   If licensee is an Illinois corporation, a duplicate original of its
articles of incorporation, documentation showing the percentage of ownership,
and subsequent certificates of good standing issued by Secretary of State of
Illinois; if licensee is a foreign corporation, the file shall also contain a
duplicate original of the corporation’s Authority to Transact Business in
Illinois or similar documentation;
   (9)   If licensee is a limited liability company, a duplicate original of
its articles of organization and fully executed operating agreement listing
ownership by percentage or by membership units;
   (10)   If licensee is a partnership, a duplicate original of the partnership
agreement and Illinois Certificate of Assumed Name, if applicable;
   (11)   If licensee if a sole proprietorship, a duplicate original of its
Illinois Certificate of Assumed Name, if applicable;
   (12)   A copy of any charges, transcripts of administrative hearings, and
disposition of charges, if any, against the licensee or applicant;
   (13)   A duplicate copy of the State of Illinois liquor license within ten
(10) days of issuance.
   (b)   The records of the local liquor control commissioner shall be public
unless otherwise exempt pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
All proceedings of the local liquor control commissioner shall be open to the
public.
ARTICLE III. RETAIL LICENSES
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 4-3100.   WHEN REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
or to make any sale of liquor at retail within the City without first having
obtained a liquor license as provided by this article.
   (1)   A "sale at retail" or "to sell at retail" means sales for use or
consumption, and not for resale, in any form.
   (2)   A "sale" means any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made
by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee,
and includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts when done for
consideration:
      a.   The selling of liquor;
      b.   The "giving away" of liquor;
      c.   The dispensing of liquor;
      d.   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purposes of
mixing drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same premises;
      e.   The pouring of liquor;
      f.   The providing of "set-ups" containing alcoholic liquor;
      g.   The maintaining of a private or public club which serves liquor on
its premises to its patrons or members;
      h.   The maintaining of a restaurant, which serves liquor on its premises
to its patrons;
      i.   The possessing in any business or commercial establishment alcoholic
liquor to be served to patrons on the premises.
   (3)   Artistic or Personal Service Establishment Exception: A license is not
required for artistic and personal service establishments to allow customers to
bring and consume their own alcoholic liquor on the premises ("BYOB"). The
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to beer and wine only. The
consumption of beer and wine shall be limited to the time the customer is
receiving services during the hours of operation of the artistic or personal
service establishment. For purposes of this exception, "artistic and personal
service establishments" are art galleries, art studios, barber shops, beauty
shops, cosmetic facilities, craft studios, salons, spas, and other similar uses
as determined by the local liquor control commissioner.
   (b)   It is the intent of this section to require a license for the sale of
liquor at retail within the City for any consideration, whether direct or
indirect, regardless of the form that the sale takes. If an establishment
allows patrons to bring their own alcoholic liquors or "BYOB," such allowance
shall be presumed to be valid consideration for purposes of this section and
thus subjects the establishment to the requirements of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3026-2021; Sec. 4-3100 amended; 9/21/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-
3100 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3101.   THE CLASSES OF LICENSES ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be the following classes of liquor licenses available to
qualified applicants in the City of Moline, Illinois.
Class Description
Class     Description
Class A   Consumption on Premises - Incidental Activity (COPIA)
Class B   Tavern
Class BB  Liquor Producer & Reseller
Class C   Packaged Sales Only
Class D   Non-for-Profit Organization; Club/Fraternal or Veterans; Church
Class E   Caterer’s License
Class F   Hotel/Motel
Class G   Specialty Retailer - Limited
Class H   Civic Center
Class I   Special Event Not-for-Profit
Class II  Special Event Hosted Bar
Class III Special Event Homebrewer
Class K*  Video Gaming Establishment
 
* License classification terminating on January 31, 2027.
(Ord. No. 3039-2021; Sec. 4-3101 amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-
3101 amended; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3101 amended; 9/12/23)
SEC. 4-3102.   FEES TO BE PAID TO THE ACCOUNTS AND FINANCE OFFICE.
   All fees to be paid under the provisions of this article shall be paid to
the accounts and finance office, unless otherwise provided by law, and shall be
forthwith deposited in the City treasury.
SEC. 4-3103.   LICENSES TO BE USED ONLY FOR PREMISES FOR WHICH ISSUED; NON-
TRANSFERRABLE.
   (a)   No licensee under this article shall use said licensee's license to
engage in the alcoholic liquor business at any location other than the one
named in the license.
   (b)   The use or attempted use of a license issued pursuant to this article
at any premises other than the one for which the license was issued shall be
cause for revocation of the license.
   (c)   In the event a licensee wishes to relocate to a new premises, the
licensee must submit a new application under Section
4-3201 and, if the number of licenses is decreased upon relocation under
subsection
4-3104(b), the City Council may adopt an ordinance to increase the number of
licenses in that class. There is no application fee for a relocating licensee
to file an application for a license in the same class at a new premises during
the term of an existing license and, if eligible, there is no license fee for
the initial license term in the new premises.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3103(c) repealed; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3027-2023; Sec.
4-3103 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 4-3104.   NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (a)   The total number of liquor licenses and options to be issued at any
time is limited to:
License Class, Option or Permit Number
License Class, Option or Permit                                 Number
Class A: Consumption on Premises - Incidental Activity (COPIA)  No limit
Class B: Tavern; and Class BB: Liquor Producer & Reseller       20
Class C: Packaged Sales Only                                    38
Class D: Club/Fraternal or Veterans, Churches or Not-for-Profit No limit
Organization
Class E: Caterer’s License                                    No limit
Class F: Hotel/Motel                                            No limit
Class G: Specialty Retailer - Limited Hours                     No limit
Class H: Civic Center                                           No limit
Class I: Special Event Not for Profit                           No limit
Class II: Special Event Hosted Bar                              No limit
Class III: Special Event Homebrewer                             No limit
Class K: Video Gaming Establishment                             0
Option 1: Outdoor Use                                           No limit
Option 2: Extended Hours 3 A.M.                                 10
Option 3: Self Pour                                             1
Permit: Retailer's Off-Site Special Use (Public Property)       No limit
Permit: Retailer's On-Site Outdoor Special Use                  No limit
 
   (b)   In the event any one of the limited/capped licenses provided for
herein shall lapse, be revoked or terminated in any manner, or the licensed
establishment has closed or relocated, the maximum number of licenses or
options in that classification shall be automatically reduced until the number
of licenses is at the maximum allowed by City ordinance, without further action
by the Mayor and City Council.
   (c)   Amortization of Class K Liquor Licenses. No new Class K Liquor
Licenses shall be issued following the effective date of Ord. No. 3039-2021,
but existing Class K. Licenses holding a valid Class K video gaming
establishment license and operating as of January 11, 2022 may continue to be
licensed and apply for renewal thereof through the term ending January 31, 2027
(the “Amortization Period”), unless sooner terminated or revoked due to
noncompliance with the requirements of state and local law, including, but not
limited to, Chapters 4 and 5 of the Moline Code of Ordinances or a lapse in the
validity of their licenses. Immediately following the conclusion of the
Amortization Period, all Class K liquor licenses shall be deemed null and void
and ineligible for renewal under said classification.
   (d)   Early Termination. From the effective date of Ord. No. 3039-2021
through the conclusion of the Amortization Period, any existing Class K
licenses shall be deemed to have terminated immediately (prior to the end of
the Amortization Period) without further action by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, Mayor or City Council upon:
      (1)   A change in liquor license classification following application and
qualification for an available liquor license classification, at which time the
former Class K liquor licensee must physically surrender the Class K liquor
license and the accompanying Video Gaming Terminal licenses to the City in
exchange for new City of Moline Video Gaming Terminal licenses if eligible
under the new liquor license classification; or
      (2)   A change in the business or corporate name of the licensee; or
      (3)   A lapse of Class K License by failure to timely apply for, pay for
or demonstrate eligibility for renewal; or
      (4)   The closure or relocation of a Class K licensed establishment; or
      (5)   The death or bankruptcy of the licensee; provided, however, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part
of an alcoholic beverage license, may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under order of an appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after said
licensee's death or declaration of insolvency or bankruptcy by a court, but not
longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of the
licensee, at which time the license shall be deemed null and void without
further action by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, Mayor or City Council.
(Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3104 enacted; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-
3104 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3025-2021; Sec. 4-3104 amended; 9/21/21; Ord.
No. 3038-2021; Sec. 4-3104 amended; 12/14/21; Ord. No. 3039-2021; Sec. 4-3104
amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3104 amended; 9/27/22; Ord. No.
3013-2023; Sec. 4-3104 amended; 4/18/23; Ord. No. 3032-2023; Sec. 4-3104
amended; 8/8/23; Ord. No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3104 amended; 9/12/23)
DIVISION 2. LICENSING PROCEDURE
SEC. 4-3200.   PREREQUISITES TO OBTAINING INITIAL LICENSE.
   The local liquor control commissioner shall issue an original license
required by this article where the applicant therefor is eligible for the
license under this article, and has completed all of the following acts:
   (1)   Fully completed the application prescribed in this division and
submitted all required documents as set forth in Section
4-2105.
   (2)   Filed a certificate of insurance protecting dram shop operators or
other proof of financial responsibility satisfactory to the local liquor
control commissioner.
   (3)   Paid the fees required by this division.
SEC. 4-3201.   APPLICATION.
   (a)   No license of any class required by this article shall be issued prior
to the time that an application is wholly completed and verified by the person
desiring the license. A license issued in violation of this section shall be
void. The application form shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
   (1)   Full legal name (including alias, maiden name, nickname, etc.) of
applicant(s) and birth date(s);
   (2)   Address and telephone numbers of applicant(s);
   (3)   Address and telephone number of premises to be used by applicant(s);
   (4)   Name of business under which premises will be operated;
   (5)   Name of owner or landlord of premises to be used by applicant(s);
   (6)   Address of owner or landlord of premises to be used by applicant(s);
   (7)   Class of license applied for, additional option(s) applied for and
application fee, annual license fee and any option fees;
   (8)   If a restaurant, the hours of kitchen operation;
   (9)   Date on which the business is to commence;
   (10)   Whether the applicant owns the premises or has the consent of the
owner to use the premises for the purpose allowed in the license;
   (11)   Whether the premises is leased;
   (12)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States;
   (13)   Whether the applicant is a resident of the City of Moline, Illinois,
and/or County of Rock Island, Illinois;
   (14)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under the
laws of the State of Illinois or any of the United States or under federal law;
if so, when, and what crime(s);
   (15)   Whether the applicant has ever been arrested for a felony under the
laws of the State of Illinois or any of the United States or under federal law
and posted bail and then forfeited said bail;
   (16)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
   (17)   Whether the applicant has ever had a liquor license issued under the
laws of the State of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions revoked for
cause;
   (18)   Whether the applicant has ever had a liquor license issued under the
laws of any other state or any of its political subdivisions revoked for cause;
if so, in what state or political subdivision;
   (19)   Whether applicant is a co-partnership or limited partnership and the
partners’ full legal names (including alias, maiden name, nickname) and birth
dates;
   (20)   Whether the applicant is a limited liability company and the members’
full names (including alias, maiden name, nickname) and birth dates;
   (21)   Whether the applicant is a corporation or is the general partner of a
limited partnership or corporation, and all stockholders including full legal
name (including alias, maiden name, nickname) and birth date(s) of those who
own more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation;
   (22)   A signed statement from all stockholders owning more than five
percent (5%) of the corporation’s stock, all partners in a partnership, or all
members of a limited liability company acknowledging their ownership and
assuming financial responsibility for all City fees, taxes or other monies
owing;
   (23)   Whether the applicant plans to actively manage the business and, if
not, who will be named the liquor manager;
   (24)   Eligibility of the individual to be named liquor manager;
   (25)   Whether any of the following persons is in any way connected with the
applicant in connection with the business for which this license is sought:
      Mayor of Moline, Illinois
      A council member of the City of Moline, Illinois
      Any city attorney of the City of Moline, Illinois
      Any police officer of the City of Moline, Illinois
      Any building official of the City of Moline, Illinois
      Any zoning administrator of the City of Moline, Illinois;
   (26)   The length of current residence of each owner, partner, or
stockholder owning more than five percent (5%) of the business, and manager
listed;
   (27)   Proof of adequate dram shop insurance as required by the Illinois
Liquor Control Act of 1934, as it is now or may hereafter be amended, prior to
being issued such license, including issuing company, policy number, and a
certificate of insurance;
   (28)   For COPIA Restaurant License: a duplicate of a current Illinois Food
Service Sanitation Manager Certification(s) or a duplicate of a current ANSI
accredited Certified Food Protection Manager certification for each applicable
employee as required for a Category I facility under Illinois state law;
   (29)   A statement signed by owner of the premises acknowledging and
certifying that if license is revoked for cause, no new license will be issued
at the premises for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
   (b)   The liquor manager shall also submit an application containing the
information set forth in subsection (a)(1-2 and 12-18) above and an affidavit
as set forth in subsection (c) below.
   (c)   All applicants shall sign an affidavit stating that the statements
made in the application form are true and are material to the question of
whether the applicants are entitled to a liquor license in the City of Moline
and State of Illinois. The applicants shall further state under oath that they
understand that making a false affidavit constitutes perjury where a false
answer is made knowingly to a material question, that they have personally
prepared the answers to the above questions, and that they have re-read them,
and find them to be wholly true, and they wholly understand them. Said
affidavit shall include a statement that the applicants agree to observe all
laws of the United States, State of Illinois and the City of Moline in the
conduct of their business.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3201 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3202.   PROPERTY CONSENTS REQUIRED FOR A LICENSE; EXCEPTION.
   (a)   No license of any class sought to be issued pursuant to this division,
except a special event license, shall be issued unless the application therefor
shall be accompanied by a consent to the granting of the license sought, signed
by a majority of the property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet in
radius from the center of the front of the premises for which the license is
sought are located. If any portion of any property falls within the one hundred
fifty (150) foot radius, that property owner shall be included in obtaining the
consent required herein.
   (b)   If the property for which a license is requested abuts a residentially
zoned parcel, or parcels, and the distance from the building housing that
requested use is less than five hundred (500) feet from the residentially zoned
parcel, the owner or owners of record of those residential parcels shall be
included in the consent survey as required by subsection (a) above.
   (c)   Property owners’ consents are not required for renewals of licenses or
for any original license if the premises for which the license is sought has
been licensed within one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the application
being made as long as the license being renewed or sought is of the same
classification as the license that existed at the premises within the prior one
hundred eighty (180) days. The local liquor control commissioner may extend
said one hundred eighty (180) day period for purposes of remodeling or
rehabilitation under the following conditions:
   (1)   Application for license is made prior to the expiration of the one
hundred eighty (180) days from the last valid license for said premises;
   (2)   Building permits are issued prior to the expiration of the one hundred
eighty (180) days from the last valid license for said premises;
   (3)   The value of construction authorized by the building permits exceeds
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); and
   The extension shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
   (d)   A property owner’s consent is valid for one (1) year from the date of
signature unless the property owner submits a request to withdraw the consent
to the office of the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, within
ninety (90) days of the signed consent or upon issuance of the license,
whichever occurs first. Said request to withdraw shall include the reason(s)
for the request.
SEC. 4-3203.   PHOTOGRAPHING AND FINGERPRINTING OF CERTAIN PERSONS PREREQUISITE
TO FILING APPLICATION.
   (a)   Prior to filing an application for a license required by this article,
the applicant, all partners of the applicant partnership, all members of the
applicant limited liability company, or all persons of the applicant
corporation who own more than five percent (5%) of its stock, and the person to
be named as liquor manager, shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the
Moline police department.
   (b)   No application for license required by this article shall be
considered, and no license issued until such time as the photographing and
fingerprinting has been completed. The fee for such background checks is
covered by the license application fee if an application is submitted and the
application fee is paid. In the event that no license is issued, the fee for
each background check performed shall be paid by the applicant within 30
(thirty) days of the date of the invoice for said payment.
   (c)   If at any time after the issuance of a license pursuant to this
division, or during the course of the consideration by the local liquor control
commissioner of an application filed pursuant to this division, the composition
of a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation changes, or if a
new liquor manager is employed, the applicant or licensee shall submit a signed
and notarized affidavit stating the change in the composition of the
partnership, limited liability company or corporation, if applicable, and cause
the new persons to be photographed and fingerprinted by the Moline police
department within fourteen (14) days, and such fingerprints and photographs
submitted to the local liquor control commissioner.
   (d)   Notice of any change contemplated by subsection (c), after the
issuance of a license shall be given in writing to the local liquor control
commissioner within fourteen (14) days of the change. Failure to give the
notice shall be grounds for revoking or suspending the license.
SEC. 4-3204.   PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license of any kind shall be issued pursuant to this article to:
   (1)   A person who has not met the residency requirements as set forth in
the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, specifically 235 ILCS 5/6-2;
   (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which such person resides;
   (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the local liquor control commissioner determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after
considering matters set forth in such person's application and the
commissioner's investigation; the burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation
shall be on the applicant;
   (5)   A person who has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude;
   (6)   A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for
cause;
   (7)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued pursuant to this article would not be eligible for the license upon a
first application;
   (8)   A sole proprietor applicant unless said applicant is a resident of
Rock Island County and is otherwise qualified to obtain a license;
   (9)   A co-partnership unless one of the partners of the co-partnership is a
resident of Rock Island County and each of the partners of the co-partnership
is otherwise qualified to obtain a license;
   (10)   A limited liability company if any member of the company would not be
eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within Rock Island County; or a corporation, if any
officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders,
owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within Rock Island County;
   (11)   A limited liability company unless it is formed in Illinois and is in
good standing or unless it is a foreign limited liability company that is
qualified under Illinois law to transact business in the state; or a
corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois and is in good standing or
unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under Illinois law to
transact business in the state;
   (12)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee, including the residency requirements as set forth in the Illinois
Liquor Control Act of 1934, specifically 235 ILCS 5/6-2, and this article;
   (13)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
or has forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation;
   (14)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (15)   Any law-enforcing City official, any mayor, alderman or other member
of the City Council, any building official of the City of Moline, or zoning
administrator of the City of Moline; and no such official shall be directly
interested in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (16)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (17)   A person who has been convicted by a gambling offense as prescribed
by 720 ILCS 5/28-1 through 720 ILCS 5/28-9, as heretofore or hereafter amended
or as prescribed by statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions, or any ordinance provisions similar in nature to said provisions;
   (18)   A person or other entity recognized under Illinois law to whom a
federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period, unless person or other entity is
eligible to be issued a license under the Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act
or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act or has obtained stamp pursuant to
the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et. seq., and local ordinance
allowing same;
   (19)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period unless stamp was issued pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230
ILCS 40/1 et. seq., and local ordinance allowing same;
   (20)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of Section
6-21 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3204 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3205.   PREMISES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   Except in the case of hotels, motels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such
premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for
dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept
accessible for use by the public. This section shall not prevent any connection
between such premises and such other portion of the building or structure which
is used only by the licensee, such licensee's family and personal guests.
SEC. 4-3206.   LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license required by this article shall be issued for use in any of the
following locations:
   (1)   In any district under an ordinance entitled "Moline Zoning Ordinance,”
where the sale of liquor is not permitted by that ordinance;
   (2)   In any area that is restricted geographically as set forth for
specific license types in this ordinance.
SEC. 4-3207.   CHANGE IN LICENSE CLASSIFICATION OR NAME CHANGE.
   (a)   Any licensee issued a license pursuant to this chapter may request to
change the type of license issued to it as long as the licensee obtains
property consents as set forth in Sec.
4-3202, meets all of the requirements of the requested license and there is a
license of the requested classification available.
   (1)   To change licenses, a licensee must complete the application form and
pay the application fee as if it were a new license. No additional annual fee
need be paid for the change in classification until the next renewal date.
   (2)   A licensee may only change classification of license once during the
year following issuance of the license.
   (b)   If at any time after the issuance of a license pursuant to this
division, or during the course of the consideration by the local liquor control
commissioner of an application filed pursuant to this division, the business
name or corporate name of a partnership or corporation changes, the applicant
or licensee shall submit a change of business name form and a signed and
notarized affidavit stating the change along with a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee.
Notice of any such name change shall be given in writing to the local liquor
control commissioner within fourteen (14) days of the change. Failure to give
the notice shall be grounds for revoking or suspending the license or
application.
SEC. 4-3208.   LICENSE FEES.
   (a)   Before any class of license or additional use option thereto is issued
pursuant to this division, the license applicant or licensee shall pay the
application fee, annual license fee and/or option fees prescribed in this
section as well as any outstanding fines, fees, taxes, bills, or invoices due
and owing the City by the applicant or licensee, by its partners if the
applicant or licensee is a partnership or limited liability company, or by its
stockholders if the applicant or licensee is a corporation.
   (b)   Application Fee. For all licenses other than Class I, II, III, the
application fee shall be paid in full at the time of filing. Upon a
determination of eligibility for a license, all other fees shall be paid. Upon
a determination that an applicant is not eligible for a license and the
application is withdrawn, then all but $250 of the paid application fee shall
be refunded. Two hundred fifty dollars of the application fee is not refundable
and is intended to cover the costs of preparing and reviewing property
consents, when applicable, pursuant to Section
4-3202, and reviewing the applicant and application, including but not limited
to criminal background checks, as well as serving other regulatory purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, there shall be no
application fee for a relocating licensee to file an application for a license
in the same class at a new premises during the term of an existing license.
   (c)   License Fee and Option Fees. The annual license fee and option fees
are in addition to the application fee and are not refundable. The option fees
are available only for those licenses as listed under "Class Eligible" in the
table set forth below in this section. The annual license fee and any selected
option fee may be pro-rated based upon the month of issuance. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, when a relocating licensee successfully
applies for a license in the same class at a new premises, there shall be no
license fee for the initial term.
   (d)   All annual licenses and their options expire on September 30 of each
year. All annual license and option fees must be paid in full on or before
September 30 at 5:00 p.m. or on or before a date and time determined by the
local liquor control commissioner and set forth in the annual renewal notice to
licensees.
   (e)   The fees for the various classes of licenses to be issued pursuant to
this division shall be as follows:
Class Description Application Fee Annual Fee
Class     Description                           Application Fee Annual Fee
Class A   Consumption on Premises Incidental    $3,000.00       $1,400.00
          Activity (COPIA)
Class B   Tavern                                $3,000.00       $1,400.00
Class BB  Liquor Producer & Reseller            $3,000.00       $1,400.00
Class C   Packaged Sales Only                   $3,000.00       $1,400.00
          Not-for-Profit Organization including
Class D   Church or Club/Fraternal or Veterans  $1,000.00       $700.00
          Organization
Class E   Caterer’s License                   $1,000.00       $700.00
Class F   Hotel/Motel                           $3,000.00       $1,400.00
Class G   Specialty Retailer - Limited Hours    $3,000.00       $1,400.00
Class H   Civic Center                          $3,000.00       $6,800.00
Class I   Special Event Not for Profit *        $25.00/Event    N/A
Class II  Special Event Hosted Bar *            $25.00/Event    N/A
Class III Special Event Homebrewer *            $25.00/Event    N/A
Class K   Video Gaming Establishment            $8,000.00       $5,000.00
 
Options Description Application Fee Annual Fee Class Eligible
Options  Description           Application Fee Annual Fee Class Eligible
Option 1 Outdoor Use           N/A             N/A        A, B, BB, D, F, G,
                                                          and H
Option 2 Extended Hours-3 a.m. N/A             $1,000.00  A, B, BB
         ***
Option 3 Self Pour             N/A             N/A        B, BB
Option 4 Catering Use          N/A             $400.00    A, B, BB, F, G
         Packaged Sales for
Option 5 Off Premises          N/A             $500.00    A
         Consumption for Class
         A Licensees
         Retailer's Off-Site                              A, B, BB, D, E, F,
Permit   Special Use (Public   $25.00/Event    N/A        FF, G, H
         Property) *
Permit   Retailer's On-Site    $25.00/Event    N/A        A, B, BB, D, E, F,
         Outdoor Special Use *                            FF, G, H
 
*   Special Event / Special Use – for purposes of this fee, an event may cover
multiple days as long as it is at the same location and for the same purpose
and is submitted under one special event license application. Annually renewing
licenses with a catering option are exempt from the application fee.
   (f)   In the case of renewal of a license issued pursuant to this article,
the licensee shall pay a penalty of one percent (1%) for each day payment is
late.
(Ord. No. 3043-2019, Sec. 4-3208(e) amended; 12/10/19; Ord. No. 3034-2020; Sec.
4-3208(g) deleted; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3002-2021, Sec. 4-3208(e) amended: 02/23/
21; Ord. No. 3007-2021, Sec. 4-3208(b) amended; 04/20/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021;
Sec. 4-3208 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3038-2021; Sec. 4-3208 amended; 12/14/
21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3208 amended; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3027-2023; Sec.
4-3208 amended; 07/18/23; Ord. No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3208 amended; 9/12/23;
Ord. No. 3027-2024; Sec. 4-3208(e) amended; 6/18/24)
SEC. 4-3209.   TERM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   A license issued pursuant to this division shall exist for a term of one (1)
year from the first day of October. At the end of the license term, the license
shall expire and cease to be a license. The license certificate issued by the
local liquor control commissioner pursuant to this division shall show the
following:
   (1)   The name of licensee and the name under which the licensee does
business, if applicable;
   (2)   The class of the license and any options attached thereto;
   (3)   The address of the licensed premises;
   (4)   The signature of the local liquor control commissioner, attestation by
the city clerk and the City seal;
   (5)   The term of the license.
SEC. 4-3210.   RENEWAL OF LICENSE; PROCEDURES.
   (a)   A license of a licensee under this chapter may be renewed at the
expiration thereof, if said licensee is then qualified to receive a license and
if the premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for the
purpose. The renewal privilege provided for in this section shall not be
construed as a vested right.
   (b)   The holder of a license issued pursuant to this article, who is
eligible for an initial license pursuant to this chapter and who desires to
procure renewal of such license, shall perform the following acts as part of
the renewal process:
   (1)   Pay the annual fees required by this chapter as well as any
outstanding fines, fees, taxes, bills, or invoices due and owing the City by
the licensee, by its partners if the licensee is a partnership, by its members
if licensee is a limited liability company or by its stockholders if the
licensee is a corporation.
   (2)   File a copy of licensee’s current certificate of dram shop insurance.
      a.   Seven (7) days advance notice shall be required of the expiration of
a licensee’s dram shop insurance. Failure to provide said notification is in
violation of this chapter and is subject to a hearing on revocation or
suspension of liquor license, and costs associated thereto.
   (3)   File a copy of licensee’s certificate of good standing or printed
documentation from the Secretary of State of Illinois if licensee is a
corporation or limited liability company.
   (4)   File a copy of licensee’s current State of Illinois liquor license and
a copy of licensee’s City of Moline food license.
   (5)   Amend application of licensee to show any change in any of the matters
stated in the first application.
   (6)   For licensees of a COPIA Restaurant license: Provide a copy of a
current Illinois Food Service Sanitation Manager Certification(s) or a copy of
a current ANSI accredited Certified Food Protection Manager certification for
each applicable employee as required for a Category I facility under Illinois
state law.
   (c)   Licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be renewed annually
in September to be effective October 1.
   (d)   Upon granting the renewal of a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, the local liquor control commissioner shall issue a new license.
   (e)    Upon renewal of a license hereunder, the local liquor control
commissioner or deputy shall notify the Moline police department which shall
review and update all background checks performed at the time of the first
application.
   (f)   Any current licensee who fails to meet the definitions of “principal”
and “incidental” as defined herein based on gross revenue, may, at the
discretion of the Liquor Commissioner, be issued a six (6) month conditional
license in order to allow said licensee to conform with the requirements of the
liquor license classification issued to them.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3210 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3211.   NATURE OF PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE.
   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, extending for its stated term only unless sooner revoked for cause,
and shall not constitute property; and it shall not be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution. The license shall not be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or be subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part
of an alcoholic beverage license, may continue the business of the sale of
alcoholic liquor under order of an appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after said
licensee's death or declaration of insolvency or bankruptcy by a court, but not
longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of the
licensee.
DIVISION 3. PRIVILEGES CONFERRED BY VARIOUS CLASSES OF LICENSES
SEC. 4-3300.   IN GENERAL.
   The privileges authorized by the issuance of one of the various classes of
licenses or the options connected therewith shall be as prescribed in this
division.
SEC. 4-3301.   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No licensee under this chapter shall engage in any conduct allowable under
any license except as specifically allowed by said licensee’s own license or
engage in any conduct otherwise prescribed by law or this chapter except as
specifically allowed by said licensee's license.
SEC. 4-3302.   CLASS A CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES - INCIDENTAL ACTIVITY (COPIA).
   (a)   The COPIA license is required for the retail sale of alcohol to be
consumed on the premises at a place of business where the sale of alcoholic
liquor is incidental or secondary to the primary activity. Restaurants, banquet
halls, theaters, bowling alleys and recreational facilities that would like to
sell liquor are required to have a Consumption on Premises-Incidental Activity
(COPIA) license. Businesses with a COPIA license typically require a retail
food license if food is prepared or served. The sale of alcoholic liquor and/or
offering of video gaming activity shall be incidental. Class A COPIA licensees
shall not include grocery stores, supermarkets, drugstores, or other retail
stores.
   (b)   A Class A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises, with allowance for the
removal of open wine bottles from a restaurant pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/6-33;
      (2)   Sales and delivery of alcoholic liquor, including cocktails, mixed
drinks, or single servings of wine placed in a retailer’s sealed container or a
manufacturer’s original container, for off-premises consumption, subject to the
conditions provided by ordinance and 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8.
   (c)   A Class A licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (d)   A Class A licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (e)   Pursuant to Section
4-2103(8), a Class A licensee may make a variance request to the local liquor
control commissioner to allow a private event at the licensed premises during
which time the entire premises may be closed to the general public. Such a
request must be made in writing to the local liquor control commissioner no
less than ten (10) days prior to the event and is limited to three (3) events
in a calendar year.
   (f)   A “minor” is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class A licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar. No minor may be allowed to use or operate a video gaming terminal located
on licensee’s premises, and video gaming terminals shall be placed in an area
restricted to individuals aged twenty-one (21) and over.
   (g)   A Class A COPIA Restaurant or Bowling Alley licensee may have a
maximum of six (6) video gaming terminals on its premises if it meets all rules
and regulations for video gaming licensing through the State of Illinois and
the City and remains compliant with said rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3302(b)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3302(b)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3302(i)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3302 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No.
3039-2021; Sec. 4-3302(h) amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3302
amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3303.   CLASS B TAVERN; CLASS BB LIQUOR PRODUCER & RESELLER LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class B Tavern license may be issued only to those taverns as
defined in Section
4-1100. Taverns, nightclubs, pubs and lounges are required to obtain a tavern
license to sell and serve alcoholic beverages as the primary source of
business. In other words, if the establishment’s business is to sell alcohol,
to be consumed on the premises, a Tavern license is required. The sale of
alcoholic liquor shall be the principal purpose of a tavern and the sale of
food and/or offering of video gaming activity, if applicable, shall be
incidental. In no event shall a Class B Tavern license be issued to an
establishment holding a Class C Packaged Sales Only liquor license or a Class C
license to a Class B liquor licensee. Should a Class B Tavern licensee apply
for the issuance or renewal of a Class C liquor license in spite of
ineligibility for same, or a Class C Packaged Sales Only liquor licensee apply
for the issuance or renewal of a Class B liquor license in spite of
ineligibility for same, the licensee shall be required to specify which
category of license it wishes to retain and which it shall voluntarily
relinquish to the City. If no such option is selected, then the City shall
consider the licensee to be applying for whichever license it originally
obtained first and license revocation proceedings shall automatically commence
as to the liquor license classification such applicant obtained second.
   (b)   A Class BB Producer & Reseller license may be issued only to those
liquor producers as defined in Section
4-1100. The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be the principal purpose of a
producer and the sale of food and/or offering of video gaming activity, if
applicable, shall be incidental.
   (c)   Patrons entering a Class B or BB licensed establishment must be 21 or
older. Exception: Patrons under the age of 21 may be admitted to a Class B or
BB licensed establishment where food is served if accompanied by a parent or
guardian; however, minors are prohibited from entering any Class B or BB
licensed establishment after 9:00 p.m. A Class B or BB licensed establishment
may prohibit minors at all times if desired.
   (d)   A Class B or BB license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle
the licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises;
      (2)   Sales and delivery of alcoholic liquor, including cocktails, mixed
drinks, or single servings of wine placed in a retailer’s sealed container or a
manufacturer’s original container, for off-premises consumption, subject to the
conditions provided by ordinance and 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8.
   (e)   A Class B or BB licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during
the following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (f)   A Class B/BB licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (g)   A “minor” is as defined in Section
4-1100. No minor shall be on any premises licensed as a Class B or BB, said
licensee must post a sign provided by the City and visible at the entrance to
its premises stating that no minors are permitted on said premises per City
ordinance.
   (h)   A Class B or BB licensed premises may not be located within three
hundred (300) feet of any church, school, other than an institution of higher
learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children, any military or naval station. The distance of three
hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the nearest part of the licensee’s
building to the nearest part of a church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans,
their spouses or children, or any military or naval station.
      (1)   Exception: If a proposed premises for a Class B or BB license is
located within one hundred (100) to three hundred (300) feet of any
establishment listed in Sec. 4-3303(h), the property owner shall be included in
the property consents required for a license per Sec.
4-3202 of the Code, and the license applicant may seek the consent(s) as part
of the majority of property owners necessary to proceed with the license
application.
   (i)   A Class B or BB licensee may have a maximum of six (6) video gaming
terminals on its premises if it meets all rules and regulations for video
gaming licensing through the State of Illinois and the City and remains
compliant with said rules and regulations, provided that a Class B licensee
with video gaming terminals shall not possess or be eligible for issuance of a
Class C Packaged Sales Only liquor license or otherwise offer for retail sale
alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-premises consumption other than
as provided in subsection (d)(2), supra.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3303(b)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3303(b)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3303(h)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3303 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No.
3039-2021; Sec. 4-3303(g) amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3303
amended; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3044-2022; Sec. 4- 3303(c) amended; 10/25/22; Sec.
4-3303(a), (i) amendment; 8/26/25)
SEC. 4-3304.   CLASS C PACKAGED SALES ONLY.
   (a)   A Class C Packaged Sales Only license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall entitle the licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor
only:
      (1)   Package sales of alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-
premises consumption.
   (b)   A Class C licensee may sell alcoholic liquor during the following
hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (c)   A Class C license may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of
any church, school, other than an institution of higher learning, hospital,
home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children,
any military or naval station. After October 1, 2021, a new initial Class C
license may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a renewed Class C
license. The distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured from the
nearest part of the licensee's building to the nearest part of a church,
school, other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged
or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, any military or
naval station, or building for a renewed Class C license.
   (d)   Minors. A “minor” is as defined in Sec.
4-1100.
      (1)   Minors are allowed in a Class C licensed premises except where a
Class C licensee has a specific section or department dedicated to the sale of
alcoholic liquor; no minor shall be permitted in said section or department
unless accompanied by an individual twenty-one (21) years or older.
   (e)   In no event shall a Class C Packaged Sales Only license be issued to
an establishment holding a Class B Tavern liquor license or a Class B license
to a Class C liquor licensee. Should a Class C Packaged Sales Only licensee
apply for the issuance or renewal of a Class B liquor license in spite of
ineligibility for same, or a Class B Tavern liquor licensee apply for the
issuance or renewal of a Class C liquor license in spite of ineligibility for
same, the licensee shall be required to specify which category of license it
wishes to retain and which it shall voluntarily relinquish to the City. If no
such option is selected, then the City shall consider the licensee to be
applying for whichever license it originally obtained first and license
revocation proceedings shall automatically commence as to the liquor license
classification such applicant obtained second.
(Ord. No. 3035-2013; Sec. 4-3304(c) repealed; new Sec. 4-3304(c) enacted; 10/
15/13) (Ord. No. 3017-2012; Sec. 4-3304(d)(2), (e)(2), (f)(2) repealed in
entirety; 07/17/12) (Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3304(a)(1) amended; 1/21/20;
Ord. No. 3034-2020; Sec. 4-3304(a)(1) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021;
Sec. 4-3304(c) amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3304 amended; 7/27/
21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3304 amended; 9/27/22; new Sec. 4-3304(e)
enacted; 8/26/25)
SEC. 4-3305.   CLASS D NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATION; CLUB/FRATERNAL OR
VETERANS’; CHURCH LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class D Not-for-Profit Organization; Club/Fraternal or Veterans;
Church license may be issued only to a club as defined in Section
4-1100. The principal purpose of a club is as a fraternal, veterans or church
organization and the revenues derived from the sale of alcoholic liquor or food
and/or video gaming activity, if applicable, shall be incidental.
   (b)   A Class D license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises;
      (2)   Package sales of alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-
premises consumption.
   (c)   A Class D licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (d)   A Class D licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (e)   A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class D licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar. No minor may be allowed to use or operate a video gaming terminal located
on licensee's premises, and video gaming terminals shall be placed in an area
restricted to individuals aged twenty-one (21) and over.
   (f)   A Club/Fraternal or Veterans’ licensee may have a maximum of six (6)
video gaming terminals on its premises if it meets all rules and regulations
for video gaming licensing through the State of Illinois and the City and
remains in compliance with said rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3305(b)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3305(b)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3305 amended;
7/27/21; Ord. No. 3039-2021; Sec. 4-3305(f) amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-
2022; Sec. 4-3305 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3306.   CLASS E CATERER’S LICENSE.
    (a)   A Class E Caterer’s License allows catering companies or restaurants,
whether located inside or outside of the city limits, to cater food and
alcoholic beverages off site and within the City of Moline. "Off Site" catering
means the preparation of food at one location for service at another. Holders
of this license are required to have a valid City of Moline food license as
well.
   (b)   A Class E licensee issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises.
   (c)   A Class E licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (d)   A “minor” is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises of an event catered by a Class E
licensee pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase,
possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed
to sit at a bar.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3306 repealed; new Sec. 4-3306 added; 9/27/22; Ord.
No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3306 amended; 9/12/23)
SEC. 4-3307.   CLASS F HOTEL/MOTEL LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class F Hotel/Motel license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
entitle the licensee, a hotel or motel as defined in Section
4-1100, to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises, whether for private events
or public consumption in tavern, lounge area or banquet rooms;
      (2)   Package sales of alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-
premises consumption. Off-premises includes the guest rooms of the Class F
establishment.
   (b)   A Class F licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (c)   A Class F licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (d)   A “minor” is as defined in Sec.
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class F licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquors; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3307(a)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3307(a)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3307(e)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3307 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No.
3025-2022; Sec. 4-3307 repealed; new Sec. 4-3307 added; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3307.   CLASS G SPECIALTY RETAIL – LIMITED HOURS.
   (a)   A Class G license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee, a specialty retailer as defined in Section 4-1100, (e.g. stationery,
wine, create-your-own art and candles) to allow the sale or service of
alcoholic liquor for on premises consumption from one (1) bar room only and
during limited hours daily, unless a variance is otherwise granted by the local
liquor control commissioner:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday through Saturday Up to 8 hours between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
 
   (b)   A Class G licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (c)   Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class G Licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; new Sec. 4-3307 added; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3308.   CLASS H CIVIC CENTER LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class H Civic Center license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
entitle the licensee, a civic center as defined in Section
4-1100, to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises, whether for private events
or public consumption in bar or lounge area, banquet rooms, or event area;
      (2)   Package sales of alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-
premises consumption.
   (b)   A Class H licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
                Day                   Hours
      Sunday       10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
      Monday through Thursday    For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the
next day
      Friday and Saturday      For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next
day.
      
   (c)   A Class H licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (d)   Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class H Licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3310(a)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3310(a)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3310(e)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3310 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No.
3025-2022; Sec. 4-3310 renumbered Sec. 4-3308; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3309.   CLASS I SPECIAL EVENT NOT FOR PROFIT LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class I Special Event Not for Profit license shall be issued only to
organized clubs, societies, associations, fraternal organizations, duly
constituted churches, municipal governmental entities, or benevolent
organizations organized not for pecuniary profits. An applicant shall provide
proof of its not-for-profit status as part of the license application.
   (b)   A Class I license fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each event.
For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long as it is
at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under one
special event license application.
   (c)   A Class I license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises at any
banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair, or similar special event.
   (d)   A Class I licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor for a special
event during the following hours:
                Day                Hours
      Sunday       10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
      Monday through Thursday    For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the
next day
      Friday and Saturday      For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next
day.
Exception: Any Class I special event that takes place outside of an enclosed
building shall cease the sale of alcoholic liquor at 11:00 p.m. of the same day
upon which sales commenced.
   (e)   A Class I license shall require proof of dram shop (liquor liability)
insurance on behalf of the City in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) if the event
is to be located on City property or public right-of-way.
    (f)   If the special event will be on City property or public right-of-way,
the Class I license also requires an approved licensing agreement executed by
the licensee, which agreement shall require proof of insurance on behalf of the
City insuring for use of the City property or public right-of-way in one of the
following amounts per Section
6-2104 of the Code: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) if less than five
thousand (5,000) persons are expected to be in attendance or five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00) if more than five thousand (5,000) persons are expected
to be in attendance.
   (g)   If the sale of alcoholic liquor is to be conducted outside of an
enclosed building, the following requirements must be met:
      (1)   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons.
      (2)   Sound amplification is allowed only if the event location is more
than five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned parcel, which shall
be measured from the nearest part of the event location premises to the nearest
part of any residentially zoned parcel. If sound amplification is allowed based
on this distance, such sound may not cause alarm or disturb the public peace
and quiet as set forth in Sec.
21-1100(7), "Noises," of the Code of Ordinances, which references noise
measurement limits in Sec.
35-5409(d) of the Code. If the amplified sound exceeds the noise measurements
of Sec.
35-5409(d) from any point at or within the property line of the residentially
zoned parcel, it will be considered a nuisance violation of Sec.
21-1100(7) and the sound amplification must cease immediately.
      (3)   Security provided by Moline police department and paid for by
licensee if the city administrator or designee deems it necessary.
      (4)   Only non-glass containers may be used.
   (h)   A Class I licensee may provide live entertainment.
   (i)   A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class I licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
   (j)   A Class I license application shall be received in the office of the
local liquor control commissioner not fewer than ten (10) business days prior
to the event and include the following information:
      (1)   Full legal name of authorized representative of organized club,
society, association, fraternal organization, duly constituted church,
municipal governmental entity, or benevolent organization organized not for
pecuniary profit;
      (2)   Copy of the articles of organization or other proof indicating the
not for profit status of the organization referenced in (j)(1) above;
      (3)   Mailing address, email address and telephone number to be reached
during the hours of event;
      (4)   Copy of government issued photo identification of authorized
representative of the organization referenced in (j)(1) above;
      (5)   Type of event, location, date, and beginning and ending times.
   (k)   Following issuance of a Class I Special Event Not for Profit liquor
license by the City, a licensee shall submit an Application for State of
Illinois Special Event Retailer's Liquor License (Not-for-Profit) to the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission and obtain a state liquor license for the
event.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3311 renumbered Sec. 4-3309; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3310.   CLASS II SPECIAL EVENT HOSTED BAR LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class II Special Event Hosted Bar license shall be issued only for a
private event to be held at City property known as Bass Street Landing Plaza or
the Historic Block Courtyard, by invitation to attendees and not open to the
general public, including but not limited to wedding ceremonies, wedding
receptions, graduation celebrations, or similar events. As the host of a
special event, the licensee may be an individual, corporation, limited
liability company or partnership who will be providing alcoholic liquor free of
charge to attendees of the event.
   (b)   A Class II license fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each event.
For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long as it is
at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under one
special event license application.
   (c)   A Class II licensee may serve alcoholic liquor at a special event
during the following hours:
         Day        Hours
      Monday through Thursday    For each day: 5:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m.
      Friday and Saturday      For each day: 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
   (d)   A Class II licensee may provide live or recorded entertainment
including amplified sound during the same hours listed in
4-3310(c) above.
   (e)   A Class II license shall require proof of dram shop (liquor liability)
insurance on behalf of the City in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
   (f)   The Class II license also requires an approved licensing agreement
executed by the licensee, which agreement shall require proof of insurance on
behalf of the City, insuring for the use of public property known as Bass
Street Landing Plaza or the Historic Block Courtyard, in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   (g)   A Class II licensee shall only serve alcoholic liquor in non-glass
containers.
   (h)   A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class II licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
    (i)   A Class II license application shall be received in the office of the
local liquor control commissioner not fewer than ten (10) business days prior
to the event and include the following information:
      (1)   Full legal name of individual or authorized representative of
corporation, limited liability company or partnership;
      (2)   Mailing address, email address and telephone number to be reached
during the hours of event;
      (3)   Copy of government issued photo identification of individual,
authorized representative of corporation, limited liability company or
partnership members applying for the license;
      (4)   Type of event, location, date, beginning and ending times.
   (j)   A State of Illinois liquor license is not required following issuance
of a Class II Special Event Hosted Bar liquor license by the City if the
applicant will only be providing alcoholic liquor free of charge to attendees
of the event. If the applicant wishes to also provide a cash bar where
alcoholic liquor will be sold to the attendees, the applicant must select
either a City liquor licensee that holds a licensing agreement with the City
for the sale of alcoholic liquor at Bass Street Landing Plaza or the Historic
Block Courtyard, or a City liquor licensee that is licensed for retailer's off-
site special use (Class 6 license option). Information on these liquor
licensees may be obtained from the office of the local liquor control
commissioner.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3312 renumbered Sec. 4-3310; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3311.   CLASS III SPECIAL EVENT HOMEBREWER LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class III Special Event Homebrewer license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall entitle the licensee, a homebrewer as defined by 235 ILCS 5/6-36,
to provide homebrew product samples as defined by 235 ILCS 5/2-1 for
consumption at a special event open to the public to persons over the age of
twenty-one (21) as outlined by 235 ILCS 5/6-36. A Class III licensee shall only
serve homebrewed samples free of charge.
   (b)   A Class III license fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
event. For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long
as it is at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under
one special event license application.
(c)   A Class III licensee may serve homebrewed samples at a special event
during the following hours:
      Day        Hours
      Sunday    10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
      Monday through Thursday    For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the
next day
      Friday and Saturday    For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next
day.
Exception: Any Class III event that takes place outside of an enclosed building
shall cease the service of homebrewed samples at 11:00 p.m. of the same day of
the event.
   (d)   A Class III license shall require proof of dram shop (liquor
liability) insurance on behalf of the City in an amount that is at least equal
to the maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of Section 6-21 of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) if the
event is to be located on City property or public right-of-way.
   (e)   If the special event will be on City property or public right-of-way,
the Class III license also requires an approved licensing agreement executed by
the licensee, which agreement shall require proof of insurance on behalf of the
City insuring for use of the City property or public right-of-way in one of the
following amounts per Section
6-2104 of the Code: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) if less than five
thousand (5,000) persons are expected to be in attendance or five million
dollars ($5,000,000.00) if more than five thousand (5,000) persons are expected
to be in attendance.
   (f)   If the service and/or sampling of homebrewed samples is to be
conducted outside of an enclosed building, the following requirements must be
met:
      (1)   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons.
      (2)   Sound amplification is allowed only if the event location is more
than five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned parcel, which shall
be measured from the nearest part of the event location premises to the nearest
part of any residentially zoned parcel. If sound amplification is allowed based
on this distance, such sound may not cause alarm or disturb the public peace
and quiet as set forth in Sec.
21-1100(7), "Noises," of the Code of Ordinances, which references noise
measurement limits in Sec.
35-5409(d) of the Code. If the amplified sound exceeds the noise measurements
of Sec.
35-5409(d) from any point at or within the property line of the residentially
zoned parcel, it will be considered a nuisance violation of Sec.
21-1100(7) and the sound amplification must cease immediately.
      (3)   Security provided by Moline police department and paid for by
licensee if the city administrator or designee deems it necessary.
      (4)   Only non-glass containers may be used.
   (g)   A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100. Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class III licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to sit at a
bar.
    (h)   A Class III license application shall be received in the office of
the local liquor control commissioner not fewer than ten (10) business days
prior to the event and include the following information:
      (1)   Full legal name of individual or authorized representative of
corporation, limited liability company or partnership;
      (2)   Mailing address, email address and telephone number to be reached
during the hours of event;
      (3)   Copy of government issued photo identification of individual,
authorized representative of corporation, limited liability company or
partnership applying for license;
      (4)   Type of event, location, date, and beginning and ending times.
   (i)   Following issuance of a Class III Special Event Homebrewer liquor
license by the City, a licensee shall submit an Application for a State of
Illinois Homebrewer Special Event Liquor License to the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission and obtain a State liquor license for the event.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3313 renumbered Sec. 4-3311; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3312.   CLASS K VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   (a)   A Class K Video Gaming Establishment license may be issued only to
those video gaming establishments as defined in Section
4-1100, whose principal business is the operation of video gaming terminals.
The sale of alcoholic liquor and the revenue derived from the sale of alcoholic
liquor and/or food at a video gaming establishment shall be incidental to the
principal purpose and activity of video gaming.
   (b)   A Class K licensee must comply with all requirements of this Section
4-3312 as well as the rules and regulations adopted by the Illinois Gaming
Board pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et. seq.
   (c)   A Class K license issued pursuant to this chapter shall entitle the
licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor from one (1) bar room
only:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises;
      (2)   Package sales of alcoholic liquor in original packages for off-
premises consumption.
   (d)   All operations must be conducted indoors.
   (e)   A Class K licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor during the
following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
No video gaming terminal may be used, operated, or played except during the
licensee's hours of business.
    (f)   A Class K licensed premises may not be located within three hundred
(300) feet of any church, school, other than an institution of higher learning,
hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or
children, any military or naval station. This restriction does not apply if one
of the listed organizations moves within the restricted distance following the
issuance of a Class K license.
   The distance of three hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the nearest
part of the licensee's building to the nearest part of any church, school,
other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, any military or
naval station. When a proposed Class K licensee will be located within a
subsection of a property by virtue of a lease, deed, or other arrangement
(e.g., a tenant in a shopping center or commercial condominium), the distance
of three hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the subsection of the
property (i.e., boundaries of the establishment's leased building premises).
   (g)   A Class K license must have at least one (1) employee age twenty-one
(21) or over on the licensed premises at all times and the entrance to the
establishment must be within view of said employee.
   (h)   A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100. No minor shall be on any premises licensed as a Class K licensee, and a
Class K licensee must post a sign provided by the City and visible at the
entrance to its premises stating that no minors are permitted on said premises
per City ordinance.
   (i)   Following issuance of a Class K license, in order to operate video
gaming on its premises, the licensee must apply for and maintain a current
State of Illinois liquor license from the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, a
video gaming location license from the Illinois Gaming Board and a video gaming
license from the City of Moline.
   (j)   No video gaming terminal may be used, operated, or played at a
licensed establishment where alcoholic liquor is sold when the liquor license
for that establishment has been suspended or revoked. A licensee's video gaming
license shall be suspended for the same period of time as the suspension or
revocation of the liquor license.
   (k)   A Class K licensee may have a maximum of six (6) video gaming
terminals on its premises if it meets all rules and regulations for video
gaming licensing through the State of Illinois and the City and remains
compliant with said rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 3002-2020; Sec. 4-3315(c)(2) amended; 1/21/20; Ord. No. 3034-2020;
Sec. 4- 3315(c)(2) amended; 11/17/20; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3315(k)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3019-2021; Sec. 4-3315 amended; 7/27/21; Ord. No.
3039-2021; Sec. 4-3315(k) enacted; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3315
renumbered Sec. 4-3312; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3313.   OPTIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   All of the options permitted by this ordinance are granted in
conjunction with a license and are not granted unless the specific class of
license held by the licensee is eligible for such an option.
   (b)   An option may be granted only if the licensee meets all requirements
for the option requested and said request is approved by the local liquor
control commissioner and the fees set forth for each option are paid.
   (c)   The purchase of an option shall not enlarge the licensee's privileges
and limitations under the license except as specified by the option purchased.
(Ord. No. 3020-2015; prior Sec. 4-3316 "Option II Additional Bar Station"
consecutively renumbered to Sec. 4-3318; 05/12/15; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-
3316 renumbered Sec. 4- 3313; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3314.   OPTION 1 OUTDOOR USE.
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for the outdoor use
option: Class A, B, BB, D, G, and H.
   (b)   The outdoor use option allows a licensed premises to conduct
activities licensed under the provisions of this chapter outside of an enclosed
building for the purpose of serving patrons when no residential neighborhood
will be adversely affected; provided, however, that all activities take place
on the licensed premises or, if the outdoor use is to operate on public right-
of-way or public property, the outdoor use option may be granted only with a
City Council approved licensing agreement executed by the licensee which
licensing agreement shall require proof of insurance on behalf of the City in
appropriate amounts, insuring for the use of right-of-way or public property.
In addition, no outdoor use option shall be granted by the liquor control
commissioner unless all of the following terms are included within the
permitted option:
      (1)   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons from the public right-of-
way;
      (2)   The maximum hours of operation for outdoor use shall be the exact
hours of operation of the licensee if the outdoor use is on private property;
if the outdoor use is to operate on public right-of-way or public property, the
hours of operation shall be daily from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.;
      (3)   All parking requirements of City ordinances must be satisfied;
      (4)   No sound amplification equipment will be used outside; provided,
however, that ambient background music is permissible; for purposes of this
subsection, "ambient background music" shall mean quiet music played at a
minimal volume such that it is not audible from adjoining property or public
rights-of-way;
      (5)   That appropriate demarcation elements shall be required herein to
identify the outside premises licensed hereunder and the proposed demarcation
elements shall be approved as set forth in Section 6-2106, "Use of Public
Right-of-Way for Sidewalk Food and Beverage Service," of the Moline Code of
Ordinances;
      (6)   Only non-glass containers may be used if the outdoor premises are
located on public property or public right-of-way;
      (7)   Except as provided herein and in Paragraph (8) below, live animals
shall be excluded from all areas under the control of the licensed
establishment both inside and outside of an enclosed building for the purpose
of serving patrons on private property, public right-of-way or public property.
This exclusion does not apply to edible fish, crustacean, shellfish, or to fish
in aquariums, nor to patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers.
Service dogs and service miniature horses recognized under the Americans with
Disabilities Act as trained to assist persons with disabilities that are
accompanying such persons shall be permitted in all areas open to the public.
      (8)   Other than Licensees holding a COPIA Restaurant License, a Licensee
with this Option may permit Companion Dogs in the outdoor area licensed
hereunder. Companion Dogs are not permitted in an indoor licensed area for any
Licensee. A Licensee choosing to allow Companion Dogs must ensure compliance
with the Illinois Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food Handling Regulation
Enforcement Act, the Sanitary Food Preparation Act, and all other applicable
statutes and ordinances of the City of Moline. A Licensee shall refuse to serve
the owner of a Companion Dog if the person in control of the Companion Dog
fails to exercise reasonable control over the Companion Dog, or if the
Companion Dog is otherwise behaving in a manner that compromises or threatens
to compromise the health or safety of any person present, including, but not
limited to, violations and potential violations of any applicable health code
or other statute or ordinance.
   (c)   To ensure compliance with all requirements of the ordinance, at least
one (1) employee of the premises must physically frequent such outside portion
at least once every five (5) minutes to monitor and require such compliance;
provided, however, that such requirement is only effective when patrons or
other individuals are present at the outdoor portion of the licensee.
(Ord. No. 3020-2015; prior Sec. 4-3317 "Option III Caterer's Retail" renumbered
to Sec. 4-3319; 05/12/15: Ord. No. 3021-2019; 08/27/19: Ord. No. 3002-2021; 02/
23/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3317 amended and renumbered Sec. 4-3314; 9/
27/22)
SEC. 4-3315.   OPTION 2 EXTENDED HOURS 3 A.M.
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for the extended hours
option: Class A Consumption on Premises - Incidental Activity (COPIA) and Class
B Tavern and BB Producer & Reseller.
   (b)   The extended hours option permits Class A licensees and Class B and BB
licensees to remain open to 3:00 a.m. daily to serve alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises only.
    (c)   The following shall be considered in determining whether to grant an
application for Option 2:
      (1)   The number of off-street parking places available to the licensee;
      (2)   The distance from the licensed premises and any off-street parking
to residentially zoned property;
      (3)   The hours live entertainment will be provided;
      (4)   Whether any other licensed premises exists within the vicinity of
the licensee;
      (5)   Whether conditions exist that are conducive to disturbing the quiet
of residential neighborhoods or to producing blight in commercial
neighborhoods.
   (d)   An Option 2 licensee must comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   Exterior Safety Plan. Every application for an extended hours option
must be accompanied by an exterior safety plan meeting the requirements of this
subsection (d).
      a.   The exterior safety plan must prevent the following conditions:
         i.   excessive noise caused by patrons leaving or entering the
premises;
         ii.   loitering or littering by such patrons;
         iii.   fighting or other criminal activity by such patrons; and
         iv.   the congregation of departing patrons in such numbers that
unreasonably impede traffic flow.
      b.   The plan shall provide evidence satisfactory to the local liquor
control commissioner of:
         i.   the installation of adequate exterior lighting;
         ii.   the installation and maintenance of surveillance cameras
installed at each building exit utilized by the general public, employed and
lighted in such a manner to identify persons entering or exiting the building
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.; and
         iii.   the employment of adequately trained security personnel.
      c.   The failure to submit an adequate exterior safety plan as required
by this subsection shall be grounds to deny an application for an extended
hours option or renewal thereof.
      d.   The failure to adequately implement or maintain an adequate exterior
safety plan under this subsection shall be grounds for suspension or revocation
of the extended hours option under Section
4-3402, et seq., or for suspension or revocation of the license for the
premises.
      e.   The existence of the conditions specified in subsection 4-3315(d)(1)
(a) shall be prima facie proof that the plan has not been adequately
implemented and maintained.
   (2)   Lighting. For purposes of Section
4-3315(d)(1)(b)(1), the term “adequate exterior lighting” means lighting that:
      (a)   is sufficient to enable the surveillance cameras required under
Section
4-3315(d)(1)(b)(ii) to produce easily discernible images within the meaning of
Section
4-3315(d)(3)(b);
      (b)   illuminates the front and sides of each entry and exit way used by
patrons of the licensee; and
      (c)   complies with all zoning ordinances and other applicable ordinances
regarding exterior lighting.
   (3)   Surveillance. The surveillance cameras required under Section
4-3315(d)(1)(b)(ii) shall comply with the following requirements:
      a.   The cameras shall be video surveillance cameras of sufficient
number, type, placement and location to view and record all activity in the
front and on all sides of each entry and exit way used by patrons of the
licensee for a distance of 15 feet, as measured from the point of entry or
exit;
      b.   The cameras shall be sufficiently light sensitive, record at a
minimum of 15 frames per second, and provide sufficient image resolution
(supported by additional lighting, if necessary) to produce easily discernible
images to the reasonable satisfaction of the liquor control commissioner;
      c.   The images recorded by each camera shall be capable of being viewed
through use of current digital technology;
      d.   The images recorded by each camera shall be capable of being
transferred to a portable form of media, including but not limited to, a USB
flash drive;
      e.   The cameras must have an audio recording capability disabled;
      f.   The cameras shall be maintained in good working condition;
      g.   At a minimum, the cameras shall be in operation and recording
continuously between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;
      h.   All recordings made by the required cameras shall be:
         i.   indexed by date and time;
         ii.   shall be preserved by the licensee for at least 72 hours; and
         iii.   upon request, shall be made available by the licensee for
inspection by the police department or the local liquor control commissioner,
in accordance with state law and police department policies.
      i.   At all times between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., the
licensee shall have on staff or otherwise available without undue delay a
person capable of operating the required cameras to produce any requested
recorded image(s) and to transfer those images to a portable form of media,
including but not limited to, a USB flash drive; and
      j.   All recordings made by the required cameras shall be stored by the
licensee on the licensed premises in a locked receptacle located in a
controlled access area accessible only to authorized personnel or shall
otherwise be secured in a manner accessible only to authorized personnel. The
licensee shall enter into a log book all instances of requests for, access to,
and dissemination and use of any recorded material made or captured by the
required video surveillance cameras, including the date and time such entry was
made, the reason why such entry was made, and the name of the person making the
request or accessing, disseminating or using the recorded material. The
licensee shall make copies of the log book available, upon request, for
inspection by the local liquor control commissioner, the police department and
in accordance with state law and police department policies; and
      k.   The licensee shall post signage, in a conspicuous manner and at
appropriate locations, notifying the public that video surveillance cameras are
in operation.
   (4)   Security. For purposes of Section
4-3315(d)(1)(b)(iii), the term “adequately trained security personnel” means
security personnel meeting and complying with all of the following minimum
requirements. The licensee must maintain on file, for a period of at least two
years, any proof of compliance, certification, log or records required under
this Section
4-3315(d)(4) and make such documents for inspection by the police department,
local liquor control commissioner or other authorized government personnel upon
request.
      a.   Each person providing security at the licensed establishment must
successfully complete the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and
Training (BASSET) program or Training for Intervention Procedures for Servers
of Alcohol (TIPS) program approved by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission,
and such person must provide proof of compliance with this requirement to the
licensee;
      b.   Each person providing security at the licensed establishment must
promptly notify the police department via the city’s 9-1-1 emergency telephone
system of any illegal activity reported to or observed by the person or the
licensee on or within sight of:
         i.   the licensed premises;
         ii.   the adjacent public sidewalk, street, highway, or other public
thoroughfare;
         iii.   any private property owned, leased, or rented by the licensee
that is located immediately next to the licensed establishment; or
         iv.   any private property owned, leased, or rented by the licensee
that is separated from the licensed establishment by a public sidewalk, street,
highway or other public thoroughfare.
      c.   Each person providing security at the licensed establishment shall
enter into a log book of all incidents of illegal activity reported or required
to be reported to the police department, including:
         i.   the date and time the incident was reported to the police
department;
         ii.   a brief summary of the incident;
         iii.   the name of the person reporting the incident; and
         iv.   if a cell phone was used to report the incident, the cell
phone’s telephone number.
      d.   Each person providing security at the licensed establishment must be
trained by the licensee to report and record all incidents of illegal activity
in a log book in conformity with the requirements of these Sections
4-3315(d)(4)(b) and
4-3315(d)(4)(c), and such person must certify in writing that such training was
received; and
      e.   Each person providing security at the licensed establishment must:
         i.   be trained by the licensee not to exceed the establishment’s
legal maximum occupancy;
         ii.   be trained by the licensee in the fundamentals of the licensed
establishment’s fire safety, emergency preparedness and emergency evacuation
procedures; and
         iii.   certify in writing that such training was received.
(Ord. No. 3020-2015; this section was previously 4-3319; consecutively
renumbered to Sec. 4-3321; 05/12/15; Ord. No. 3016-2021; Sec. 4-3321(d)
repealed; 7/27/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3321 amended and renumbered Sec.
4-3315; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3028-2023; Sec. 4-3315 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 4-3316.   OPTION 3. SELF-POUR.
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for the self-pour
option: Class B and BB.
   (b)   Option 3 shall allow an eligible licensee to offer customers beer or
mead through a customer-operated self-pour device.
   (c)   An Option 3 licensee must comply with the following requirements:
   (1)   Customers must purchase their alcohol from a customer-operated self-
pour device via a programmable, pre-authorized access card.
      (i)   The licensee must require valid proof of identification and verify
the age and identity of the customer before issuing an access card.
      (ii)   The access card must restrict the total number of ounces the
customer may purchase without a manager’s permission.
      (iii)   The licensee must be able to deactivate the access card to
prevent violations of the City Code.
      (iv)   The licensee must deactivate the access card at checkout or the
end of the business day.
   (2)   A BASSET trained employee must actively and passively monitor
customer-operated self-pour devices and the consumption of customer-operated
self-pour beer and mead at all times. The employee must remain stationed within
a reasonable distance and within the sightline of the customer-operated self-
pour devices and monitor the service of alcohol guarding against over-service
and underage service, as well as any other applicable regulations.
   (3)   A customer using a self-pour device may pour no more than 16 ounces of
beer or four ounces of mead per pour. Only customers 21 years of age or older
may operate a self-pour device.
   (4)   The licensee must provide constant video monitoring of the customer-
operated self-pour devices at all times during which the licensed establishment
is open to the public. The licensee must keep recorded footage from the video
monitoring for at least 90 days and must provide the footage to any authorized
law enforcement agent upon request.
(Ord. No. 3038-2021; new Sec. 4-3227 enacted; 12/14/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022;
Sec. 4-3327 amended and renumbered Sec. 4-3318; 9/27/22; Ord. No. 3035-2023;
Sec. 4-3318 renumbered Sec. 4-3318; 9/12/23)
SEC. 4-3317.   OPTION 4. CATERING USE.
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for the catering use
option if licensee meets the definition of a caterer retailer as set forth in
Section
4-1100: Class A, B, BB, D, F, G and H.
   (b)   A licensee may select the catering use option to authorize the
licensee to provide catering services at an off-site catering location during
the following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday through Saturday 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
 
   (c)   Catering location is defined as a location that is used for a private
or public party or function.
   (d)   If a retail license holder with a catering option wishes to provide
alcoholic service on public property, a retailer’s off-site special use permit
(public property) must be obtained.
   (e)   To exercise this option, a licensee must provide verification to the
local liquor control commissioner that its dram shop (liquor liability)
insurance covers catering events and locations. For functions located on public
property, the City of Moline must be listed as an additional insured with
liquor liability coverage of no less than $1,000,000.00.
(Ord. No. 3035-2023; new Sec. 4-3317 added; 9/12/23)
SEC. 4-3318.   OPTION 5. PACKAGED SALES FOR OFF PREMISES CONSUMPTION FOR CLASS
A LICENSEES.
   (a)   Class A licensees are the only class of licensees who are eligible for
the packaged sales for off premises consumption for Class A licensees option.
   (b)   Package sales of liquor for off-premises consumption must be sold only
in original packages.
   (c)   A Class A licensee with an Option 5 may sell liquor in original
packages for off premises consumption during the following hours of business:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Thursday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next day
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
 
   (d)   Class A licensees with an Option 5 may sell packaged liquor for off
premises consumption only in conjunction with other sales in their
establishment.
   (e)   Class A licensees with an Option 5 are prohibited from displaying
packaged liquor for off premises consumption in their establishment.
(Ord. No. 3027-2024; new Sec. 4-3318 added; 6/18/24)
SEC. 4-3319.   RETAILER'S OFF-SITE SPECIAL USE PERMIT (PUBLIC PROPERTY).
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for a retailer's off-
site special use permit: Class A, B, BB, D, F, G and H with option 4 catering
use.
   (b)   The retailer's off-site special use permit shall allow an eligible
licensee to sell alcoholic liquor for an off-site special event on any approved
City property or right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of an
Illinois Special Use Permit Liquor License. Off-site means a premises other
than the establishment premises covered by the existing license.
   (c)   Under this permit, a licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor for
an off-site special event during the following hours:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. the next day
Monday through Saturday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. the next day
 
Exception: Any such special event that takes place outside of an enclosed
building shall cease the sale of alcoholic liquor at 11:00 p.m. of the same day
upon which sales commenced.
   (d)    If the sale of alcoholic liquor is to be conducted outside of an
enclosed building, the following requirements must be met:
      (1)   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons.
      (2)   Sound amplification is allowed only if the event location is more
than five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned parcel, which shall
be measured from the nearest part of the event location premises to the nearest
part of any residentially zoned parcel. If sound amplification is allowed based
on this distance, such sound may not cause alarm or disturb the public peace
and quiet as set forth in Sec.
21-1100(7), "Noises," of the Code of Ordinances, which references noise
measurement limits in Sec. 35-5409(d) of the Code. If the amplified sound
exceeds the noise measurements of Sec.
35-5409(d) from any point at or within the property line of the residentially
zoned parcel, it will be considered a nuisance violation of Sec.
21-1100(7) and the sound amplification must cease immediately.
      (3)   Security provided by Moline Police Department and paid for by
licensee if the city administrator or designee deems it necessary.
      (4)   Only non-glass containers may be used.
   (e)   Application for the retailer's off-site special use permit may be made
to the local liquor control commissioner no less than ten (10) business days
prior to the special event. To obtain this permit, a licensee must provide
verification to the local liquor control commissioner that its dram shop
(liquor liability) insurance covers the special event. The licensee must also
pay the special event license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
event. For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long
as it is at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under
one special event application.
   (f)   This permit also requires an approved licensing agreement executed by
the licensee, which agreement shall require proof of insurance on behalf of the
City insuring for use of the City property or public right-of-way in one of the
following amounts per Section 6-2104 of the Code: one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) if less than five thousand (5,000) persons are expected to be
in attendance or five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) if more than five
thousand (5,000) persons are expected to be in attendance.
   (g)   The licensee shall immediately cease the sale and serving of alcoholic
liquor at a special event if the City of Moline Police Department informs the
licensee that a violation of any of the City ordinances or state law has
occurred at the event.
   (h)   Following issuance of a special event liquor license by the City under
the Retailer's Off-Site Special Use permit, a licensee shall submit an
Application for State of Illinois Special Use Permit Liquor License to the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission and obtain a State liquor license for the
event.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3322 amended and renumbered Sec. 4-3316; 9/27/22;
Ord. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3316 amended and renumbered 4-3318; 9/12/23; Ord. No.
3027-2024; Sec. 4-3318 renumbered Sec. 4-3319; 6/18/24)
SEC. 4-3320.   RETAILER'S ON-SITE OUTDOOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (a)   The following classes of licenses are eligible for a retailer's on-
site outdoor special use: Class A, B, BB, D, F, G and H.
   (b)   This permit shall allow an eligible licensee to sell alcoholic liquor
for an outdoor special event on the licensee's premises. Such events may
include a car show, a holiday celebration, a music fest, or similar event and
are typically identified as being held in the parking lot of the licensee.
   (c)   An on-site outdoor special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall entitle the licensee to make the following sales of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Sales for consumption on the premises.
   (d)   The permit fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each event. For
purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long as it is at
the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under one special
use application.
   (e)   A permitted licensee may serve alcoholic liquor for an outdoor special
use during the following hours:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. the same day
Monday through Saturday For each day: 6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. the same day
 
   (f)    Other requirements for outdoor special events must be followed:
      (1)   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons.
      (2)   Sound amplification is allowed only if the event location is more
than five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned parcel, which shall
be measured from the nearest part of the event location premises to the nearest
part of any residentially zoned parcel. If sound amplification is allowed based
on this distance, such sound may not cause alarm or disturb the public peace
and quiet as set forth in Sec.
21-1100(7), "Noises," of the Code of Ordinances, which references noise
measurement limits in Sec.
35-5409(d) of the Code. If the amplified sound exceeds the noise measurements
of Sec.
35-5409(d) from any point at or within the property line of the residentially
zoned parcel, it will be considered a nuisance violation of Sec.
21-1100(7) and the sound amplification must cease immediately.
      (3)   Security provided by Moline Police Department and paid for by
licensee if the city administrator or designee deems it necessary.
       (4)   Only non-glass containers may be used.
   (g)   Minors. A "minor" is as defined in Section
4-1100.
      (1)   Minors may be allowed on the premises of a Class A, B, BB, D, F, G
or H liquor licensee during a special use event for purposes other than
purchase, possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may
be allowed to sit at a bar.
      (2)   Minors shall not be allowed on the premises of a Class B or BB
licensee during a special use event pursuant to Sec.
4-3303 of this chapter.
   (h)   A request for a special use permit may be made to the local liquor
control commissioner no less than ten (10) business days prior to the special
use event. To exercise this option, a licensee must provide a site plan and
verification to the local liquor control commissioner that its dram shop
(liquor liability) insurance covers the event; the proof of insurance should
include the event name, location, date and hours. A licensee will be provided a
letter of permission for the event upon the local liquor control commissioner's
review and approval of the event.
   (i)   The licensee shall immediately cease the sale and serving of alcoholic
liquor and shut down the special use event if the City of Moline Police
Department informs the licensee that a violation of any of the City ordinances
or Illinois state law has occurred at the event.
   (j)   Except as provided herein and in Paragraph (k) below, live animals
shall be excluded from all areas under the control of the licensed
establishment both inside and outside of an enclosed building for the purpose
of serving patrons on private property, public right-of-way or public property.
This exclusion does not apply to edible fish, crustacean, shellfish, or to fish
in aquariums, nor to patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers.
Service dogs and service miniature horses recognized under the Americans with
Disabilities Act as trained to assist persons with disabilities that are
accompanying such persons shall be permitted in all areas open to the public.
   (k)   Other than those serving food, licensees with this permit may allow
Companion Dogs in the outdoor areas licensed hereunder. Companion Dogs are not
permitted in an indoor licensed area for any Licensee. A Licensee choosing to
allow Companion Dogs must ensure compliance with the Illinois Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act, the Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, the Sanitary Food
Preparation Act, and all other applicable statutes and ordinances of the City
of Moline. A Licensee shall refuse to serve the owner of a Companion Dog if the
person in control of the Companion Dog fails to exercise reasonable control
over the Companion Dog, or if the Companion Dog is otherwise behaving in a
manner that compromises or threatens to compromise the health or safety of any
person present, including, but not limited to, violations and potential
violations of any applicable health code or other statute or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3021-2019; 8/27/19; Ord. No. 3002-2021; Sec. 4-3324(a) amended; 02/
23/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3324 amended and renumbered Sec. 4-3317; 9/
27/22; Ord. No. 3035-2023; Sec. 4-3317 renumbered Sec. 4-3319; 9/12/23; Ord.
No. 3027-2024; Sec. 4-3319 renumbered Sec. 4-3320; 6/18/24)
DIVISION 4. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS
SEC. 4-3400.   INITIAL APPLICATIONS.
   The local liquor control commissioner may refuse to grant any initial
application for a license or options connected thereto without hearing;
however, said commissioner shall state in writing any reasons for such refusal
and mail same to the applicant at the address on the application. The applicant
may request in writing a hearing before the local liquor control commissioner
within ten (10) days from the date of refusal and at such hearing be entitled
to present evidence on said applicant's behalf as to why said applicant should
be entitled to a license and to be represented by counsel at such hearing. The
local liquor control commissioner shall make a decision in writing within
fifteen (15) days from the close of the hearing which decision shall be
appealable to the State of Illinois liquor control commission. If the local
liquor control commissioner fails to make a decision within fifteen (15) days
from the date an application is completed and all required submissions have
been filed or within fifteen (15) days from the close of the hearing, the
application shall be considered denied.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3400 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3401.   RENEWALS.
   The local liquor control commissioner may refuse to renew a license or
options connected thereto for cause; however, an applicant for renewal shall
first be provided notice in writing of the cause or causes for non-renewal
mailed to said applicant at the address of the applicant and be afforded a
hearing where said applicant may confront witnesses against said applicant, be
represented by counsel, and present evidence on said applicant's own behalf.
Said hearing shall be held within ten (10) days of the notice, and the local
liquor control commissioner shall render a decision in writing within five (5)
days after the close of the hearing. Said decision shall be appealable to the
State of Illinois liquor control commission. Except for nonpayment of fees, no
applicant for renewal shall be denied the right to continue operation of the
business as provided in the expired license until the local liquor control
commissioner has rendered a decision in writing and the time for appeal has
expired and no appeal has been taken.
SEC. 4-3402.   ADMINISTRATIVE FEES, REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   (a)   If a licensee or its agents, officers, or employees commit any
violation of the provisions of this Chapter of the Moline Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as it is now or may hereafter be
amended, or any provision of the Moline Code of Ordinances relating to the
business of the licensee, including but not limited to any payments due and
owing the City for services or taxes, or any rule or regulation established by
the State of Illinois liquor control commission which is not inconsistent with
law, or any criminal offense on the licensee's premises, the local liquor
control commissioner may issue a warning or impose an administrative fee and
may suspend or revoke the licensee's license. The amount of the fee to be
imposed and whether a license is suspended or revoked is based upon the
previous violations committed by the licensee.
      (1)   If a licensee commits a first violation, the local liquor control
commissioner may issue a warning to correct or prevent further violative
actions or impose an administrative fee of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      (2)   If a licensee commits a second violation, the local liquor control
commissioner shall impose an administrative fee of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may suspend the
licensee’s license for one (1) business day or longer to be imposed on the same
day of the week upon which the violation occurred.
      (3)   If a licensee commits a third violation, the local liquor control
commissioner shall impose an administrative fee of not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and may suspend the licensee’s license for three (3)
consecutive business days or longer, the suspension to begin on the same day of
the week upon which the violation occurred.
      (4)   If a licensee commits a fourth or subsequent violation, the local
liquor control commissioner shall impose an administrative fee of not less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may suspend the licensee’s license for
seven (7) consecutive business days or longer, the suspension to begin on the
same day of the week upon which the violation occurred.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the local liquor control
commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued if said commissioner
determines that the licensee or its agents, officers or employees has violated
any of the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes as it is now or may hereafter be amended, any provision of the Moline
Code of Ordinances relating to the business of the licensee, or any rule or
regulation established by the State of Illinois liquor control commission which
is not inconsistent with law, or any criminal offense on the licensee's
premises, and if said commissioner determines that circumstances warrant a
greater penalty than those outlined in subsection (a).
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3402 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3403.   NOTICE AND HEARING.
   No license shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by
the local liquor control commissioner upon at least three (3) days’ notice in
writing to the licensee mailed to the address on file in the local liquor
control commissioner's office. Said licensee shall have the opportunity to
appear and defend against the violation either personally or through legal
counsel and to confront those bringing charges against said licensee.
SEC. 4-3404.   WITNESSES.
   (a)   No natural person may be required at said hearing to present testimony
against oneself or against another if such testimony would tend to incriminate
the witness unless such person is awarded use immunity from such statements or
has already been tried for such conduct or the statute of limitations has run
out for such offense. Nothing herein is intended to prevent the local liquor
control commissioner from gaining access to business records of a licensee or
from drawing an adverse inference from the refusal to testify.
   (b)   The city attorney only can grant such immunity from municipal
prosecution and shall also obtain in writing from the State's Attorney of Rock
Island County such immunity if the offense also violates state law.
SEC. 4-3405.   FINAL ORDER OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after the
close of a revocation or suspension hearing, render in writing a decision upon
the charges stated in the notice stating the facts relied upon and the
conclusions drawn therefrom and enter an order of either liable or not liable
for a violation of the provisions of this chapter or State law above as
described in Section
4-3402 and, if liable, assess the administrative penalty therefor. A copy of
said order shall be mailed to the licensee at the address on file with the
local liquor control commissioner within five (5) days of its entry.
   (a)   It shall be within the authority of the liquor control commissioner to
order costs of any hearing which can include, but are not limited to, those
associated with reporter costs, administration costs, attorney costs,
departmental overtime costs, administrative fines, and any other costs that are
deemed appropriate.
   (b)   That upon receipt of dram shop insurance or other proof of financial
responsibility at any hearing for failure to provide same, costs and fines as
identified in subsection (a) above shall not be automatically waived.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3405 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-3406.   ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (a)   All proceedings provided for in this division shall be recorded by a
certified court reporter; however, no transcription of such record shall be
made unless requested in writing by an interested party who shall also order a
copy of said transcription for all other interested parties and one (1)
official transcript for filing with the state commission.
   (b)   Appeals from the decision of the local liquor control commissioner
shall be as provided in Chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or as
amended; however, appeals shall not be heard de novo but shall be made upon the
record provided for in subsection (a) above all as authorized by said Chapter
235 for appeals originating from home rule units of local government.
   (c)   An appeal properly and timely taken shall stay the imposition of any
administrative punishment.
SEC. 4-3407.   REQUIRED TRAINING FOR LICENSEE.
   (a)   City Mandatory Training. The City shall offer mandatory periodic
training sessions regarding the rules and regulations of the sale of alcoholic
liquor within the City with the following requirements:
   (1)   liquor licensees shall be notified of the date of the training
sessions via first class mail and electronic mail, if applicable, at least five
(5) business days prior to the session dates;
   (2)   a designated representative from every business licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor within the City shall attend the training sessions per the
City’s notice of same;
   (3)   failure to attend a training session by an alcoholic liquor licensee
will be considered a violation of this ordinance and administrative proceedings
shall be enforced.
   (b)   BASSET Training. BASSET is the acronym for Beverage Alcohol Sellers
and Servers Education Training. Pursuant to the Illinois Liquor Control Act of
1934, specifically, 235 ILCS 5/6-27 and 27.1, any individual who sells or
serves alcoholic liquor in an open container at retail in Illinois, defined
herein as a “server,” must successfully complete a BASSET training program
certified by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission (“ILCC”). A list of
training providers may be obtained from the ILCC. This training is only
required for servers employed by liquor licensees with on-premises consumption.
      (1)   Server. For purposes of this section, a server shall mean:
         a.   an individual who sells or serves open containers of alcoholic
liquor at retail; and
         b.   an individual who is employed to check the identification of
others to determine if they are of lawful age to enter a licensed premises
where alcoholic liquor is sold or served for consumption on the premises and/or
of lawful age to purchase alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
      Exception : For purposes of this section, the definition of server does
not include the following:
         a.   a volunteer serving alcoholic beverages at a not for profit
special event or charitable function;
         b.   a distributor or importing distributor conducting product samples
as authorized by 235 ILCS 6-31 or a registered tasting representative
conducting a tasting; or
         c.   an instructor engaged in training or educating on the proper
technique for using a system that dispenses alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   BASSET Certificate. A BASSET certificate shall mean a certificate,
card or other written evidence issued by a BASSET training provider who is
licensed or certified by the ILCC to provide the training program. Upon a
participant's successful completion of the training program, the training
provider will issue a BASSET certificate to the participant and the ILCC will
issue a certification letter and BASSET card to the participant. The BASSET
certificate issued by the training provider shall be accepted as meeting the
training requirements for all server license requirements of the State of
Illinois and of the City.
         a.   Any server, as defined above, who is employed in Rock Island
County must possess a BASSET certificate within one hundred twenty (120) days
of the server's employment date.
         b.   A BASSET certificate is valid for three (3) consecutive years
from the date of issue, and a server must maintain the BASSET certification in
good standing at all times that he/she is employed as a server by a City liquor
licensee.
         c.   A BASSET certificate is the property of the server and the server
may provide a duplicate to a City liquor licensee upon employment in lieu of
the original certificate.
         d.   A server may transfer a BASSET certificate to another liquor
licensee upon employment, but a server shall not sell, assign or otherwise
transfer his/her BASSET certificate to another person.
         e.   A server must produce the BASSET certificate upon request of the
Illinois liquor control commission or the local liquor control commissioner or
designee or any law enforcement officer.     
      (3)   Liquor Licensees. It shall be the responsibility of liquor
licensees with on-premises consumption to ensure that all servers employed by
licensee have valid BASSET certification. The licensee shall retain a copy of
each server's certificate on licensee's establishment premises or at such
location where licensee sells or serves alcoholic liquor in open containers at
retail. The copies must be made available for inspection upon the request of
the Illinois liquor control commissioner or the local liquor control
commissioner or designee or any law enforcement officer.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-3407 amended; 9/27/22)
ARTICLE IV. OPERATION
SEC. 4-4100.   POSTING.
   (a)   Every holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all
times keep the license posted in a conspicuous location on a wall of the
business premises.
   (1)   A copy of valid dram shop insurance or other proof of financial
responsibility shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous location on a wall
of the business premises.
   (b)   No person shall post any license issued under this chapter in any
premises other than the premises named in the license as issued.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of any peace officer to seize any license issued
pursuant to this chapter which has been posted in any premises other than the
premises for which it was issued.
SEC. 4-4101.   PERSONS NOT TO REMAIN ON PREMISES AFTER CLOSING HOUR.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no licensee shall permit
other persons to remain on the licensed premises after the closing hours
applicable to the class of license held by the licensee. However, the licensee
may remain on the premises and a person on the licensee's payroll may remain on
the premises solely for the purpose of tallying the day’s sales and for
cleanup.
   (b)   All lights must be turned off at the premises licensed pursuant to
this chapter at or before the closing hour prescribed for the class of license
held, except:
      (1)   Outside lights;
      (2)   Inside lights for police protection;
      (3)   Lighting as necessary for cleanup until said cleanup is complete.
   (c)   A Class A licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic liquor at the
closing hour prescribed in its application or subsequent amendment thereto, but
may remain open with persons on the premises for its primary purpose of the
sale of food.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-4101 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-4102.   LICENSED PREMISES SHALL BE PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
   No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall deny or permit
said licensee's agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of any
premises in which alcoholic liquor is authorized to be sold subject only to the
conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens. All licensed premises under this chapter are required to be open to
the public unless provided otherwise in this chapter. Private functions are
allowed only in rental halls or other licensed premises that have private party
rooms or facilities separate and apart from its public rooms or facilities.
SEC. 4-4103.   CREDIT SALES.
   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person on
credit or on a passbook, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods,
wares, or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and, if any
person shall extend credit for such a purpose, the debt thereby attempted to be
created shall not be recoverable at law. However, nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or statements for
alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members, or
guests according to the bylaws of the club. Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed as preventing any hotel from permitting checks or statements
for alcoholic liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at said hotel and
charged to the accounts of the guests, and nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to prevent payment by credit card or other credit device for
the purchase of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption or in the original
package for consumption off the premises.
SEC. 4-4104.   RESTRAINT OF TRADE.
   No person licensed pursuant to this chapter shall enter into any contract
with any manufacturer, distributor, or importing distributor of alcoholic
liquor whereby the licensee agrees not to sell any alcoholic liquor
manufactured or distributed by any other manufacturer, distributor, or
importing distributor.
SEC. 4-4105.   PANDERING BY LICENSEE.
   No licensee shall in any advertisement state or imply that obscene conduct
or immoral conduct, or obscene entertainment or immoral entertainment, as
defined in Section
22-7200 et seq., of the Moline Code of Ordinances, can be found or seen at the
licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-4105 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-4106.   SELF SERVICE.
   (a)   No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall allow any person to
serve themselves alcoholic liquor for purposes of consumption on the premises
of the licensee except as otherwise provided herein.
   (b)   The restrictions imposed pursuant to Section
4-4106(a) above concerning the disallowance of self-service of alcoholic liquor
shall not apply to licensees or agents or employees thereof as follows:
      (1)   Upon proper identification and verification of an individual (as
required elsewhere in this Code or by Illinois state law), any person who is
twenty-one (21) years of age or older who is occupying a separately
compartmentalized and separately accessed suite at a sporting or entertainment
event where such suites are used, which event takes place in a facility of any
sort where the gross seating capacity of such facility is eight thousand
(8,000) persons or more, may be furnished with a key to a locked container
(such as a refrigerator or a cabinet) located entirely within the suite, for
the purposes of serving alcoholic liquor to himself or other suite guests who
are twenty-one (21) years of age or older for consumption in the suite only.
      (2)   To ensure compliance with the age requirements of this section, at
least one (1) employee of the licensee must physically frequent such suite not
less than once each hour to monitor and require such compliance; provided,
however, that such monitoring requirement is only effective when suite holders
or other individuals are present at the suite portion of the licensee.
      (3)   Customers on the premises of an Option 3, Self-Pour licensed
establishment pursuant to Section
4-3318.
   (c)   The exemptions specified in Section
4-4106(b) shall be strictly construed.
   (d)   All other licensing requirements of this Code shall still apply and
shall remain in full force and effect.
   (e)   Under no circumstances shall a suite described in this Section
4-4106 be construed to constitute a "home" pursuant to Section
4-5100, and in no circumstances shall any minor be served or otherwise provided
or possess alcoholic liquor in such respective suite during any period of
service or consumption.
(Ord. No. 3038-2021; Sec. 4-4106 amended; 12/14/21; Ord. No. 3025-2022; Sec. 4-
4106 amended; 9/27/22)
SEC. 4-4107.   DRIVE-IN OR WALK-IN SERVICE WINDOWS.
   No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall allow any person to purchase
alcoholic liquor through a "drive-in service window" or "walk-in service
window.” No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall sell at retail any
alcoholic liquor through a "drive-in service window" or "walk-in service
window."
   For the purposes of this section, a "drive-in service window" or "walk-in
service window" shall mean any opening on the premises of the licensee whereby
a person may purchase, obtain, or in any other way get alcoholic liquor without
physically entering the premises or building of the licensee.
SEC. 4-4108.   OPERATION WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDING.
   No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall operate or permit the
operation of licensed activities under the terms of this chapter, except within
enclosed buildings on licensed premises unless otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
SEC. 4-4109.   CONDUCT ON PREMISES.
   (a)   No licensee shall allow or permit any drunken or intoxicated person to
be or remain upon the licensed premises. No loud, obscene or boisterous
talking, or lewd touching or disorderly conduct shall be permitted upon the
licensed premises.
   (b)   No licensee shall allow or permit any loitering, gathering of unruly
individuals or crowds or any unlawful or dangerous or disorderly behavior
whether in the premises or in any parking lot or other adjacent area serving
the premises; and the licensee shall have primary responsibility for hiring
such security personnel and taking other appropriate measures to observe
compliance with this subsection.
   (c)   No licensee under this article, nor any agent or employee of the
licensee, shall appear, be present, or perform while nude upon the licensed
premises, nor shall any such licensee, or any agent or employee of the
licensee, allow or permit any other person on the licensed premises to appear,
be present, or perform while nude upon the licensed premises. For the purposes
of this subsection, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks or the human female breast including
the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full opaque
covering.
   (d)   No licensee under this article, nor any agent or employee of the
licensee, shall conduct or perform any specified sexual activity upon the
licensed premises, nor shall any such licensee, or any agent or employee of the
licensee, allow or permit any other person to conduct or perform any specified
sexual activity upon the licensed premises. For purposes of this subsection,
the term “sexual activity” shall mean acts of intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sex act prohibited by
law.
   (e)   In the event a violation of law has occurred on the premises or in any
adjacent areas serving the premises, the licensee or its agents shall
immediately notify the Moline police department.
ARTICLE V. MINORS
SEC. 4-5100.   ACTIVITIES EXEMPT FROM THIS ARTICLE.
   The possession and dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years during the performance of a religious
ceremony or service, or the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years while under the direct supervision and direct
approval of the parents or parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of
a home is not prohibited by this Article V.
SEC. 4-5101.   PREPARATION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   No person under eighteen (18) years of age may tend any bar or pour, draw,
mix, sell or serve any alcoholic liquor in or at a premises licensed by the
City.
(Ord. No. 3026-2017; Sec. 4-5101 repealed; new Sec. 4-5101 enacted; 10/10/17)
SEC. 4-5102.   POSSESSION.
   No minor shall have on or about said minor's person, or in said minor's
custody, or in said minor's possession, or in said minor's control, any
alcoholic liquor, whether the seal is or is not broken.
SEC. 4-5103.   PURCHASE.
   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age, shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic
liquor or have alcoholic liquor in said person's possession.
SEC. 4-5104.   CONSUMPTION.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift, delivery
or service of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age to consume or
to possess in any manner, including by consumption, any such alcoholic liquor,
except as otherwise provided by law. The violation referred to in this section
which relates to the possession of alcohol after it has been consumed may be
identified as the "Illegal Possession of Alcohol by Consumption" or by the
number of this chapter and section of this article. This violation may be
proven by evidence which indicates that the breath of the person charged with
such offense had a smell associated generally or specifically with any
alcoholic beverage and no additional evidence relating thereto shall be
necessary to find the defendant to be in violation of this article. It shall
not be necessary to show that the person charged with an offense hereunder was
at the time in question under the influence of any alcoholic beverage in any
manner, but such evidence shall be admissible to prove a violation of this
section.
   (b)   The defendant in a case brought under subsection (a) above has the
duty of producing as affirmative defenses the lawful consumption of alcoholic
liquor in a religious ceremony or in the privacy of a home under the direct
supervision of the parents or parent or guardian or at a location where
consumption by said person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is otherwise
permitted by law and once said defendant has met said duty, it shall be the
duty of the prosecutor to persuade the trier of fact that said person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years consumed or possessed by consumption alcoholic
liquor in violation of subsection (a) above by a preponderance of the evidence.
(Ord. No. 3026-2017; Sec. 4-5104(b) repealed; new Sec. 4-5104(b) enacted; 10/
10/17)
SEC. 4-5105.   GIVING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR TO MINORS.
   No person shall have, sell, or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any minor
within the City, including alcoholic liquor in a container with the seal
unbroken.
SEC. 4-5106.   AUTHORITY AND DUTY OF LICENSEE UNDER THIS CHAPTER TO REQUIRE
PROOF OF AGE.
   If a person licensed pursuant to this chapter or agent or employee thereof
believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of the age of a prospective recipient, the licensee,
agent or employee thereof, shall require valid proof of identification and
verify the age and identity of the recipient before making the sale or
delivery. No attempt at proof of identification shall be considered valid
unless said identification contains a picture of the holder thereof.
SEC. 4-5107.   FRAUDULENT IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (a)   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card
issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or
agency thereof; use the identification card of another; carry or use any false
or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of
false identification.
   (b)   Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee or agent or employee thereof, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually said person's own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting
to purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any
alcoholic beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, shall be subject
to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
SEC. 4-5108.   PROOF OF AGE NOT A DEFENSE.
   No licensee or agent or employee thereof shall raise as a defense to this
article the fact that compliance has been had with Section
4-5107 hereof. However, such fact shall be considered by the local liquor
control commissioner in way of aggravation or mitigation of the finding of
guilt for violation of this article.
SEC. 4-5109.   PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for the parents or parent or guardian to suffer or
permit a child or ward under their custody and control and under the age of
eighteen (18) years to violate any provision of this Article V, except as
expressly permitted by Section
4-5100.
SEC. 4-5110.   RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located
within the City to knowingly allow any minor to remain on such premises while
in possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in
violation of this Article V.
(Ord. No. 3026-2017; Sec. 4-5110 repealed; new Sec. 4-5110 enacted; 10/10/17)
SEC. 4-5111.   RESTRICTION ON PREMISES AND VIOLATION THEREOF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
to be on any premises located within the City while in possession of alcoholic
liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this Article V. Said
action shall be subject to the remedies set forth in Sec.
4-1103.
(Ord., No. 3028-2011; Sec. 4-5111 enacted; 07/19/11)
ARTICLE VI. VICARIOUS LIABILITY
SEC. 4-6100.   LICENSEE'S LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS OF STATE OR LOCAL LAW.
   Every act or omission constituting a violation of Chapter 235 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, or any of the provisions of this chapter, by any
officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any licensee under this
chapter shall be deemed and held to be the act or omission of the licensee,
even though such act may be done without the knowledge, authorization, or
consent of the licensee.
Amendment Reference Notes:
Ord. No. 3024-2009; Chapter 4 repealed; new Chapter 4 enacted; 09/22/09;
scrivener’s error to Sec. 4-3208(e) corrected by changing Restaurant Alternate
from $200.00 to $400.00 – 11/02/09
Ord. No. 3029-2018: Chapter 4 repealed; new Chapter 4 enacted; 07/17/18
Prior and subsequent ordinance amendments are referenced below the
corresponding sections.
CHAPTER 5
AMUSEMENTS
   Art. I.   Video Gaming, §5-1100 - §5-1107
   Art. II.   Motion Picture Theaters, §5-2100 - §5-2103
   Art. III.   Outdoor Carnivals and Circuses, §5-3100 - §5-3107
ARTICLE I. VIDEO GAMING
SEC. 5-1100.   TERMS DEFINED.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Gambling. Gambling shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section
22-5101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (2)   Licensed Establishment. Licensed Establishment shall mean any licensed
retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or
otherwise served for consumption on the premises, whether the establishment
operates on a nonprofit or for-profit basis. The following classes of City of
Moline liquor licenses are classified as Licensed Establishments for purposes
of this article and are eligible for a Video Gaming Terminal license if they
meet the requirements of this article: Class A restaurant or bowling alley, B,
BB, D club/fraternal or veterans organization, K.
   (3)   Sales Taxes. The State and City taxes paid on the retail sale of
merchandise, food, alcohol and other tangible personal property from the
premises of the Licensed Establishment under the requirements of the Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, the City’s Home Rule Sales Tax pursuant
to Chapter 31, Article IV of the City Code, and the City’s Prepared Food and
Liquor Tax pursuant to Chapter 31, Article VII of the City Code.
   (4)   Sales Tax Year. A fiscal period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar
months commencing on January 1 and ending December 31 of the year immediately
preceding the commencement of the February 1—January 31 video gaming terminal
licensing term. “Sales Tax Year” shall measure the Sales Taxes actually
collected, reported and remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue and the
City of Moline during the specified January 1—December 31 period, even though
the taxable transaction may fall outside of the Sales Tax Year. By way of
illustration, tax returns and corresponding payments arising out of
transactions from December 2021 are not due until January 2022 and such Sales
Taxes would therefore be part of the 2022 Sales Tax Year.
   (5)   Terminal Operator. Terminal Operator shall mean any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or association who owns, sells, leases, rents, or is
otherwise responsible for placing or distributing Video Gaming Terminals within
the City of Moline.
   (6)   Video Gaming Terminal. Video Gaming Terminal shall mean any electronic
video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, electronic cards or voucher,
or any combination thereof, is available to play or simulate the play of a
video game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack,
as authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can
be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine or device that
directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
(Ord. No. 3039-2021; Sec. 5-1100(3) and (4) enacted; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3043-
2022; Sec. 5- 1100(2) amended; 10/25/22)
SEC. 5-1101.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No Video Gaming Terminal may be placed in any Licensed Establishment
unless the owner of the Licensed Establishment holds a valid license for video
gaming from the Illinois Gaming Board and has obtained a Video Gaming Terminal
license from the City pursuant to this article. A Licensed Establishment may
have a maximum of six (6) terminals on its premises if it meets all rules and
regulations for video gaming licensing through the Board and the City. Video
Gaming Terminals are not permitted in any other establishment in the City.
   (b)   No person may act as a Terminal Operator of Video Gaming Terminals in
the City unless said person holds a valid license for video gaming from the
Illinois Gaming Board and has obtained a Terminal Operator license pursuant to
this article.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, no more than thirty (30) Licensed
Establishments shall be licensed for video gaming at any time. Should there be
more than thirty (30) Licensed Establishments licensed for video gaming at the
time of passage of this ordinance, those license holders may continue to be
licensed as long as they comply with all requirements of state and local law
and there is no lapse in the validity of their licenses. No new licenses shall
be issued until the number of Licensed Establishments falls below thirty (30).
      (1)   Exception to the limit requirements of subsection (c): The license
holder of a Video Gaming Terminal license in a Class K Licensed Establishment
that wishes to acquire a Class A Restaurant or Class B Tavern Licensed
Establishment may apply to the City of Moline for approval and issuance of a
new Video Gaming Terminal license for the newly-acquired Class A Restaurant or
Class B Tavern Licensed Establishment. Said licensee must agree to surrender
its current licenses to the City as a condition of filing an application with
the State of Illinois for a video gaming license at the licensee's new Class A
Restaurant or Class B Tavern Licensed Establishment. Upon approval by the State
of Illinois of a new video gaming license for the newly-acquired Class A
Restaurant or Class B Tavern Licensed Establishment, the licensee must: 1)
physically surrender said Class K liquor license and the accompanying Video
Gaming Terminal license to the City in exchange for the new City of Moline
Video Gaming Terminal license; and 2) cease all operations at the formerly
Licensed Establishment prior to operating Video Gaming Terminals within the
newly-acquired Class A Restaurant or Class B Tavern Licensed Establishment.
   (2)   Exception to the limit requirements of subsection (c): Notwithstanding
the limitation on issuing new video gaming terminal licenses to new Licensed
Establishments when doing so would cause the aggregate number of Licensed
Establishments licensed for video gaming in the City to exceed thirty (30) as
set forth in subsection (c), a Class A Restaurant or bowling alley or Class B
Tavern Licensed Establishment may apply to the City of Moline for approval and
issuance of a new Video Gaming Terminal license. Upon receipt of such
application for a video gaming terminal license exceeding the maximum number
permissible under subsection (c), the City’s accounts and finance office shall
promptly notify the mayor prior to processing such application. The mayor may
exercise discretion to recommend increasing the maximum number of Licensed
Establishments licensed for video gaming at any time by one (1) such license to
accommodate the pending Class A or B Licensed Establishment application for a
Video Gaming Terminal License. Such discretion shall be based on factors
including but not limited to the concentration of Licensed Establishments
featuring video gaming in the vicinity, impact on and compatibility with the
surrounding neighborhood, anticipated impact on the applicant’s business,
available parking, and anticipated economic impact on the City. Upon such
favorable recommendation, the City Council may, by majority vote, authorize
increasing the limit to accommodate the pending application. Any increase so
authorized by the City Council shall automatically sunset upon the denial of
the Class A or B Licensed Establishment’s pending video gaming terminal license
application by the City under Section 5-1102 without further action.
(Ord. No. 3014-2020, Sec. 5-1101(c) amended; 6/2/20; Ord. No. 3039-2021, Sec.
5-1101(a) and (c) amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3043-2022; Sec. 5-1101(c)(1) and
(c)(2) amended; 10/25/22)
SEC. 5-1102.   APPLICATION; INSPECTION.
   A person desiring either license required by this article shall apply to the
City’s accounts and finance office therefore; the license shall be issued by
the accounts and finance office upon the certification of the building official
and zoning administrator that the premises for which the license is applied or
for which Video Gaming Terminals will be located complies with all building
construction codes and the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the City of
Moline, the fee has been paid, and it has been determined that the provisions
of this article are complied with or that adequate provision has been made to
cause such compliance.    
SEC. 5-1103.   FEE; TERM, LATE PENALTY.
   (a)   Terminal Operators shall pay an annual fee of one thousand eight
hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per year for each Video Gaming Terminal located
within the City.
   (b)   The term of each license shall be February 1 to January 31. A license
issued pursuant to this article is good only for the term in the license, and
the City may, at any time, choose to prohibit video gaming within the City
entirely upon expiration of the current license term. A license issued in
accordance with this article shall not vest any type of interest with the
licensee other than for the term of the existing license. A license issued in
accordance with this article shall expire immediately upon the voluntary
surrender or revocation of the licensee's video gaming license issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board or the Licensed Establishment's state or local liquor
license. No license shall be issued or renewed where the applicant owes a debt,
fine, fee, or penalty to the City or has violated any City ordinance,
including, but not limited to, the liquor code, sign code, or any other of the
requirements of this article.
   (c)   Any licensee licensed by any part of the Moline Code of Ordinances or
other act of the City Council who fails to renew applicable licenses by the due
date will be charged a reinstatement fee equal to the amount of the license or
two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is less. If a licensee does not renew
its license within thirty (30) days after the renewal date, the license will be
considered to be voluntarily surrendered and shall not be renewed.
   (d)   Any Licensed Establishment or Terminal Operator liable for the
collection, reporting and remittance of the Sales Tax shall be entitled to a
credit against the fee otherwise due for Video Gaming Terminal licenses in an
amount equal to the greatest aggregate amount of Sales Taxes paid during any
one of the three (3) Sales Tax Years preceding the applicable video gaming
terminal license term (the “Credit”).
(Ord. No. 3043-2019, Sec. 5-1103(b) amended; 12/10/19; Ord. No. 3039-2021, Sec.
5103(a) and (d) amended; 1/11/22; Ord. No. 3043-2022; Sec. 5-1103 amended; 10/
25/22)
SEC. 5-1104.   TRANSFERABILITY; DISPLAY.
   (a)   No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable from
one person to another or from one premises to another. However, licenses shall
be transferable from one Video Gaming Terminal to another. For licensees that
are corporations, if the percentage of ownership of any shareholders in that
corporation changes by more than fifty percent (50%) or if more than fifty
percent (50%) of shares in the corporation are transferred to a new shareholder
or shareholders, then the license is considered to be transferred, which is not
permitted pursuant to this article.
   (b)   A Video Gaming Terminal license shall consist of a display certificate
describing the number of Video Gaming Terminals exhibited on the premises, the
Licensed Establishment’s name and address, and the Terminal Operator’s name and
address, and it must be signed by the accounts and finance office and under
seal of the City of Moline.
   (c)   A Terminal Operator license shall consist of a display certificate
listing by address, the name of each Licensed Establishment within the City
where Video Gaming Terminals are sold, leased, rented, serviced or otherwise
placed or distributed by said Terminal Operator and the number of terminals at
each such Licensed Establishment.
   (d)   In the event the Video Gaming Terminals or number of terminals change
after issuance of a license, but before renewal thereof, the license shall be
considered to have been amended to a new license; provided, the licensee of the
Licensed Establishment and the Terminal Operator notify the accounts and
finance office in writing of the change within ten (10) days after the change
in number of terminals has occurred and pay any additional fees required by an
increase in the number of terminals. The act of operation without the
notification required herein and payment of fees required herein shall
constitute operation without holding a valid license.   
   (e)   Each Video Gaming Terminal license issued pursuant to this article
shall be displayed at all times by a Licensed Establishment in a conspicuous
place on the licensed premises and in an area accessible to business invitees
during all hours of operation.
SEC. 5-1105.   RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATIONS AND ADVERTISING.
   Licensed Establishments, Terminal Operators, and Video Gaming Terminals
shall be subject to the restrictions of the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1,
et. seq.
   Any advertising for video gaming by or for all existing Licensed
Establishments shall be restricted as follows. See Section
3-2102 of the Moline Code of Ordinances for definitions of each sign type
referenced herein.
   (1)   From the effective date of this ordinance until June 30, 2019, no new
additional video gaming advertising of any of the following types shall be
permitted:
      a.   Off-premises advertising, including but not limited to billboards,
box trucks, sound trucks, and printed pamphlets, fliers and ads;
      b.   Temporary signs; and
      c.   Freestanding banners and building banners.
   (2)   As of July 1, 2019, no video gaming advertising of any of the
following types shall be permitted:
      a.   Off-premises advertising, including but not limited to billboards,
box trucks, sound trucks, and printed pamphlets, fliers and ads;
      b.   Temporary signs;
      c.   Freestanding banners and building banners; and
      d.   Window signs in any window of a Licensed Establishment.
   (3)   As of January 1, 2023, advertising for video gaming shall be limited
to one (1) exterior building sign attached to the Licensed Establishment. The
sign must conform to all requirements of
Chapter 3, “Advertising and Signs,” of the Moline Code of Ordinances and will
count toward the number of signs allowed per building under the Code. Except
for Licensed Establishments with a Class K liquor license, additional exterior
building signs that are for purposes other than video gaming shall be permitted
as long as they conform to all requirements of
Chapter 3.
      a.   Class K Liquor Licensees.  Licensed Establishments that hold a Class
K Video Gaming Establishment liquor license shall be limited to one (1)
exterior building sign attached to the establishment that identifies the
licensee’s legal name or “doing business as” name of the establishment only.
The sign must conform to all requirements of
Chapter 3, “Advertising and Signs,” of the Moline Code of Ordinances. No other
exterior building signs are permitted for a Class K liquor licensee after
January 1, 2023.
      b.   All existing exterior building signs for video gaming at Licensed
Establishments are hereby deemed to be non-conforming.
      c.   Nonconforming Signs. From the effective date of this ordinance until
January 1, 2023, such nonconforming building signs may be continued until any
of the following activities affect the subject sign or sign location, at which
time the nonconforming sign(s) must be removed unless it is the only exterior
video gaming sign and it meets the listed requirements of this subsection (3):
         1.   Change of use classification; or
         2.   Change in name of the licensee/license holder; or
         3.   Replacement or repair of any portion of the sign in excess of
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value; or
         4.   Removal or replacement of the entire sign structure; or
         5.   Building permit application review by the City of Moline or
zoning administrator.
   (c)   If the number of video gaming licenses issued to Licensed
Establishments falls below thirty (30) and a new license is issued to a
Licensed Establishment prior to any of the effective dates set forth in
subsection (5) above, the license shall be subject to those advertising
restrictions as of the date of its issuance rather than the effective dates
listed in subsection (b).
SEC. 5-1106.   SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   (a)   The mayor may suspend or revoke or refuse to renew a license issued
hereunder for cause. The mayor shall give written notice to the licensee of the
cause of the suspension or revocation or refusal to renew and provide the
licensee at least ten (10) days before such suspension or revocation or refusal
to renew is to be effective to request a hearing by filing such request in
writing with the mayor. If such a request is filed, the mayor shall schedule a
hearing as soon as practicable, but in no case later than thirty (30) days
after a request for hearing has been filed. Pending hearing, a licensee may
continue to operate.
   (b)   The City shall have the burden of proof that cause exists at any
hearing to suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a license. The accounts and
finance officer shall render any decision in writing and give the licensee a
copy thereof.
   (c)   Service of notices and decision required in this section shall be
obtained by mailing same by certified mail.
SEC. 5-1107.   PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
petty offense and be punished as provided in Section
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.”
(Ord. No. 3019-2012; Art. I. repealed in its entirety; new Art. I. enacted; 07/
17/12)
(Ord. No. 3036-2017; Art. I. “AMUSEMENT DEVICES,” repealed in its entirety; new
Art. I. “VIDEO GAMING,” enacted; 10/17/17 – removes amusement devices from Art.
I. as the City will no longer regulate or license such devices; Art. I. now
pertains to regulation and licensing of video gaming only)
(Ord. No. 3043-2017; new Sec. 5-1101(c) enacted; 11/07/17 – sets limitation on
number of video gaming establishment licenses to 30)
(Ord. No. 3053-2018; Art. I. “VIDEO GAMING,” repealed in its entirety; new Art.
I. “VIDEO GAMING,” enacted; 12/18/18 – adds definition and licensing
requirement for a terminal operator)
(Ord. No. 3016-2019; Art. I. “VIDEO GAMING,” repealed in its entirety; new Art.
I. “VIDEO GAMING,” enacted; 06/11/19 – amends video gaming establishment
license to video gaming terminal license throughout and adds additional
restrictions on advertising Sec. 5-1105)
ARTICLE II. MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
SEC. 5-2100.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct, or to cause or
permit any of said person's agents, servants or employees to operate or
conduct, a motion picture theater in the City, without first having obtained a
license therefor from the City.
SEC. 5-2101.   LICENSE YEAR; REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Each license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the first
day of May following its issuance.
   (b)   Licenses may be revoked by the accounts and finance officer for cause,
after an administrative hearing pursuant to written notice, or in lieu thereof,
be suspended after such hearing.
SEC. 5-2102.   RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-12; Sec. 5-2102 repealed; new Sec. 5-2102 enacted; 06/25/02)
(Ord. No. 3031-2015; Sec. 5-2101 repealed in its entirety pursuant to 2016
License and Fee Review; section was titled “Application for License; License
Fee;” 09/15/15)
SEC. 5-2103.   INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the inspections division of the department of public
works to make or cause to be made a periodical visit of inspection of each
premise subject to this division, but not less frequently than semiannually,
and to require a thorough fumigation of all such places when deemed advisable
on account of any epidemic or contagious disease or at any time the Illinois
Department of Public Health or the Rock Island County Health Department directs
same and to enforce compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 3043-2022; Sec. 5-2103 amended; 10/25/22)
ARTICLE III.    OUTDOOR CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
SEC. 5-3100.   TERMS DEFINED.
   (a)   Outdoor carnival  means any aggregation of shows or riding devices,
games of skill, or any combination of shows and riding devices, or any
combination of several enterprises, such as revolving wheels, merry-go-rounds,
giant swings, panoramas, musical and theatrical entertainments or riding
devices, whether carried on or engaged in or conducted on public or private
property, which may be open air or enclosed in a tent, and whether carried on,
engaged in or conducted as one enterprise or by several concessionaires, and
whether one admission fee is charged for admission to all such shows or
entertainments, or separate fee for admission is charged for each amusement.
   (b)   Outdoor circus means a show consisting of acrobats, trained animals,
clowns, or similar forms of entertainment that is held on public or private
property, which may be open air or enclosed in a tent.
SEC. 5-3101.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct, or to cause or
permit any of said person's agents, servants or employees to operate or conduct
an outdoor carnival or outdoor circus in the City without first having obtained
a license therefore from the City.
SEC. 5-3102.   LENGTH AND FREQUENCY OF OPERATION.
   (a)   No outdoor carnival or outdoor circus, once approved, shall remain in
operation in any one (1) location for a period exceeding seven (7) consecutive
days.
   (b)   No outdoor carnival or outdoor circus, regardless of operator, shall
be located on any one (1) particular site more than two (2) times during any
calendar year.
SEC. 5-3103.   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   Application for outdoor carnival or outdoor circus licenses shall be
made to the finance director on forms provided by said director and shall
contain the following information:
   (1)   The site or location of the proposed carnival or circus;
   (2)   A precise description of the kinds of entertainment to be offered, the
number, and a diagram indicating wherein they are to be located on the proposed
site;
   (3)   The name of the owner, lessee, proprietor, operator or manager of the
carnival or circus, and in addition thereto, the name of the owner, lessee,
proprietor, operator or manager of each entertainment, performance or
exhibition which collectively make up the carnival or circus, and the legal
relationship of each to the applicant or to the proprietor of the carnival or
circus;
   (4)   The names, birth dates, social security numbers and state driver’s
license or state identification for every person who will be working or
volunteering for the registered purpose;
   (5)   The number and location of off-street parking spaces and toilet
facilities to be used by patrons of the carnival or circus, to be indicated on
the diagram referred to in subsection (2) above;
   (6)   An indication of the dates the carnival or circus is to be in
operation and the hours during which the carnival or circus is to be open the
public;
   (7)   Current USDA licenses for any animals appearing at the carnival or
circus;
   (8)   A food license from the City of Moline for any food concessions for
the length of the carnival or circus; and
   (b)   The fee for a license to operate an outdoor carnival or outdoor circus
shall be one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) plus fifty ($50.00) per
additional day.
(Ord. No. 3025-2009; Sec. 5-3103(b) repealed; new Sec. 5-3103(b) enacted; 10/
05/09) (Ord. No. 3021-2015; Sec. 5-3103 repealed; new Sec. 5-3103 enacted; 05/
19/15)
SEC. 5-3104.   INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the inspections division of the department of public
works to make or cause to be made a visit of inspection of each premise subject
to this division; it shall be the duty of the police department to conduct a
site visit; and it shall be the duty of the fire department to conduct a site
visit. It shall be the duty of the applicant to conduct background checks for
all employees and volunteers prior to working at the event pursuant to State of
Illinois’ licensing requirements. It shall be the duty of the Finance
Department to verify the licenses and permits submitted with the application.
(Ord. No. 3021-2015; Sec. 5-3104 repealed; new Sec. 5-3104 enacted; 05/19/15)
SEC. 5-3105.   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No license shall be issued for conducting an outdoor carnival or outdoor
circus until the applicant(s) therefore have placed on file with the City a
certificate of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability
insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and
all devices and facilities operated in connection with carnivals or circuses.
Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) excess liability and shall name the City of
Moline and its employees as additional insured, with insured endorsement
included.
(Ord. No. 3043-2022; Sec. 5-3105 amended; 10/25/22)
SEC. 5-3106.   INDEMNITY.
   The owner, lessee, operator, or manager of a carnival or circus shall, in
addition to the application provided, deliver to the City an agreement in
writing holding the City harmless from all liability resulting from the
operation of the carnival or circus, and, further, shall agree to indemnify the
City from all liability resulting from any injury to patrons, bystanders,
passersby, or any individual as a result of the operation or maintenance of the
carnival or circus.
SEC. 5-3107.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Finance Director, shall have the authority to revoke for cause, any
license or registration granted under this Article III for a violation of this
chapter, after due hearing and upon notice to the party charged. The notice
shall be in writing and served by registered mail to the party charged, and
shall be not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing. In the case of
immediate peril to persons or property or where clear and convincing evidence
exists purporting to show non-compliance with this Code, the Finance Director
shall have authority to summarily suspend such license and provide the license
holder with notice of their right to request a hearing within three (3) days of
such summary suspension, but request of a hearing shall not stay, cancel or
impair the suspension.
(Ord. No. 3020-2008; new Art. III enacted; 03/18/08)
CHAPTER 6
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY USES
   Art. I.   Standards for Construction of Facilities on Rights-of-Way, §6-1100
- §6-1123
   Art. II.   Insurance Requirements for Licensing Agreements on Public
Property and Rights-of-Way, §6-2100 - §6-2106
   Art. III.   Small Wireless Facilities Deployment, §6-3100 - §6-3107
ARTICLE I.    STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
SEC. 6-1100.   PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City
rights-of-way and the City as a whole.
   (b)   Intent. In enacting this article, the City intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the City and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
   (1)   prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
   (2)   prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (3)   prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the City's
utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public
property;
   (4)   protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from
the installation of facilities;
   (5)   protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
   (6)   preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
   (7)   preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize certain neighborhoods, districts, and corridors;
   (8)   prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
   (9)   assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   (c)   Facilities Subject to this Article. This article applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the wireless provider or utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement.
Additionally, all facilities lawfully established prior to the effective date
of this article shall comply with the requirements of this article within sixty
(60) days of the expiration date of any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement. If no such agreement exists, an established facility must
comply with the requirements of this article within sixty (60) days of the
effective date of this article. The director of engineering may waive certain
requirements of this article for lawfully established facilities if such
requirements are unduly burdensome or are not feasible given that the
facilities have already been established.
   (d)   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The City, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the City enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
article.
   (e)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
   (1)   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a
utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
   (2)   Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (f)   Conflicts with Other Articles. This article supersedes all articles or
parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (g)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (h)   Sound Engineering Judgment. The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this article and may exercise the power described
in Section 6-1120 to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed
in this article when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the ability of the City to regulate its rights-of-way for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1100 repealed; new Sec. 6-1100 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1101.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   (1)   "Act" - Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act.
   (2)   "AASHTO" - American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
   (3)   "ANSI" - American National Standards Institute.
   (4)   "Antenna" - Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of
wireless communications services.
   (5)   "Applicable codes" - Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   (6)   "Applicant" - A person applying for a permit under this article.
   (7)   "Application" - A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   (8)   "ASTM" - American Society for Testing and Materials.
   (9)   "Backfill" - The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.
   (10)   "Bore" or "Boring" - To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity
for the insertion of a pipe, conduit, or electrical conductor.
   (11)   "Cable operator" - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   (12)   "Cable service" - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   (13)   "Cable system" - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   (14)   "Carrier Pipe" - The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   (15)   "Casing" - A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   (16)   "City" - The City of Moline.
   (17)   "Clear Zone" - The total roadside border area, starting at the edge
of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and
speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO
Roadside Design Guide.
   (18)   "Coating" - Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried
pipe for protection against external corrosion.
   (19)   "Code" - The City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (20)   "Collocate" or "collocation" - To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
   (21)   "Communications service" - Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
   (22)   "Communications service provider" - A cable operator, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   (23)   "Conductor" - Wire carrying electrical current.
   (24)   "Conduit" - A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   (25)   "Construction" or "construct" - The installation, repair,
maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or
abandonment in place of facilities.
   (26)   "Cover" - The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
   (27)   "Crossing facility" - A facility that crosses one or more right-of-
way lines of a right-of-way.
   (28)   "Director of engineering" - The City director of engineering or his
or her designee.
   (29)   "Disrupt the right-of-way" - For the purposes of this article, any
work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   (30)   "Emergency" - Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for
the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public
served by the utility.
   (31)   "Encasement" - Provision of a protective casing.
   (32)   "Equipment" - Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other
items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
   (33)   "Excavation" - The making of a hole or cavity by removing material,
or laying bare by digging.
   (34)   "Extra heavy pipe" - Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.
   (35)   "Facility" - All structures, devices, objects, and materials
(including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals,
poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as
defined in this section, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article. For
purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the City.
   (36)   "FCC" - The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   (37)   "Fee" - A one-time charge.
   (38)   "Freestanding facility" - A facility that is not a crossing facility
or a parallel facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer,
pump, or meter station.
   (39)   "Frontage road" - Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
   (40)   "Hazardous materials" - Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the director of engineering to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   (41)   "Highway Code" - The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.,
as amended from time to time.
   (42)   "Highway" - A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular
traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   (43)   "Historic district" or "historic landmark" - A building, property, or
site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   (44)   "Holder" - A person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   (45)   "IDOT" - Illinois Department of Transportation.
   (46)   "ICC" - Illinois Commerce Commission.
   (47)   "Jacking" - Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.
   (48)   "Jetting" - Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under
pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   (49)   "Joint use" - The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by
two or more utilities.
   (50)   "J.U.L.I.E." - The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.
   (51)   "Law" - A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
   (52)   "Major intersection" - The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.
   (53)   "Micro wireless facility" - A small wireless facility that is not
larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches
in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven (11) inches.
   (54)   "Monopole" - A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower
designed and principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that
is not a utility pole.
   (55)   "Municipally-owned infrastructure" - Infrastructure in the public
right-of-way within the boundaries of the City, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, pipes, structures, or buildings owned,
operated or maintained by the City.
   (56)   "Municipal utility pole" - A utility pole owned or operated by the
City in public rights-of-way.
   (57)   "Occupancy" - The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-
way.
   (58)   "Parallel facility" - A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
   (59)   "Parkway" - Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.
   (60)   "Pavement cut" - The removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.
   (61)   "Permit" - A written authorization required by the City to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   (62)   "Permittee" - That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant
to Sections
6-1104 and
6-1105 of this article.
   (63)   "Person" - An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   (64)   "Practicable" - That which is performable, feasible or possible,
rather than that which is simply convenient.
   (65)   "Pressure" - The internal force acting radially against the walls of
a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   (66)   "Petroleum products pipelines" - Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   (67)   "Prompt" - That which is done within a period of time specified by
the City. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
   (68)   "Public entity" - A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.
   (69)   "Public safety agency" - The functional division of the federal
government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   (70)   "Rate" - A recurring charge.
   (71)   "Restoration" - The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or
other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   (72)   "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way"- The area on, below, or above any
public roadway, highway, street, alley other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes,
including utility easements, in which the City has the right and authority to
authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of
the City. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or
personal City property that is not specifically described in the previous two
(2) sentences and shall not include City buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way. Right-of-way does not include City-owned aerial lines.
   (73)   "Roadway" - That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
   (74)   "Sale of telecommunications at retail" - The transmitting, supplying,
or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   (75)   "Security fund" - That amount of security required pursuant to
Section
6-1109.
   (76)   "Shoulder" - A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   (77)   "Sound engineering judgment" - A decision(s) consistent with
generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
   (78)   "Small wireless facility" - A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   (79)   "Telecommunications" - This term includes, but is not limited to,
messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way
radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-
way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private
line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one (1) or more specified locations
to one (1) or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
   (80)   "Telecommunications provider" - Means any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   (81)   "Telecommunications retailer" - Means and includes every person
engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   (82)   "Trench" - A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation
of an underground facility.
   (83)   "Utility" - The individual or entity owning or operating any facility
that is not a small wireless facility as defined in this article.
   (84)   "Utility pole" - An upright pole designed and used to support
electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service
cables, which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a
similar function.
   (85)   "Vent" - A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases
or vapors from an underground casing.
   (86)   "Video service" - That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
   (87)   "Water lines" - Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   (88)   "Wet boring" - Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger
to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
   (89)   "Wireless facility" - Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities.
"Wireless facility" does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on,
under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structure or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise
not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
   (90)   "Wireless infrastructure provider" - Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   (91)   "Wireless provider" - A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless service provider.
   (92)   "Wireless services" - Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   (93)   "Wireless services provider" - A person who provides wireless
services.
   (94)   "Wireless support structure" - A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1101 repealed; new Sec. 6-1101 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1102.   ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the
City shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of engineering,
providing the registrant's name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one (1) or more contact persons who can act on
its behalf in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's facilities
in the right-of-way and a twenty-four (24)-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section
6-1107 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1102 repealed; new Sec. 6-1102 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1103.   PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (a)   Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any City right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds
a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or
(4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility
on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the director of engineering and obtaining a permit
from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit
shall be required for the following, and the City will require notification via
on-line form provided by the City:
   (1)   Installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises, including electrical drop and restore projects where there will be no
disruption of the right-of-way;
   (2)   Relocation of equipment to a new utility pole or adding risers where
there will be no disruption of the right-of-way;
   (3)   Overlashing of fiber optic cable where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way;
   (4)   Installation of security lighting onto an existing pole or structure
where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way;
   (5)   No permit shall be required for routine maintenance, the replacement
of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size or
smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days
prior to the planned replacement, or the installation, placement, maintenance,
operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on
cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable
safety codes.
      No permit shall be required for any right-of-way use by the City. The
City may require a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that
affect traffic patterns or that require lane closures. All lane closures will
follow the requirements of the Illinois Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
   (b)   Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
Any utility or contractor found to be working in the right-of-way without the
appropriate permit will be required to secure the necessary permit to work in
the right-of-way at a cost of three times the standard permit application fee.
   (c)   Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be
made by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative
and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
   (1)   The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
   (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless
provider or utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
   (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
   (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent
of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of
the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be
affected or impacted by the work proposed;
   (5)   Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file with
the City:
      a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures
and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
      b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
   (6)   Drawings, plans (to scale) and specifications that show the work
proposed, and comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; including:
      (a.)   Applicant shall show right of way lines on the plans;
      (b.)   Applicant shall show the horizontal distance of the utility
dimensed to right of way lines;
      (c.)   Applicant shall show the vertical depth of the utility;
      (d.)   Applicant shall show the detailed depth of utility and depth of
public utility at every public utility conflict in the work area;
         a.   Applicant will maintain a one (1) foot vertical separation
between new facilities and public utilities.
         b.   Applicant will maintain a five (5) foot horizontal separation
between new facilities and public utilities.
   (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in Section
6-1107 of this article;
   (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section
6-1109 of this article;
   (9)   Separation requirements may be waived by the director of engineering
where the requirements may have negative impacts on public safety, or if such
installation would be unduly burdensome.
      Any request for a variance from one (1) or more provisions of this
article (See Section
6-1120); and
   (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
   (d)   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of
Facilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the
specific facility that is the subject of the permit application:
   (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and
Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by
law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by
the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
   (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
   (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
and the City have been satisfied;
   (e)   Applicant's Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the applicant in writing to the City within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   (f)   Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200), which amount
may be amended from time to time by action of the City Council. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. No application fee is required
to be paid by any telecommunications utility that is paying the municipal
telecommunications tax pursuant to the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications
Tax Act.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1103 repealed; new Sec. 6-1103 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1104.   ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Application Deadlines. Applications are deemed complete if the City
does not notify the applicant otherwise within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the application.
   (b)   City Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of
engineering on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not conform
to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, or
regulations that concern public safety, the director of engineering shall
notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code
provisions upon which the denial is based. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional
application fees.
   If the director of engineering is satisfied that the proposed work conforms
to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the director of engineering shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director of engineering,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this article.
   (c)   Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications
Retailers.
   (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence
work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of engineering shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
   (2)   In the event that the director of engineering fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
(ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this article.
   (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to Section
6-1103 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this
section.
   (d)   Additional City Review of Applications of Holders of State
Authorization Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days
after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided
the holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1104 repealed; new Sec. 6-1104 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1105.   EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A
permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article on City rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Duration. No permit issued to a utility under this chapter shall be
valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (c)   At the discretion of the director of engineering, a pre-construction
meeting may be required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit
issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major
contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a
pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date,
time and place designated by the City with such City representatives in
attendance as the City deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of
reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid conflicts with or disruption of other
facilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (d)   Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the
City does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the City and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1105 repealed; new Sec. 6-1105 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1106.   REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with Section
6-1120 of this article. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1106 repealed; new Sec. 6-1106 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1107.   INSURANCE.
   (a)   Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as
named insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed
in paragraph (1) below:
   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations,
explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C,"
and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not
less than:
      a.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each
person;
      b.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) for property damage resulting from
any one accident;
      c.   One million dollars ($1,000,000) for all other types of liability;
      d.   Two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate;
      e.   Wireless providers must include the City as an additional insured on
the commercial general liability policy;
   (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
   (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
   (4)   Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks; and
   (5)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
   If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (b)   Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (c)   Copies Required. The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies
of any of the policies required by this section to the City within ten (10)
days following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
   (d)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
      "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by
the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such intent to cancel or
not to renew."
   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this Section.
   (e)   Self-Insurance. A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or
a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
subsection (a) of this section. A wireless provider or utility that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a), or
the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A wireless
provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under
the Workers Compensation Act.
   (f)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Wireless Provider or
Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to
the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   (g)   Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1107 repealed; new Sec. 6-1107 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1108.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless
provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing
or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license,
or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless provider or
utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the
City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1108 repealed; new Sec. 6-1108 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1109.   SECURITY.
   (a)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
   (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this article;
   (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this article; and
   (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs,
or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-
performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to
this article or any other applicable law.
   (b)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
City. Said forms are attached to this article as Appendices 1 and 2. Any surety
bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a
minimum:
   (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the City
and the permittee;
   (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
   (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (c)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be $2,500.00 or
10% of the total cost of the project. The dollar amount of the Security Fund is
intended to be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to
restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior
to the construction under the permit, as determined by the director of
engineering, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the
City estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior
to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
director of engineering may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each
phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for
phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase.
   (d)   Withdrawals. The City, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
   (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
   (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
   (3)   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or expenses
which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by the permittee; or
   (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (e)   Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection (c) of this section.
   (f)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the City,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (c) of this section.
   (g)   Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon satisfactory completion of
the work authorized under the permit, including removal of all signs and
restoration of the work area, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (h)   Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. Upon request, the City
reserves the right to waive the security fund requirement.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1109 repealed; new Sec. 6-1109 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1110.   PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   City Right to Revoke Permit. The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this article for one (1) or more of the following reasons:
   (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
   (2)   Non-compliance with this article;
   (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
   (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (b)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The City shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section
6-1110 .
   (c)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
   (1)   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
   (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the deficiencies
stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
City within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation; or
   (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal to the
City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
   The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   (d)   Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this
section.
   (e)   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the City or
its designee may, at the option of the City: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the City for all costs of removal.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1110 repealed; new Sec. 6-1110 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1111.   UTILITY CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (a)   Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the City no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (b)   Notification of Change - Wireless Providers. Wireless providers are
required to provide the City with written notice of its intent to sell or
transfer small wireless facilities. Such notice must include the name and
contact information of the new wireless provider.
   (c)   Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's right-of-
way.
   (d)   Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1111 repealed; new Sec. 6-1111 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1112.   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances (including, but not limited to, the
City of Moline supplemental specifications), codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:
   (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
   (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
   (3)   Highway Design Manual;
   (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
   (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
   (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code
§ 545);
   (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
   (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (b)   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the director of engineering shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the director of engineering shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1112 repealed; new Sec. 6-1112 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1113.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (a)   Public Safety. The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or
small wireless facilities located in the City right-of-way may not interfere
with the frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety
communications. Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with
industry standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna,
wireless facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the
owner must take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference
at its own costs. The City may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless
facility or small wireless facility based on such interference if the
interference is not corrected.
   The City may reserve space on its utility pole for future public utility or
safety uses or for the City’s electric utility uses. This reservation of space
may preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility where the City
determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (b)   Minimum Requirements. The City's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (c)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The wireless provider
or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal,
state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's
workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (d)   Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city may
require any street or lane closures to be restricted to non-peak hour travel
times.
   (e)   Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall
notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time
and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to Section
6-1119 of this article, the wireless provider or utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   (f)   Compliance. The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to its attention by the City.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1113 repealed; new Sec. 6-1113 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1114.   LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (a)   General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
   (1)   No Interference with City Facilities. No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the director of engineering determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
City's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the City's utility facilities.
   (2)   Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way. For communication service providers proposing to install new facilities,
no new poles shall be allowed to be installed without the City's express prior
consent, except with respect to small wireless facilities to the extent
required by law. Additionally, the provisions of Sec.
28-6100 apply where applicable.
   (3)   No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
   (4)   No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
   (5)   Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (6)   Screening. Screening shall be required for all units equal to or
greater than four (4) feet in height as measured from existing grade, with the
exception of street light and traffic signal controller cabinets.
      a.   Where screening is required, it shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 35, article V, Division 2, Landscape and Buffer yard Standards.
      b.   Equipment shall be located so that its visual impact is minimized.
Equipment shall not be permitted to be located within the parkway area between
the public sidewalk and street curb, unless another feasible location is not
available within or outside of the right-of-way.
      c.   The equipment shall be positioned to maximize the effectiveness of
the screening, including locating the equipment so that the access panel is
located on the side that is least visible; however, boxes shall not be placed
to impede views for pedestrians, cyclists, or drivers.
      d.   Screening requirements may be waived by the director of engineering
where installation of screening may have negative impacts on the public safety,
such as impeding views for pedestrians, cyclists, and drivers on the adjacent
roadways, sidewalks, bikepaths, and driveways, or if such installation would be
unduly burdensome.
      e.   All screening must be maintained by the permittee.
   (7)   The City is not required to install or maintain any specific utility
pole or to continue to install or maintain utility poles in any location if it
makes a non-discriminatory decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of
a particular type. For City utility poles with collocated small wireless
facilities in place when the City makes a decision to eliminate above-ground
utility poles, the City will, at its discretion, either maintain the utility
pole or install and maintain an alternative utility pole for the collocation of
the small wireless facility, or offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless
provider.
   (b)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
   (1)   Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
      a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
      b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two (2) feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
      c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge
as practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
      d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
      e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one (1) foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
   (2)   Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may
be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
      a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable
and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way
line;
      b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway
only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
      c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (c)   Facilities Crossing Highways.
   (1)   No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
   (2)   Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
   (3)   Ninety (90) Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross
at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
   (4)   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
      a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules
entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
      b.   Poles are located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
      c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
   (5)   Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
      a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
      b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
   (6)   Markers. The City may require the utility to provide a marker at each
right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §192.707
(1989)).
   (d)   Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The City may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (e)   Freestanding Facilities.
   (1)   The City may restrict the location and size of any monopole, utility
pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or
modified so that the height of the free standing facility is higher by more
than ten (10) feet or more than ten (10) percent, whichever is greater, than
any other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way
within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed facility, measured along the
center line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other
freestanding facilities located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed
facility, the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be forty-five
(45) feet.
   (2)   The City may require any monopole, utility pole or other freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. If at any time
the City determines that existing wires, cables or other facilities of public
utilities be changed from an overhead to an underground installation, the owner
or operator of a facility shall, at no expense to the owner or operator,
convert its system in that location to an underground installation unless the
owners or operator’s franchise agreement, tariff or applicable state or federal
law provides otherwise, if overhead transmission facilities cannot be converted
to underground installation then relocation costs will be borne by the
responsible Utility.
   (3)   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one (1) side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
   (f)   Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
   (1)   No existing electrical service provider in the corridor is located
underground; and
   (2)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ
suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety.
Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless,
single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
Existing utility poles and municipally-owned infrastructure shall be used
wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or monopoles
is strongly discouraged.
   (g)   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
   (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
   (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
      a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
      b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
      c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
      d.   The proposed method of attachment;
      e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
      f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
      g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
      h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to
the risk involved.
   (h)   Appearance Standards.
   (1)   The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
   (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1114 repealed; new Sec. 6-1114 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1115.   CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (a)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction
Methods.
   (1)   Boring or Jacking.
      a.   Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director
of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty- eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
      b.   Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted
under the roadway.
      c.   Borings with Diameters Greater Than Six (6) Inches. Borings over six
(6) inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one (1) inch (25 mm).
      d.   Borings with Diameters Six (6) Inches or Less. Borings of six (6)
inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
      e.   Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any
tree designated by the City to be preserved or protected shall be bored under
or around the root system.
   (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance
on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of
Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction" and the latest edition of the City of Moline Supplemental
Specifications.
      a.   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable
minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission
is obtained from the director of engineering.
      b.   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
      c.   Drip Line of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
   (3)   Backfilling.
      a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
      b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of engineering, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of engineering.
   (4)   Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall
be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph (4) is
permitted under Section
6-1121 , the following requirements shall apply:
      a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as
soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of engineering.
      b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
      c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
      d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete
surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      e.   For PCC pavement restoration, pavement shall be replaced in full
panels.
   (5)   Encasement.
      a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway
and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-
piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the City.
      b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one (1)
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
      c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be
furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
      d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement
may be eliminated.
      e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair
and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
      f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
   (6)   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                      MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines                        30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service 18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by
Lines                                 City)
Gas or Petroleum Products             30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                            Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                      Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or       Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
Drainage Line                         Protection
 
   (b)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
   (1)   Electric Power or Communication Lines.
      a.   Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within
City rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity
with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160
of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
      b.   Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
      c.   Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a
crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the
crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or
(b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior
to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
      d.   Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November
1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops,
shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless
otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
   (2)   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication
Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
      a.   the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
      b.   jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch
lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
      c.   open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or
toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
      d.   tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
   (3)   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR
§192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and
all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (4)   Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
   (5)   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage
Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" as
well as the City of Moline current supplemental specification.
   (6)   Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead
or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be
provided with a vegetation-free area extending one (1) foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of engineering. With the approval of
the director of engineering, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used
in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (c)   Materials.
   (1)   General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
   (2)   Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the director of engineering.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the City.
   (3)   Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the City
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (d)   Operational Restrictions.
   (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the
City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards
to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also
be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
   (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the director of engineering when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
   (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction are
those set forth in Chapter
21-1100(18) of this Code.
   (e)   Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the City shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
   Any utility that constructs facilities in the right-of-way within the City
must become a member of J.U.L.I.E. and mark the location of its facilities when
alerted to do so as a participating member of J.U.L.I.E. The City shall have no
obligation to mark the location of any utility's facilities nor shall it be
obligated to alert any utility to proposed work by itself or others.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1115 repealed; new Sec. 6-1115 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1116.   VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (a)   Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the City as permitted by law.
   (b)   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (c)   Chemical Use.
   (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray,
inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
City for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
   (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted
on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
director of engineering that such spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1116 repealed; new Sec. 6-1116 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1117.   REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (a)   Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
City, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
   (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
   (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
   (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of
a required permit in violation of this article; or
   (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (c)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (d)   Abandonment of Facilities. As used in this article, a facility that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the City,
the utility shall notify the City within ninety (90) days. The owner of the
abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90) days after
sending such written notice to the City. The City may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the City director of engineering
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of
such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant
to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for City utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for
removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1117 repealed; new Sec. 6-1117 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1118.   CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within twenty (20) days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the City. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Sidewalks and bike/ped paths shall be
restored within ten (10) days. Restoration of roadway, sidewalks and bike/ped
path surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
director of engineering. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which
existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in
this Section may be extended by the director of engineering for good cause
shown.
   Projects which disturb the right-of-way fronting developed and occupied
properties the Utility shall be responsible to inform the property owner the
timeline for restoration prior to the start of any project adjacent to such
properties.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1118 repealed; new Sec. 6-1118 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1119.   MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense.
   (b)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
   (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-
of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
   (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
director of engineering or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
   (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (c)   Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the City a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1119 repealed; new Sec. 6-1119 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1120.   VARIANCES.
   (a)   Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or
more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the Director of
Engineering as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (b)   Authority to Grant Variances. The Director of Engineering shall make a
recommendation and forward the variance requests to the City Council to decide,
on an individual basis, whether each variance is authorized for each provision
of this article identified in the variance request.
   (c)   Conditions for Granting of Variance. The City Council may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
   (1)   One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
   (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (d)   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the City Council may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of
this article.
   (e)   Right to Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the City
Council under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal in
circuit court pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1120 repealed; new Sec. 6-1120 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1121.   PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the City will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1121 repealed; new Sec. 6-1121 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1122.   ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1122 repealed; new Sec. 6-1122 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-1123.   SEVERABILITY.
   This article shall be and is an enactment of the home rule authority of the
City which is granted by Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution of
1970 and any conflict between this ordinance and state statute or law shall be
in derogation of such statute or law and shall supersede such statute or law,
unless to do so would be otherwise unconstitutional, or otherwise create any
liability on the part of the City, its employees, or officers. If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-1123 repealed; new Sec. 6-1123 enacted; 04/25/23)
ARTICLE II. INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING AGREEMENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
AND RIGHTS-OF-WAYS.
SEC. 6-2100.   GENERAL.
   This article shall govern all Licensing Agreements or other uses of public
property or public rights-of-way in which the Licensee intends to construct,
build, maintain, establish, replace, use or occupy any space or area in, on
above, or under any public property or public rights-of-way or improved public
place (hereinafter collectively referred to as: “public property”).
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2100 repealed; new Sec. 6-2100 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-2101.   TERMS; DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   Block Party shall mean a gathering of persons living within a
residential neighborhood upon a city-owned right-of-way within that
neighborhood, for recreational and/or social purposes.
   (b)   Carnival or Festival shall mean any aggregation of attractions whether
shows, acts, entertainment, sporting activities, games, vending devices,
amusement devices, food and/or drink service or dram shop counters, whether
conducted under one or more managements or independently, which are temporarily
set up or conducted in a location accessible to the public, with or without
admission fee to the aggregation as a whole.
   (c)   High risk shall mean those activities having an increased risk of
injury to persons or property.
   (d)   Improved public property shall mean public ways and public places that
generally contain surface improvements, such as public property containing
buildings, pavement, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters.
   (e)   Parade shall mean a group of persons with or without animals or
vehicles in a public procession or march in or upon city-owned parks, streets,
sidewalks or other public grounds. The term shall include road races, walk-a-
thons, bike-a-thons and similar money-raising events. The term shall not
include picketing or protest demonstrations which do not have the primary
purpose or effect of obstructing the sidewalk or the traveling public thereon.
   (f)   Unimproved public property shall mean public ways and public places
that generally do not contain any type of surface improvements, such as
pavement, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters or that are not paved surfaces.
   (g)   Examples of public property, both improved and unimproved, include
without limitation, the following:
   (1)   Publicly owned land
   (2)   Publicly owned buildings or facilities
   (3)   Alleys, streets, cul-de-sacs
   (4)   Sidewalks
   (5)   Easements
   (6)   Cross walkways
   (7)   Drainage channels
   (8)   All other areas embraced between the property lines and dedicated to
the public use.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2101 repealed; new Sec. 6-2101 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-2102.   LICENSING AGREEMENTS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (a)   With the exception of block parties, any event using public property
shall follow the special events policy of the City Council as adopted from time
to time. Such policy shall require, at a minimum, the execution of a licensing
agreement and provision of a certificate of insurance in the amounts required
in Section
6-2104 below. In addition, other activities which expose the City to liability
as a result of the use of public property shall also require execution of a
licensing agreement and provision of a certificate of insurance in the amounts
required in Section
6-2104 below. Utilities and telecommunications providers shall be required to
execute a licensing agreement one time per calendar year. All such certificates
required herein must name the City as an additional insured. If the event or
use of public property is one which has previously been approved by the City
Council in a prior year, the mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized to sign
subsequent licensing agreements in future years, subsequent to Council review
and disapproval upon report. Nothing herein shall permit the closing of streets
without prior Council approval by special ordinance.
   (b)   Uses of public property which require the issuance of a licensing
agreement and the certificate of insurance include, without limitation, the
following:
   (1)   Driveways
   (2)   Openings in streets
   (3)   Overhead structures or devices
   (4)   Underground devices
   (5)   Underground areas
   (6)   Walkways
   (7)   Parades
   (8)   Food & Bicycle races
   (9)   Temporary mobile food service
   (10)   Festivals
   (11)   Special Events
   (12)   Sidewalk Café
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2102 repealed; new Sec. 6-2102 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-2103.   CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE; FEES. 
   (a)   A current Certificate of Insurance naming the City of Moline,
Illinois, as an “additional insured” must be on file with the city clerk before
a license agreement will be issued or renewed pursuant to Sec.
6-2102 above. Such Certificate shall be in the precise form determined by the
City’s loss control manager, with the precise cancellation language required by
said manager. Additionally, if the use or event involves a state route, the
State of Illinois MUST also be named as an “additional insured.”
   (b)   All related fees must be paid prior to issuance or renewal of a
Licensing Agreement.
   (c)   The city clerk shall keep a copy of the City’s required Certificate of
Liability Insurance form in the office.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2103 repealed; new Sec. 6-2103 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-2104.   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The City attempts to make each user of public property responsible for
the degree of risk to which each use exposes the City. The calculations are not
intended to approach mathematical precision or to be equitable, but are instead
minimum requirements for each particular use of public property. Therefore,
each user of public property shall provide a certificate of insurance in the
amounts specified herein. For any high risk activity, the costs of insurance
will increase commensurate with the degree of risk. For all activities not
specified, the City's loss control manager shall determine the appropriate
amount, subject to written appeal to the city administrator or designee.
   (1)   Nothing herein shall be construed as avoiding or repealing any other
license or permit requirement of the Moline Code of Ordinances and any other
such permits or licenses must be obtained in addition to the insurance herein
required before processing hereunder.
   (2)   The description of public property uses and the insurance requirements
to be provided and noted on the approved Certificates of Insurance which
designates the City as additional insured are as follows:
2. INSURANCE TIERS FOR PARTICULAR ACTIVITIES
Description                              Insurance Requirement
(a)   Run, race, walk-a-thon, bicycle race or balloon race          $1,000,000
in total coverage
(b)   Work on Public Way License                  Insurance $1,000,000 per
occurrence; shall also Indemnify City
(c)   Driveways Permit Class B – Use of Public Way            Insurance
$1,000,000 per occurrence or as directed by the Director of Revenue; applicant
shall also indemnify City
(d)   Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks Non Standard Surface Materials   Insurance
$1,000,000 per occurrence or as required by Commissioner of Transportation,
whichever is greater; shall also indemnify City
(e)   Kiosks                              $500,000
(f)   Canopies/Marquees                        $1,000,000
(g)   Outdoor Café (No Alcohol)                     $500,000
3. INSURANCE TIERS FOR PARTICULAR ACTIVITIES, Continued:
Description                              Insurance Requirement
(h)   Outdoor Café W/Alcohol                     $1,000,000
(i)   Structures On/Under/Over Public Property            $1,000,000 and Owner/
person in possession of property shall indemnify City and hold City harmless
for damages to persons/property relating to structure
(j)   Dumpsters/Roll Off Boxes Permit Requirement            $1,000,000
(k)   Street fair, festival,                          $1,000,000
   street dance, or other event   
   (No alcohol)   
(l)   Street fair, festival,                          $1,000,000 for under 500
persons expected in attendance
   street dance, or other event                  [See subsection 6-2104(a)(3)]
   (w/alcohol)
(m)   Street fair, festival,                        $1,000,000 for 500 to 5,000
persons expected
   street dance or other event                     in attendance [See
subsection 6-2104(a)(3)]
   (w/alcohol)
(n)   Street fair, festival,                        $5,000,000 for more than
5,000 persons expected
   street dance, or other event                  in attendance [See subsection
6-2104(a)(3)]
   (w/alcohol)
(o)   Fire Prevention – Blasting and                   Insurance (must be from
insurance company rating of A-11 or better):
   Explosives            
   $3,000,000/$10,000,000 – Mfg. & Sale of Explosives
   $3,000,000/$10,000,000 – Contractors Activities involving explosives with
City additional insured.
   $3,000,000/$10,000,000 per occurrence – Delivery of Explosives for one (1)
vehicle;
      $1,000,000 per occurrence of each additional vehicle
(p)   Signs – For Obstruction of Streets               Insurance $1,000,000
with indemnification of City
   and Sidewalks (IDOT Permit Requirements)
(q)   Fireworks; Petroleum Products                  $5,000,000
   Motorized Vehicle Races
(r)   Carnivals, Excursion Boats                     $5,000,000
(s)   All other Uses of Public Property    As determined by the Loss Control
Manager, subject to Appeal to City Administrator or designee
   (3)    Attendance required in the immediately proceeding subsections must be
estimated in good faith. Any estimate which is grossly disproportionate to
actual attendance shall be presumed to be a fraud against the City, punished as
an ordinance violation set forth in Sec. 1-1107 of the Code of Ordinances. For
purposes of this section "grossly disproportionate" shall be where the number
of persons is more than three times the attendance estimated by the user at the
time of submission of the required Certificate of Insurance.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2104 repealed; new Sec. 6-2104 enacted; 04/25/23;
Ord. No. 3016- 2024; Sec. 6-2104 amended; 5/7/24)
SEC. 6-2105.   USES OF PARK PROPERTY.
   Uses of park property shall be as determined by the Parks and Recreation
Department, subject to the insurance requirements set forth by such Board.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2105 repealed; new Sec. 6-2105 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-2106.   USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SIDEWALK FOOD AND BEVERAGE
SERVICE.
   Use of public right-of-way for sidewalk food and beverage service shall also
be governed by administrative guidelines pertaining to such use, promulgated by
City staff, which guidelines are authorized by this Code. A copy of the
administrative guidelines may be obtained from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-2106 repealed; new Sec. 6-2106 enacted; 04/25/23)
ARTICLE III. SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
SEC. 6-3100.   PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   (b)   Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This article supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (c)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws
or regulations.    
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3100 repealed; new Sec. 6-3100 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3101.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   (1)   “Act” – Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act.
   (2)   “Antenna” – Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   (3)   “Applicable codes” – Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   (4)   “Applicant” – Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
   (5)   “Application” – A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   (6)   “Collocate” or “collocation” – To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
   (7)   “Communications service” – Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
   (8)   “Communications service provider” – A cable operator, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   (9)   “FCC” – The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   (10)   “Fee” – A one-time charge.
   (11)   “Historic district” or “historic landmark” – A building, property, or
site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   (12)   “Law” – A federal or State statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
   (13)   “Micro wireless facility” – A small wireless facility that is not
larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches
in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven (11) inches.
   (14)   “Municipal utility pole” – A utility pole owned or operated by the
City in public rights-of-way.
   (15)   “Permit” – A written authorization required by the City to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   (16)   “Person” – An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   (17)   “Public safety agency” – The functional division of the federal
government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   (18)   “Rate” – A recurring charge.
   (19)   “Right-of-way” – The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for
compatible use. Right-of-way does not include City-owned aerial lines.
   (20)   “Small wireless facility” – A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included
in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   (21)   “Utility pole” – A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or
in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   (22)   “Wireless facility” – Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or
within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities,
coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or
utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
   (23)   “Wireless infrastructure provider” – Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   (24)   “Wireless provider” – A wireless infrastructure provider or a
wireless services provider.
   (25)   “Wireless services” – Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   (26)   “Wireless services provider” – A person who provides wireless
services.
   (27)   “Wireless support structure” – A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3101 repealed; new Sec. 6-3101 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3102.   REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (a)   Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided for in
applications including requested variations from the requirements of this
article as specified herein, but not subject to zoning review or approval if
they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii)
outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or
industrial use.
   (b)   Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
   (1)   Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
      a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed; this should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed, to include dimensional details of small
wireless facilities and mounting hardware used to attach equipment to the
utility pole or small wireless support structure;
      d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
      f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
      g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      h.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by the City, the wireless provider shall be
required to enter into a pole usage agreement pursuant to this article.
      i.   Any other documentation and materials identified in Section
6-1103 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (2)   Application Process. The City shall process applications as follows:
      a.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      b.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
         However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy-five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this article.
      c.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
         However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
         The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this article.
      d.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this article.
         If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the wireless provider.
         The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
         The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and
resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The City shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure
to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City’s review period.
         The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
         Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
      e.   Pole Attachment Agreement. Within thirty (30) days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
City and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the City for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by
the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless
facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter
into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
   (3)   Completeness of Application. Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the City shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the City's permit application form are submitted by the applicant
to the City.
      Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice
of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
   (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
      a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or
      b.   A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
   (5)   Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
Application fees for a consolidated application are set forth in subsection (d)
below. If a single permit is issued, the “annual recurring rate” charged will
be per facility, as set forth in subsection (g) below.
      If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City
may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   (6)   Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of
five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this article.
      If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable City code provisions or regulations
in effect at the time of renewal.
   (7)   Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by:
      a.   Delivering a hard copy either by personal delivery at the City’s
designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by
overnight courier delivery service; and
      b.   Delivering an electronic copy by electronic mail to the address
provided on the application.
   (c)   Collocation Requirements and Conditions. 
   (1)   Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (2)   Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (3)   No Interference with Public Safety Communication Frequencies. The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
      A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type
and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on
such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (4)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local
code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that
are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in any City
ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (7)   Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
(100) feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
      If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (8)   Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
      a.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
three hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
      b.   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
   (9)   Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for
a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall
apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in Section
6-1120.
   (10)   Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (11)   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   (12)   Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
   (13)   Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (14)   Cooperation. As a condition of any permit for installation of a new
pole, small wireless support structure, or other above-ground facility granted
pursuant to this article, permittees shall be required to cooperate with the
City and other small wireless providers in collocating additional small
wireless facilities on poles and small wireless support structures owned by the
permittee, provided that such proposed additional small wireless provider has
been issued permits for that location by the City as described herein. All
permittees shall exercise good faith in collocating other small wireless
providers regarding sharing of the permitted site, provided that such shared
use does not give rise to a substantial technical level of impairment of the
ability to provide the permitted use (i.e., significant interference in
broadcast capabilities as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial
burden). Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to
evaluate the feasibility of sharing utility poles or small wireless
infrastructure. In the event that a dispute arises as to whether a permittee
has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the City may require a
third-party technical study at the expense of the applicant, the permittee, or
both.
   (d)   Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
   (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one (1) small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
   (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
   (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section must be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees are non-refundable.
   (4)   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      a.   routine maintenance;
      b.   the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent
with subsection d. under the section titled “Application Requirements;” or
      c.   the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
   (e)   Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this article authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
   (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
   (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   (3)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section
16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this
article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
      For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in Section
3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a
State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service, or (b) to
obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate
communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this
article.
   (f)    Pre-Existing Agreements. Existing agreements between the City and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant
to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article.
   (g)    Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the City an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i.) two hundred dollars ($200) per
year, or (ii.) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the City utility pole.
   If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (h)    Obsolescence, Abandonment, and Removal. Any small wireless facility
that is no longer needed or is not operational shall be reported immediately by
the small wireless provider to the City. Any obsolete or nonoperational small
wireless facilities shall be removed within ninety (90) days following notice
to the City by the provider. A small wireless facility that is not operated for
a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless
provider of the abandonment.
   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days
of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3102 repealed; new Sec. 6-3102 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3103.   DESIGN AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Design Standards. In addition to any other applicable design standards
as set forth in the applicable codes and ordinances or imposed by any other law
or regulations, a wireless provider shall comply with the following design
standards:
   (1)   Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances, i.e. cabinet,
controller, etc., are to be installed, screening must be installed to minimize
the visibility of such equipment or appurtenance and shall not be permitted to
obstruct sight lines or to create other traffic or safety problems.
   (2)   Color and Stealth. All small wireless facilities, including all
related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the
surroundings of the utility pole, wireless support structure, or other
structure on which such facility or equipment is mounted, placed, or
collocated. The color must be comprised of non-reflective materials which blend
with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. The
wireless provider shall use good faith efforts to employ reasonable stealth
techniques to conceal the appearance of a small wireless facility or its
related equipment and appurtenances.
   (3)   Utility Poles; Wireless Support Structures; Extensions. Any utility
pole extension or wireless support structure extension shall blend with the
color of the utility pole or wireless support structure upon which the
extension is mounted. Any new utility pole or replacement utility pole should
be metallic unless otherwise approved by the City, and shall blend with the
color, style, and structure of any surrounding utility poles or wireless
support structures.
   (4)   Size. The wireless provider shall make good faith efforts to ensure
the silhouette of the small wireless facility and its related equipment and
appurtenances are reduced to minimize visual impact.
   (5)   Illumination. Small wireless facilities shall not be illuminated
unless required by law.
   (6)   Generators and Backup Battery. Generators are not permitted for small
wireless facilities. All proposed battery backups must be reviewed and approved
by the City.
   (b)   Safety Standards. In addition to any other applicable safety standards
as set forth in the applicable codes and ordinances or imposed by any other law
or regulations, a wireless provider shall comply with the following safety
standards:
   (1)   A small wireless facility and any related equipment or appurtenance
shall not be collocated in a manner so as to obstruct or interfere with a
motorist’s view of roadways, nor shall any small wireless facility and any
related equipment or appurtenance be collocated in a manner which obstructs the
view of a motorist at an intersection. Further, wireless providers are
encouraged and should allow for the full use of the public right-of-way by
pedestrians, bicycles, and other users.
   (2)   Any and all transmission cables and cable trays deployed horizontally
above the ground between any number of small wireless facilities and its
equipment, or between any number of small wireless facilities, or between any
number of small wireless facilities’ equipment, shall be at least eight (8)
feet above ground at all points.
   (3)   Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the small
wireless facility must be installed in accordance with the national electrical
code, national electrical safety code, or any other applicable code adopted by
the City and in force at the time of the installation of the small wireless
facility. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover. No wiring or
cabling serving the facility will be allowed to interfere with any existing
uses.
   (4)   No signage shall be permitted on any small wireless facility or its
related equipment or appurtenances, other than signs that are required for
public safety purposes, by law, or by the FCC, FAA, or other similar
governmental agency.
   (5)   The location of wireless support structures, replacement poles, and/or
any new poles shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), City
construction standards, and State and federal regulations in order to provide a
clear and safe passage with the public right-of-way.
   (6)   No small wireless facilities or related equipment shall be operated to
produce noise levels above forty (40) decibels as measured form the nearest
property line to which the small wireless facility is located.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3103 repealed; new Sec. 6-3103 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3104.   DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Rock Island County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal
utility poles within the right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating
person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred
dollars ($200) per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined
upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3104 repealed; new Sec. 6-3104 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3105.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3105 repealed; new Sec. 6-3105 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3106.   INSURANCE.
   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, insurance as required in Section
6-1107.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3106 repealed; new Sec. 6-3106 enacted; 04/25/23)
SEC. 6-3107.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this article is severable.
(Ord. No. 3016-2023; Sec. 6-3107 repealed; new Sec. 6-3107 enacted; 04/25/23)
CHAPTER 7
ANIMALS AND FOWL
   Art. I.    In General, §7-1100 - §7-1118
   Art. II.    Dogs and Cats
      Div. 1. In General, §7-2100 - §7-2114
      Div. 2. Registration, §7-2200
      Div. 3. Rabies Control, §7-2300 - §7-2304
   Art. III.    Impoundment, §7-3100 - §7-3104
   Art. IV.    Kennels and Pet Shops, §7-4100 - §7-4110
   Art. V.    Enforcement
      Div. 1. Community Service Section, §7-5100 - §7-5102
      Div. 2. General Provisions, §7-5200 - §7-5202
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 7-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have, unless the context
indicates otherwise, the meaning ascribed to them:
   (1)   Animal means any animal, poultry, bird, reptile or any other dumb
creature, but does not include any human being.
   (2)   Animal control facility means any facility operated by or under
contract for the state of Illinois, Rock Island County, or the City of Moline,
Illinois for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless,
abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals, and also means any
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1994 (225
ILCS 115/1 et seq.) and amendments thereto which operates for the above
mentioned purpose in addition to its customary purposes.
   (3)   Animal shelter means a facility operated, owned or maintained by a
duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other non-profit
organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of animals. “Animal shelter” also means any
veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians
licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act of 1994 (225
ILCS 115/1 et seq.) and amendments thereto which operates for the above-
mentioned purpose in addition to its customary purposes.
   (4)   Cat , except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals of
the feline species of the age of four (4) months or older.
   (5)   Chicken shall mean a female member (hen) of the subspecies Gallus
Gallus Domesticas, a domesticated fowl.
   (6)   Chicken enclosure shall mean a structure for housing and sheltering of
hens. A chicken enclosure shall mean and include any chicken coop, henhouse,
chicken tractor or poultry shed that is constructed and maintained pursuant to
the provisions of 7-1104A(d) below.
   (7)   Chicken pen shall mean a wire-enclosed area that is attached to a
chicken enclosure for the purpose of allowing hens to leave the chicken
enclosure and walk or run about while remaining confined in an enclosed,
predator-safe environment.
   (8)   Chief of police means the chief of the City of Moline police
department or his or her designee.
   (9)   City means the City of Moline, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
   (10)   City Code means the City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (11)   Community service officer means any employee of the community service
section of the City of Moline police department having custody and control of
the City’s animal control facility and of animals therein, and shall include
his or her designees.
   (12)   Community service section means the community service section of the
City of Moline police department.
   (13)   Confine, confined or confinement means the restriction of an animal
at all times by such animal’s owner or keeper to an escape-proof building or
other enclosure separate from other animals and the public.
   (14)   Dangerous animal means any animal, as defined above, of any species
considered to be ferocious, mischievous or intractable at common law, including
lions, tigers, other jungle, desert or mountain cats, bears, elephants, wolves,
foxes, raccoons, monkeys, apes, poisonous or constrictor snakes or lizards and
shall also mean any animal of any other species, but excluding dogs, known to
its owner to be dangerous or any animal, which has given its owner or possessor
reason to know that it is dangerous.
   (15)   Dangerous dog means any individual dog which when either unmuzzled,
unleashed or unattended by its owner or keeper, or a member of the owner or
keeper’s family, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches, in an apparent
attitude of attack, any person upon a street, sidewalk or any public grounds or
places, or any property other than the property of the animal’s owner or
keeper.
   (16)   Department means the City of Moline police department.
   (17)   Dog , except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals
of the canine species of the age of four (4) months or older.
   (18)   Enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six (6) feet in
height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other
measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering, and
which shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top
and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the
enclosure.
   (19)   Found to be a dangerous dog means that the chief of police has, after
notice and an opportunity to be heard by the dog’s owner or keeper, determined
that the dog is a “dangerous dog” as defined in this section and has entered a
written order based on that determination.
   (20)   Found to be a vicious dog means that the chief of police has, after
notice and an opportunity to be heard by the dog’s owner or keeper, determined
that the dog is a “vicious dog” as defined in this section and has entered a
written order based on that determination.
   (21)   Guard or sentry dog means a dog specifically trained and used
primarily to perform guard, sentry or other security duty including, without
limitation, defending, patrolling, or protecting property, life or safety, at a
commercial establishment; however, this definition does not include personally
owned pets kept on private residential property that also provide security.
   (22)   Guide or support dog means a dog specifically trained and used to
perform services for the sight or hearing impaired or to provide support
services for a disabled person.
   (23)   Has been bitten means that a person or animal has been seized with
the teeth or jaws of another animal so that the person or animal seized has
been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and further means and includes any
contact of animal saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin of the person
or animal.
   (24)   Hen shall mean a female member of the subspecies Gallus Domesticas, a
domesticated fowl.
   (25)   Impound, impounded or impoundment means confinement at the City of
Moline animal control facility or at a licensed veterinarian's place of
business.
   (26)   Inoculation means the injection, subcutaneously or in such other
manner as may be approved by the Illinois Department of Agriculture of an
antirabies vaccine meeting standards approved by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture or by the United States Department of Agriculture.
   (27)   Kennel operator means any person who operates an establishment, other
than an animal control facility, veterinary hospital, or animal shelter, where
dogs or dogs and cats are maintained for boarding, training or similar purposes
for a fee or compensation; or who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers
for adoption with or without charge dogs or dogs and cats which he has produced
and raised. A person who owns, has possession of, or harbors four (4) or less
females capable of reproduction, shall not be considered a kennel operator.
   (28)   Leash means a cord, rope, strap or chain no longer than six (6) feet
in length which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of an
animal and shall be of sufficient strength to keep the animal under control.
   (29)   Licensed veterinarian means a veterinarian duly licensed as such
under the laws of the State of Illinois or of any other state which, by law,
provides for the licensing of veterinarians.
   (30)   Muzzled means the practice of preventing an animal from opening its
mouth fully by means of any commercially manufactured muzzle or other humane
device approved by a community service officer.
   (31)   One-family detached dwelling shall mean a property or a zoned lot
that has a one-family detached dwelling (single family residence) located on
that property or zoned lot. See Section
7-1104A(c) below.
   (32)   Owner or keeper means and includes any person, including any
individual, partnership, society, association, corporation, firm or other legal
entity, or any public or private institution, who:
      a.   Has a right of property in an animal;
      b.   Harbors or keeps an animal;
      c.   Has an animal in the person’s care;
      d.   Acts as custodian of an animal; or
      e.   Knowingly suffers or permits any dog or cat to remain on or about
any premises within the City under said person’s charge or control.
   (33)   Peace officer means any City of Moline police officer or any other
law enforcement officer with authority to act within the jurisdiction of the
City.
   (34)   Pet shop operator means any person who sells, offers to sell,
exchange, or offers for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs, cats,
birds, fish, reptiles, or other animals customarily obtained as pets in the
state of Illinois. However, a person who sells only such animals that he has
produced and raised shall not be considered a pet shop operator under this
chapter and a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or
veterinarians licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice Act
of 1994 (224 ILCS 115/1 et seq.) and amendments thereto shall not be considered
a pet shop operator under this chapter.
   (35)   Run line means the system of tying a dog in place with either rope or
chain having a tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds and
which allows the dog freedom of movement only on the property of the dog’s
owner or keeper.
   (36)   Running at large or at large means any time an animal is:
      a.   off its owner or keeper’s property, is not confined within a vehicle
being driven or parked upon the street while subject to the control of a
competent person, and is not controlled by a leash and "at heel" beside a
competent person to whose commands the animal is obedient; or
      b.   on its owner or keeper’s property without being contained on the
property by means of a fence, chain, leash, competent supervision, or other
visible means of restraint sufficient to protect persons or animals not on that
property.
   (37)   Urban hen shall mean a hen kept on the premises of a property
pursuant to a license issued by the City under this chapter.
   (38)   Vicious dog means:
      a.   Any individual dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a human
being or other animal either on public or private property;
      b.   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of humans or domestic animals;
      c.   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks
upon humans or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with
special equipment;
      d.   Any individual dog that attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation; or
      e.   Any individual dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog upon
three (3) separate occasions by a court or an administrative hearing unit of
competent jurisdiction as set forth in this chapter.
   However, no dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or keeper, or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained dog for law
enforcement duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is
specific as to breed.
   (39)   Wild animal means any animal ferae naturae or naturally wild.
(Ord. No. 3021-2016; Sec. 7-1100, new subsections (5), (6), (7), (24), (31) and
(37) enacted and remaining subsections consecutively renumbered; 07/12/16.
Note: original Ord. No. 3021-2016 contained scrivener’s errors in that Sec. 7-
1100 was listed as Sec. 7-1101 and the new subsection (37) was listed as (36);
those scrivener’s error corrected herein and in the ordinance on file in the
City Clerk’s office.)
SEC. 7-1101.   CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person shall commit cruelty to any animal. A person commits cruelty
to animals by knowingly:
   (1)   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, starving, or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or
knowingly allowing the same to be done;
   (2)   Failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with a sufficient quantity of good quality,
wholesome food to maintain proper body weight and good general health, kept in
a suitable container within viewable range and in an area to prevent tampering,
contamination or spillage.
   (3)   Failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with a sufficient quantity of good quality,
wholesome water kept in an area to prevent contamination and spillage, and
replaced with fresh water at least once per day.
   (4)   Failing to provide any animal in a person’s charge or custody, as
owner or keeper or otherwise, with shelter constructed in a manner to assure
protection from the elements.
   (5)   Failing to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;
   (6)   Abandoning any animal in an animal control facility, animal shelter,
veterinary clinic or on the premises of another or any place where an animal
may become a public charge or may suffer hunger, injury, or exposure;
   (7)   Failing to provide humane care and treatment, including keeping the
animal in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner;
   (8)   Selling, offering for sale, bartering, or giving away as a pet or
novelty any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, or other fowl or any other animal
which has been dyed, colored, or otherwise treated to impart an artificial
color thereto;
   (9)   Poisoning or causing to be poisoned any dog or other domestic animal
except by a licensed veterinarian or humane shelter or pound;
   (10)   Confining an animal in such a manner so that it is forced to stand,
lie or sit in its own excrement;
   (11)   Failing to provide living quarters, in addition to the shelter
required by Section
7-1101(4), of sufficient size for the animal to exercise and move about;
   (12)   Tethering an animal on a leash or a weight or in such a manner that
prevents the animal from moving freely without entanglement;
   (13)   Killing or injuring, or attempting to kill or injure, any domestic
animal;
   (14)   Confining or allowing any animal to remain in a motor vehicle in such
a manner that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure
to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or
other protection from such heat or cold. If a community service officer or
peace officer has probable cause to believe that an animal has been subjected
to cruelty as defined in this subsection, and that the animal’s life, safety or
health is in danger, the community service officer or peace officer has
authority to enter the motor vehicle containing such animal by any reasonable
means under the circumstances after making a reasonable attempt to locate the
person confining or allowing the animal to remain in the vehicle.
   (15)   Cropping an animal’s ear, docking an animal’s tail or performing
other surgeries or surgical-type procedures, except as performed by a licensed
veterinarian; or
   (16)   Instigating, causing, procuring or assisting in any indecent or
immoral show or exhibition of any animal.
   (b)   Any person who causes, instigates, permits, facilitates, aids, abets,
or encourages any violation of this section shall be guilty of the violation of
cruelty to animals.
   (c)   If a community service officer or peace officer has probable cause to
believe that an animal has been subjected to cruelty as defined in subsection
(a) above, and that the animal’s life, safety or health is in danger, the
community service officer or peace officer may seize and impound the animal,
may give the animal veterinary or other care at the owner or keeper’s expense,
and may euthanize the animal at the owner or keeper’s expense when, in the
judgment of the community service officer or a licensed veterinarian,
euthanasia is necessary to prevent additional suffering and alternative avenues
of alleviating suffering have been exhausted or eliminated as futile. Once an
animal subjected to cruelty but not subject to euthanasia as stated above has
been impounded, the redemption procedures set forth in Article III shall apply.
SEC. 7-1102.   ANIMALS FOR USE IN ENTERTAINMENT.
   (a)   Prohibited acts .
   (1)    No person may own, capture, breed, train, or lease any animal which
he or she knows or should know is intended for use in any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between
such animal and any other animal or human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purpose of sport, wagering, or entertainment.
   (2)   No person shall promote, conduct, carry on, advertise, collect money
for or in any other manner assist or aid in the presentation for purposes of
sport, wagering, or entertainment, any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals or any animal and
human, or the intentional killing of any animal.
   (3)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, ship, transport, or otherwise
move, or deliver or receive any animal which he or she knows or should know has
been captured, bred, or trained, or will be used, to fight another animal or
human or be intentionally killed, for the purpose of sport, wagering, or
entertainment.
   (4)   No person shall manufacture for sale, shipment, transportation or
delivery any device or equipment which the person knows or should know is
intended for use in any show, exhibition, program, or other activity featuring
or otherwise involving a fight between two (2) or more animals, or any human
and animal, or the intentional killing of any animal for purposes of sport,
wagering or entertainment.
   (5)   No person shall own, possess, sell or offer for sale, ship, transport,
or otherwise move any equipment or device which such person knows or should
know is intended for use in connection with any show, exhibition, program, or
activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two (2) or more
animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any animal for
purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
   (6)   No person shall make available any site, structure, or facility,
whether enclosed or not, which he or she knows or should know is intended to be
used for the purpose of conducting any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals, or any animal and
human, or the intentional killing of any animal.
   (7)   No person shall attend or otherwise patronize any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two
(2) or more animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
   (8)   No person shall tie or attach or fasten any live animal to any machine
or device propelled by any power for the purpose of causing such animal to be
pursued by a dog or dogs. This subsection (8) shall apply only when such dog is
intended to be used in a dog fight.
   (b)   Seizure and disposition of animals and other items illegally used in
entertainment .
   (1)   The department may seize and impound any and all animals and seize any
equipment, money or other proceeds utilized in or directly related to any
violation of this section. Animals and other items impounded or seized shall be
held for evidence and for final disposition by the court or an administrative
hearing unit of appropriate jurisdiction.
   (2)   The department shall give notice to the person from whom the animals,
equipment, money or other proceeds were seized pursuant to subsection (b)(1)
above, or to the person in possession as owner, or lessee of the premises where
said items were found, or if the names of any of these persons are unknown to
the department upon reasonable inquiry, by posting notice upon the outer door
of the premises. The notice shall be directed to any person claiming an
interest in the property or money, to come before the court on a specified
date, not less than three (3) days from the date of the notice, and to show
cause, if any, why the items should not be sold at public auction as
contraband, or otherwise be forfeited as contraband to the City for disposition
as authorized by this section.
   (3)   If in the court’s or hearing unit’s opinion, after hearing, or upon
the default of those notified to appear, it appears to the court or hearing
unit that the items seized are in fact contraband, the court or hearing unit
shall order disposition of said items in one or more of the following ways:
      a.   Any animals forfeited under this section shall be either humanely
euthanized, offered for adoption, or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
any controlling provision of the City Code or state law.
      b.   Any money forfeited under this section shall be forfeited to the
City treasury.
      c.   Any other items forfeited under this section shall be sold at public
auction to the highest bidder for cash, and the proceeds paid into the City
treasury.
SEC. 7-1103.   SHOOTING OR MOLESTING BIRDS.
   No person shall shoot or in any manner molest any bird. No person shall rob
any bird’s nest of its contents unless done in furtherance of removing a nest
from a house or other structure on private property when such nest has become a
nuisance.
SEC. 7-1104.   LIVESTOCK AND DOMESTIC FOWL PROHIBITED IN CITY; RUNNING-AT-
LARGE; NUISANCE.
   (a)   No person shall keep any cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, swine,
other beasts of burden related to the foregoing, or domestic fowl of the
species of geese, ducks, turkeys, guinea hens or others, at any place or upon
any premises in the City, excepting that:
   (1)   horses shall be permitted to be kept upon premises for which a special
use has been granted by the City Council to permit a riding stable provided any
and all conditions of such special use are fully complied with at all times;
and
   (2)   hens shall be permitted upon premises for which a license has been
issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of Sec.
7-1104A below.
   No person shall permit any of the above enumerated animals to run at large
in the City. Any animals found within the City in violation of this section may
be subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article III
of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies, the
animals and fowl prohibited from being kept in the City or running at large in
the City by subsection (a) are hereby declared to be nuisances and may be
abated pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21 of the City Code and amendments thereto.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the business
premises of any duly licensed animal control facility, animal shelter or
licensed veterinarian.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the premises of any
duly-licensed business engaged in the sale of fowl as long as the following
conditions are met:
   (1)   Such fowl is not kept on the sales floor or retail area of the
premises;
   (2)   The purchaser of such fowl, excluding hens, must sign a form verifying
that he does not reside within the city limits of the City of Moline and that
he will keep the fowl outside the City’s limits and use the fowl for
agricultural purposes only.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-06; new Sec. 7-1104(d) enacted; 05/20/03; Ord. No. 3021-2016;
Sec. 7-1104(d) repealed; new Sec. 7-1104(d) enacted; 07/12/16)
SEC. 7-1104A.   URBAN HENS.
   (a)   License required. 
   (1)   No person shall own, raise, harbor or keep any hens within the City
without having first obtained a valid urban hen license from the City’s
accounts and finance officer or his designee pursuant to the provisions of this
section. The license shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this
section and any additional conditions deemed necessary by the City Council to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (2)   License Application. Any person desiring to own, raise, harbor or keep
hens within the City shall submit a written license application on a form
provided by the City’s accounts and finance officer or his designee. Such
application shall include the applicant’s name, address, telephone number and
email address (if applicable), the number of hens to be kept on the premises
address, and the applicant’s signature certifying the validity of the
information provided therein and agreement to keep the hens in compliance with
the provisions of this section and all related City ordinances.
   (3)   Licensing Requirements. The requirements for issuance of a license
include the following.
      a.   Fee: the fee to obtain a license is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
The license shall expire July 31 of each year and shall be renewed before
August 1 of each year.
      b.   Any and all judgments in the City’s favor and against the property
owner of the premises have been paid in full, and in the event the applicant is
a tenant or leaseholder of the premises, any and all judgments in the City’s
favor and against said applicant have been paid in full.
      c.   The premises to be licensed shall be zoned as and contain only a
one-family detached dwelling, occupied and used as such by the licensee.
      d.   The applicant has successfully completed an approved class in
raising hens in an urban setting. The accounts and finance officer or his
designee shall maintain a current list of such approved classes.
   If the accounts and finance officer or his designee finds that all licensing
requirements have been met, the officer shall issue the license to the
applicant.
   (4)   Licensing Regulations. The following licensing regulations shall be
additional requirements of the licensee.
      a.   Renewal. The annual renewal fee for a license is twenty-five dollars
($25.00). If the license is not renewed before August 1 of the expiration year,
the owner or occupant of the premises for which the license was issued shall
remove the hens from the City within thirty (30) days of the license
expiration.
      b.   Non-commercial use only. Issuance of a license shall not allow the
licensee to engage in hen breeding, egg production, fertilizer production,
sales, display, or other related activity for commercial purposes.
      c.   Non-transferable. No license issued pursuant to this section shall
be transferable from one person to another or from one premises to another.
      d.   The licensee shall keep the license on the licensed premises and
provide proof of same upon request by any officer of the City.
   (5)   Denial, suspension, revocation, non-renewal. The accounts and finance
officer or his designee may deny, suspend, revoke or decline to renew any
issued license for any of the following reasons.
      a.   False statements on any application or in response to requests for
information by the City.
      b.   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection or renewal
fee required by this section.
      c.   Failure to comply with any notice of violation issued by the City
pursuant to this section within the time specified therein.
      d.   Failure to comply with any provisions of this section.
   Notice of denial, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a license shall
be in writing, be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service on the license holder or other resident at the address
provided on the application, and state the reason or reasons for said action.
   (6)   Effect of denial or revocation.
      a.   If a license is either denied or revoked, the applicant may not re-
apply for a new license for a period of one (1) year from the date of the
denial or revocation.
      b.   If the license is revoked, the owner or occupant of the premises for
which the license was issued shall remove the hens from the City within thirty
(30) days of the license revocation.
   (7)   Appeals. The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five
(5) working days after denial or receipt of the notice of revocation from the
accounts and finance officer or his designee, the license applicant or holder
files a written request for a public hearing on the accounts and finance
officer’s or designee’s action. Public hearing shall be conducted before the
city administrator or his designee on whether a license should be denied,
reinstated or revoked, as the case may be. The city administrator or his
designee may order the license issued or reinstated either conditionally or
unconditionally, or revoke the license. Ten (10) days notice of the time and
place of the public hearing shall be given to the license holder, who shall
have an opportunity to appear before the city administrator or his designee and
present any evidence or arguments the license holder may have as to why the
action taken by the accounts and finance officer or his designee should not be
approved by the city administrator or his designee.
   (b)   Number and type of hens allowed. No more than six (6) hens shall be
allowed on any licensed premises. Roosters (male chickens) are prohibited.
   (c)   Zoning; One-Family Detached Dwellings.
   (1)   The keeping of hens shall be restricted to properties zoned as one-
family detached dwellings (single family residences) as defined by
Chapter 35 of the City Code, Sec.
35-3405(a), which states, in part: “a dwelling designed for and occupied by not
more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any
other dwelling unit; this dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached
single-family residence which is located on an individual lot or within a group
development; this dwelling unit may not be split into two or more residences.”
   (2)   The provisions of this Sec.
7-1104A shall supersede any conflicting provisions of
Chapter 35, “Zoning and Land Development,” of the City Code, including Sec.
35-3406(f), “Husbandry.”
   (d)   Enclosures; confinement.  Chicken enclosures and chicken pens shall be
designed, constructed and well maintained to provide safe and healthy living
conditions for the hens while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in
the neighborhood.
   (1)   Hens must be kept in a chicken enclosure, chicken pen, or fenced area
at all times. Hens shall be secured within a chicken enclosure during non-
daylight hours.
   (2)   Chicken enclosures and chickens pens shall be located in the rear yard
of a premises only, as defined by
Chapter 35 of the City Code, Sec.
35-1203(385), “yard, rear.” Or, if no rear yard meets the setback requirements
of subsection (d)(3) below, then chicken enclosures and chicken pens may be
located in a side yard, as defined by
Chapter 35 of the City Code, Sec.
35-1203(387), “yard, side,” as long as the setbacks in subsection (d)(3) below
are met.
   (3)   The minimum setback for placement shall be five (5) feet from the
premises property lines and twenty-five (25) feet from any residential
dwelling, church, school or place of business.
   (4)   Chicken enclosures shall meet the following standards:
      a.   a minimum of four (4) square feet per hen;
      b.   be constructed of wood or other similar materials and enclosed on
all sides with a roof, door(s) and secure latching mechanisms for any doors or
windows;
      c.   include predator/bird proof wire of less than one (1) inch openings
for any doors or windows;
      d.   provide adequate ventilation and protection from the elements;
      e.   contain an independent electric/heat source without the use of
extension cords;
      f.   be resistant to rodents and predators, including dogs and cats.
   (5)   Chicken pens shall meet the following guidelines:
      a.   be fully enclosed with a roof and be covered with predator/bird
proof wire or aviary netting;
      b.   be resistant to rodents and predators, including dogs and cats.
   (6)   The materials used in making chicken enclosures and chicken pens shall
be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof(s) has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited.
   (7)   A City building permit is not required unless the total size of the
chicken enclosure will exceed 120 square feet, thereby meeting the definition
of a major accessory structure as defined in Sec.
35-3201(b) of the City Code.
   (e)   Odor and noise impacts.
   (1)   Odors from hens, hen manure or other hen related substances shall not
be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the licensed premises. Chicken
enclosures and chicken pens shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary
condition. Any accumulation of waste, uneaten or discarded feed, and fallen
feathers shall be collected and discarded in a sanitary manner and with such
frequency as is necessary to ensure that related odors are not detectable from
adjacent properties and that any such accumulation does not constitute a
nuisance as defined in Sec.
7-1112(b), “Animal Waste on Private Property,” and/or Sec.
21-1100, “Nuisances in General; Definitions,” of the City Code. Cleaning of
chicken enclosures and chicken pens shall be done in such a manner which
prevents any animal waste runoff onto public right-of-way and which complies
with the provisions set forth in the City’s Stormwater Utility Ordinance,
Chapter 34 of the City Code.
   (2)   Noise from hens shall not be loud enough beyond the property lines of
the licensed premises on which hens are kept so as to disturb the public peace
and quiet.
   (f)   Feed and water.   Hens shall be provided with access to feed and clean
water at all times. Feed must be stored in secure containers and in a secure
location until it is placed for consumption by the hens. Feed must be stored in
a manner so that it is not available to rodents, wild birds, predators or other
pests.
   (g)   Waste storage and removal.   
   (1)   Any manure that is kept on the licensed premises for compost and
fertilizer use must be stored in a secure enclosed container or area to ensure
that it is not visible from adjacent properties, that related odors are not
detectable from adjacent properties, and that any such accumulation does not
constitute a nuisance as defined in Sec.
7-1112(b) and/or Sec.
21-1100 of the City Code. All other manure not used for composting or
fertilizing shall be removed.
   (2)   No more than three (3) cubic feet of manure shall be stored on the
licensed premises.
   (3)   See also subsection (e)(1) above.
   (h)   Hens at large. The licensee shall not allow the licensee’s hens to
roam off the licensed premises.
   (i)   Unlawful acts.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, raise, harbor or keep hens
in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of the
City Code.
   (2)   No person shall keep hens inside a one-family detached dwelling unit,
multi-family dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.
   (3)   No person shall keep hens on a vacant or uninhabited property within
the City of Moline.
   (4)   No person shall keep a rooster within the City of Moline.
   (5)   No person shall slaughter any hen or rooster within the City of
Moline.
   (6)   Should a dog or cat or other domesticated animal kill a hen on or off
the licensed premises, said animal shall not be considered a dangerous or
aggressive animal for that reason alone, and said action will not be cause for
the City to enforce its animal control provisions.
   (j)   Nuisance violation.
   (1)   Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health
hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance
abatement provisions of the City Code. Penalty for violation of any part of
this section shall be as provided in Sec.
1-1107 of the Code.
   (2)   Should the City order abatement of the hens from the licensed premises
as a result of a nuisance violation, neither the City of Moline nor the County
of Rock Island shall be responsible for removal, temporary keeping or
relocating of the hens.
(Ord. No. 3021-2016; new Sec. 7-1104A “URBAN HENS” enacted; 07/12/16)
SEC. 7-1105.   BEEKEEPING.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have,
unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning ascribed to them:
   (1)   Apiary shall mean a place where bee colonies are kept.
   (2)   Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis
Mellifera Species.
   (3)   Colony shall mean a hive and its equipment and appurtenances,
including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood.
   (4)   Hive shall mean a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
   (b)   License required. 
   (1)   No person shall keep bees within the City without having first
obtained a valid beekeeping license from the City’s accounts and finance
officer or his designee pursuant to the provisions of this section. The license
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this section and any additional
conditions deemed necessary by the City Council to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (2)   License Application. Any person desiring to keep bees within the City
shall submit a written license application on a form provided by the City’s
accounts and finance officer or his designee. Such application shall include
the applicant’s name, address, telephone number and email address (if
applicable), the number of hives to be kept on the premises address, and the
applicant’s signature certifying the validity of the information provided
therein and agreement to keep bees in compliance with the provisions of this
section and all related City ordinances.
      a.   The applicant shall also submit the following with the application
form:
         1.   Proof of registration of the colonies with the State of Illinois
Department of Agriculture; and
         2.   Fee: payment of the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) license fee. The
license shall expire March 31 of each year and shall be renewed before April 1
of each year; and
         3.   A scaled site plan of the proposed apiary showing placement of
the apiary and compliance with all applicable requirements outlined in this
section.
      b.   Before a license will issue, any and all judgments in the City’s
favor and against the property owner of the premises must be paid in full, and
in the event the applicant is a tenant or leaseholder of the premises, any and
all judgments in the City’s favor and against said applicant must be paid in
full.
      If the accounts and finance officer or his designee finds that all
licensing requirements have been met, the officer shall issue the license to
the applicant.
   (c)   Location, Construction and Maintenance of Apiaries.  
   (1)   The keeping of bees shall be restricted to premises that are zoned as
one-family detached dwellings (single family residences) as defined by
Chapter 35 of the City Code, Sec.
35-3405(a), which states, in part: “a dwelling designed for and occupied by not
more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any
other dwelling unit; this dwelling unit type consists of a fully detached
single-family residence which is located on an individual lot or within a group
development; this dwelling unit may not be split into two or more residences.”
   The provisions of this Sec.
7-1105 shall supersede any conflicting provisions of
Chapter 35, “Zoning and Land Development,” of the City Code, including Sec.
35-3406(f), “Husbandry.”
   (2)   Apiaries shall be located only in a rear or side yard.
   (3)   The minimum setback for placement of apiaries shall be ten (10) feet
from the property lines of the premises.
   (4)   Apiaries may consist of not more than five (5) hives on a licensed
premises consisting of no more than six (6) boxes per hive.
   (5)   All bee colonies must be kept in inspectable type hives with removable
combs, which must be kept in sound and usable condition.
   (6)   All hives shall be enclosed by six foot high solid fencing with a
secure gate and prominent signage warning of the presence of bee hives.
   (7)   Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water within
ten (10) feet of the apiary is available at all times to the bees so that the
bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet water bowls,
birdbaths or other water sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic
pet contact. The water shall be maintained so as not to become stagnant.
   (8)   Adequate techniques in handling bees, such as requeening, and adequate
space in the hive shall be maintained to prevent unprovoked stinging.
   (d)   Licensing Regulations. The following licensing regulations shall be
additional requirements of the licensee.
   (1)   Renewal. The annual renewal fee for a license is twenty-five dollars
($25.00). If the license is not renewed before April 1 of the expiration year,
the owner or occupant of the premises for which the license was issued shall
remove the bees from the City within thirty (30) days of the license
expiration.
   (2)   Non-commercial use only. Issuance of a license shall not allow the
licensee to engage in sales, display, or other related activity related to
beekeeping for commercial purposes.
   (3)   Non-transferable. No license issued pursuant to this section shall be
transferable from one person to another or from one premises to another.
   (4)   The licensee shall keep the license on the licensed premises and
provide proof of same upon request by any officer of the City.
   (e)   Denial, suspension, revocation, non-renewal. The accounts and finance
officer or his designee may deny, suspend, revoke or decline to renew any
issued license for any of the following reasons.
   (1)   False statements on any application or in response to requests for
information by the City.
   (2)   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection or renewal fee
required by this section.
   (3)   Failure to comply with any notice of violation issued by the City
pursuant to this section within the time specified therein.
   (4)   Failure to comply with any provisions of this section.
   Notice of denial, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a license shall
be in writing, be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service on the license holder or other resident at the address
provided on the application, and state the reason or reasons for said action.
   (f)   Effect of denial or revocation.  
   (1)   If a license is either denied or revoked, the applicant may not re-
apply for a new license for a period of one (1) year from the date of the
denial or revocation.
   (2)   If the license is revoked, the owner or occupant of the premises for
which the license was issued shall remove the bees from the City within thirty
(30) days of the license revocation.
   (g)   Appeals. The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five
(5) working days after denial or receipt of the notice of revocation from the
accounts and finance officer or his designee, the license applicant or holder
files a written request for a public hearing on the accounts and finance
officer’s or designee’s action. Public hearing shall be conducted before the
city administrator or his designee on whether a license should be denied,
reinstated or revoked, as the case may be. The city administrator or his
designee may order the license issued or reinstated either conditionally or
unconditionally, or revoke the license. Ten (10) days’ notice of the time and
place of the public hearing shall be given to the license holder, who shall
have an opportunity to appear before the city administrator or his designee and
present any evidence or arguments the license holder may have as to why the
action taken by the accounts and finance officer or his designee should not be
approved by the city administrator or his designee.
   (h)   Nuisance violation.
   (1)   Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health
hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance
abatement provisions of the City Code. Penalty for violation of any part of
this section shall be as provided in Sec.
1-1107 of the Code.
   (2)   Should the City order abatement of the bees from the licensed premises
as a result of a nuisance violation, neither the City of Moline nor the County
of Rock Island shall be responsible for removal, temporary keeping or
relocating of the bees.
(Ord. No. 3032-2018; Sec. 7-1105, “BEEKEEPING WITHIN THE CITY PROHIBITED,”
repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 7-1105 enacted; 08/0718 – allows beekeeping
within the City)
(Ord. No. 3000-2019, Amended; Sec. 7-1105 (b)(2)a.2., (c)(3), (c)(6), (d)(1)
repealed; new subsections (b)(2)a.2., (c)(3), (c)(6), (d)(1) enacted; 01/22/19;
Note: ordinance was adopted, then amended by Council immediately thereafter and
the ordinance number assigned is 3000-2019, Amended)
SEC. 7-1106.   DANGEROUS ANIMALS, IN GENERAL.
   (a)   Except for purposes of a public exhibition upon seven (7) days prior
written notice to and prior written authorization from the chief of police, no
person shall possess any dangerous animal in the City, and no person
shall permit any dangerous animal within the City for such public exhibition to
run at large nor shall any person lead such an animal with a leash, whether the
animal is muzzled or unmuzzled, on any street or in any public place within the
City
   (b)   Any person violating Section
7-1106 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; Sec. 7-1106 (b) repealed; new Sec. 7-1106 enacted; 09/10/
02)
SEC. 7-1107.   IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (a)   Dangerous animals not in compliance with this chapter are subject to
impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this
chapter. If such animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may
be slain or dispatched by any peace officer.
   (b)   In all cases where an animal slain or dispatched pursuant to this
section has bitten any person or animal, it shall be the duty of the community
service officer or peace officer to treat the carcass and head as it would any
animal displaying symptoms of rabies. No peace officer shall shoot an animal in
the head if said animal is displaying symptoms of rabies.
   (c)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating Section
7-1107 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new Sec. 7-1107 (c) enacted; 09/10/02)
SEC. 7-1108.   NUMBER OF RABBITS RESTRICTED.
   (a)   The total number of rabbits over six (6) weeks old that may be
maintained outdoors on any residential property is two (2).
   (b)   Rabbits found within the City in violation of this section are subject
to impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this
chapter.
SEC. 7-1109.   WILD ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep, harbor, possess, act as custodian or have a right of
property in a wild animal. Appropriately licensed zoos, veterinary hospitals or
clinics, animal control facilities, animal shelters, and persons licensed as
wild animal rehabilitators are exempt from this prohibition. Wild animals found
within the City in violation of this section are subject to impound by the
department and disposal as provided in Article III of this chapter.
SEC. 7-1109A.   DEER HUNTING.
   (1)   A person may discharge a long, recurve, or compound bow, or - when
necessary to accommodate a documented disability - a crossbow, as permitted by
regulations of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and the laws of the
State of Illinois, on private property within the corporate limits of the City
if the following requirements are met:
      a.   The person must possess a valid deer archery permit issued by the
State of Illinois and must comply with all of the conditions of the permit and
all applicable laws and regulations of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources relating to archery deer hunting. A person desiring to use a crossbow
must provide documentation to the City of Moline that a crossbow is a necessary
accommodation to a disability.
      b.   The person must possess a deer hunting permit issued by the City.
The cost for this permit shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per hunter. The
application procedure necessary for obtaining a permit shall be according to
the City of Moline deer management rules and restrictions for deer hunting in
subsection (2) of this section. Applications are accepted only between August 1
– October 31 of any given year for that year's hunting season.
      c.   There shall be no more than eight (8) sites permitted for deer
hunting. All sites must be located on private property. The size of each site
must have a minimum of three (3) contiguous acres. City staff shall review and
approve, if warranted, all sites on an annual basis.
      d.   Each hunter shall be authorized to hunt from an approved stand
located on the permitted hunting sites. Each stand located on an approved site
shall have a minimum platform height of six (6) feet.. No person shall
knowingly direct an arrow across the boundary of or off the designated site.
Only one (1) hunter per stand at any one time will be allowed. If multiple
stands are to be located on a site, each stand shall have a density of no less
than five (5) acres.
      e.   Locating appropriate hunting sites will be the responsibility of the
hunter. The hunter shall provide site information to the City’s account’s and
finance department to determine if the site information complies with this
section and the rules and procedures for deer hunting in subsection (2). The
site information submitted by the hunter shall include a description and
address(es) of the proposed hunting site.
      f.   Deer archery hunting will only be allowed on those specific dates
annually designated as deer bow season by the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources.
     (2)   Deer Management Rules and Regulations. The City of Moline permits an
archery hunting program for deer in an effort to better control the deer
population within the boundaries of the City, contingent, however, upon annual
review by the City Council. The intent is to give control of hunting to the
property owners, yet enable archery hunters to harvest the deer for their use
or to provide meat for social agencies. Hunting sites will be selected based on
criteria including deer concentration, safety, and overall impact. There are
stipulations required of hunters in an effort to make the program as safe as
possible, yet achieve the goal of thinning the number of deer within the City
limits.
      a.   Hunters.
      1.   Obtaining a Permit. Hunters must obtain a permit in order to
participate in the Moline deer management program. In order to obtain a permit,
hunters will need to provide the following:
         a)   Written permission from the property owner(s) of the site(s) they
desire to hunt;
         b)   Hunters are encouraged to obtain permission from owners who are
adjacent and abutting the hunting site;
         c)   Hunters must obtain approval from any owner or tenant of an
inhabited dwelling that is one hundred (100) yards from a hunting site;
         d)   Archery proficiency certification from an approved provider;
         e)   Copy of a current Illinois hunting license;
         f)   Completed City of Moline deer management permit application form.
      2.   Hunting Rules and Regulations:
         a)   Hunters must adhere to all State of Illinois and Department of
Natural Resources guidelines, rules, and restrictions;
         b)   Hunters must obtain appropriate state permits and tags;
         c)   Hunters must have a valid City of Moline permit;
         d)   Hunters must harvest two does before harvesting a buck;
         e)   All deer harvested as part of the deer management program must be
reported to the Moline Police via online form with date, time and location of
harvest of deer;
         f)   All remains must be removed from the hunting site;
         g)   Hunters will obtain permission from property owners before
tracking or retrieving a deer that travels out of the approved hunting area.
Illinois is not a right to retrieve state.
      b.   Hunting Sites. Sites will be approved by the City based upon
criteria including deer concentration, safety, and overall impact.
      1.   Restrictions and Requirements:
         a)   Consist of no less than three (3) contiguous acres;
         b)   One hundred (100) yards from a school, park, or church, unless
approved;
         c)   Situated in a manner that all shots are taken at a downward
angle;
         d)   Shots must not be taken in a way they may carry into an open or
occupied area;
         e)   Only one hunter active per site at any time;
         f)   Certain sites may have a time restriction when hunting is
allowed;
         g)   Hunters must set up their stand at least one hundred (100) feet
from buildings, roads and sidewalks;
         h)   Hunters must post a sign, provided by the City, notifying the
public that hunting is occurring; the sign shall be placed in the most visible
location to notify neighbors and the public;
         i)   Hunting acres cannot be shared or combined to create another
hunting site.
      2.   Multiple Hunters:
         a)   Additional hunters may be allowed when using a separate stand at
a density of no less than one (1) hunter per five (5) acres;
         b)   Property owners may coordinate with multiple hunters to utilize a
site, but only one (1) hunter may actively use a stand at any one time.
      3.   Property Owners:
         a)   Property owners reserve the right to deny hunting on their
property;
         b)   Property owners wishing to hunt or allow hunting on their
property must submit their site for approval to the City’s accounts and finance
department;
         c)   The City will notify property owners that are adjacent to and
abutting an approved hunting site in advance via letter;
         d)   Property owners with objections or concerns regarding hunting in
their vicinity should state their concern in writing or contact the finance
department.
      4.   Unpermitted Hunting:
         a)   Any hunting that takes place without appropriate permits will be
considered poaching and treated as such;
         b)   Any hunting on property which is not approved by the City will be
considered poaching and treated as such;
         c)   Hunting on property without the property owner’s explicit
permission is impermissible.
   (3)   Any violation of the deer management program rules and guidelines will
result in the permanent revocation of City hunting privileges and subject the
hunter to a possible fine for said violation.
(Ord. No. 3033-2018; new Sec. 7-1109A enacted; 08/07/18 re: bow and arrow
hunting of deer; Ord. No. 3030-2019; Sec. 7-1109A (1), (1)(a), (1)(f), (2)
(a)2.e) repealed; new subsections (1), (1)(a), (1)(f), (2)(a)2.e) enacted; 11/
19/19; Ord. No. 3055-2022; Sec. 7-1109A repealed; new Sec. 7-1109A enacted; 12/
13/22)
SEC. 7-1110.   NONRESIDENT NOT TO HAVE ANIMALS IN THE CITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   Persons who are not residents of the City shall not keep any animal in
the City; however, this prohibition shall not apply to persons remaining in the
City for thirty (30) days or less or who are passing through the City, but
shall apply to any nonresident who habitually allows an animal to run at large
within the City. Any animals found within the City in violation of this section
are subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article
III of this chapter.
   (b)   The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to appropriately
licensed veterinary hospitals or animal control facilities, animal shelters,
clinics, and licensed animal kennels and pet shops.
SEC. 7-1111.   REPORTING ANIMAL BITES AND ATTACKS.
   (a)   Any person owning or keeping a dog or cat or other animal which bites
or attacks or approaches a person on a street, sidewalk or public place in an
apparent attitude of attack shall immediately report the same in writing to the
department.
   (b)   Any person who has been bitten or so attacked or approached by a dog,
cat or other animal shall file a written report of such event with the
department within twenty-four (24) hours after such event occurred.
   (c)   Reports made pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall
include the name of the person completing the report, the victim's name,
address and telephone number; the animal’s owner or keeper's name, address and
telephone number; a description of the animal; the location where the bite,
attack, or approach occurred and the date and time of same; the description and
location of the wound, if any; the name of the victim’s treating physician, if
any; and, if the bite, attack, or approach occurred on the property of the
animal’s owner or keeper, the purpose for which the victim was on the owner or
keeper's property.
   (d)   Any animal that has bitten any human being is subject to impound by
the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this chapter.
SEC. 7-1112.   CONTROL OF ANIMAL WASTES.
   (a)   Animal Waste on Public Property . No person owning, harboring, keeping
or controlling any dog or cat or other domestic animal or pet shall cause,
suffer or allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, or
any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public property
whatsoever, or upon any private property without permission from the property
owner. The restriction in this section shall not apply to public property when
the owner or person in control of such animal complies with the following
conditions:
   (1)   The person immediately removes all feces deposited by such animal by
any sanitary method.
   (2)   The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas is disposed
of by the person in accordance with the provisions of this section in a
sanitary manner approved by the department or the City’s environmental health
specialist.
   (b)   Animal Waste on Private Property .
   (1)   The accumulation of animal feces in or on any private property is
hereby declared a nuisance.
   (2)   Every person who is the owner or occupant of private property or the
agent in charge of such property is charged with the duty of keeping such
property free of any accumulation of animal feces.
   (3)   “Accumulation” for purposes of this subsection (b) shall mean:
      a.   any quantity which results in the presence of feces odor at the
property line; or
      b.   any quantity that interferes with the use or enjoyment of any
neighboring property as the result of odors, visual blight, or attraction of
insects, rodents or other pests; or
      c.   any quantity that otherwise constitutes a hazard to the health,
safety or convenience of persons residing both on and off of the property.
   (4)   Notice to Remove.
      a.   Each owner, occupant or agent having charge of such property who is
notified in accordance with the provisions set forth herein by a community
service officer, a peace officer or any other duly authorized agent of the
City, including without limitation, any and all City personnel in the City’s
code compliance division, to remove an accumulation of feces, shall be charged
with the duty of removing such feces and satisfactorily disposing of the same
within twenty-four (24) hours of the effective date and hour of the notice.
      b.   The notice shall set forth in writing the dates of inspection, the
address of the property found to have an accumulation of animal feces, the fact
that such an accumulation was observed, and the fact that the owner, occupant
or agent must remove the accumulation within twenty-four (24) hours of the
notice’s effective date and hour.
      c.   If the property where an accumulation of feces is found contains
only a single-family dwelling, then the notice shall be directed to the
occupant of such property whether such occupant be the property’s owner or
lessee. If the property where the accumulation of feces is found contains more
than one dwelling unit, then notice shall be directed to the record owner of
such property or the agent in charge of such property.
   (5)   The notice’s effective date and hour shall be determined in accordance
with the manner in which the notice was served:
      a.    If a copy of the notice is delivered to an owner of record
personally or to any adult occupant of the property personally or to the agent
in charge of such property personally, the notice’s effective date and hour is
the date and hour so personally served.
      b.    If a copy of the notice is delivered to the usual place of abode of
an owner of record or to the occupant at the property and left with a person in
the owner or occupant’s family thirteen (13) years of age or older and of
suitable discretion, who shall be informed of the contents thereof, and
concurrently, a copy of the notice is sent by first class mail addressed to the
usual place of abode of such owner and the occupant at the property, said
notice becomes effective upon the date and hour of personal service upon such
family member.
      c.    If a copy of the notice is sent by certified or registered mail
addressed to an owner of record at his or her last known address or the
occupant at the property and receipt thereof is returned with the signature of
such owner or occupant, then the effective date and hour of said notice shall
be midnight of the date following the date signed for as evidenced by the
return of mail received. If the notice is returned to the City undelivered,
then a copy of the notice shall be posted conspicuously on the property, and
the notice’s effective date and hour is the date and hour the notice was so
posted.
   (6)   No owner, occupant or agent in charge of such property shall fail to
satisfactorily remove and dispose of such accumulation of feces within twenty-
four (24) hours of the effective date and hour of the notice to remove the
same. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
   (7)   Second or subsequent violations -- Notice not required. After an
owner, occupant or agent having charge of property is once notified of a
violation of this section, and regardless of whether that person complies with
that notice, a second or subsequent instance of an accumulation in violation of
this section within one (1) year shall not require any notice to that person,
and shall constitute a violation subjecting that person to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs and not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
SEC. 7-1113.   LIBERATION OF CONFINED ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall remove from restraint, or release from confinement or
enclosure, an animal belonging to or kept by any other person, unless in an
emergency situation when such removal or release is necessary to protect the
confined or enclosed animal from being physically harmed, or unless the
animal’s owner or keeper consents to the removal or release.
SEC. 7-1114.   DEAD ANIMALS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or possessor of any dead
animal within the City to leave the animal unburied for more than twelve (12)
hours after its death, or for anyone to bring and leave the carcass of any dead
animal within the City without burying the carcass.
   (b)   No person shall haul, drag, transport, or otherwise move any dead
animal along or upon any street, alley or other public place within the City
unless such dead animal is wholly covered so as to conceal the same from view.
   (c)   No person within the City shall skin or otherwise mutilate any dead
animal, or permit another to do so, within the view of any public place or
within the view of any private property other than the private property owned
or controlled by said person.
   (d)   No person shall allow the body, or any part thereof, of any dead
animal to decompose and petrify on the person’s property.
SEC. 7-1115.   ANIMAL TRAPPING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to use any type of leg-hold animal trap within
the City. It shall be unlawful to use any other animal trap that could cause
cruelty to animals within the City without the written approval, guidance and
direction of the community service section except where an infestation of City
property results in a determination that such infestation is either a public
nuisance or that it creates a safety hazard to the public, which determination
shall be made by the community service section. In the case of such exception,
appropriate means to control the situation shall be used by the community
service section.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be in any way used to determine, cause
or create any duty upon the City to remedy, abate or eliminate such nuisance or
hazard and no liability on the part of the City is created hereby.
(Ord. No. 95-4-4, §7-1115 repealed in its entirety; new section enacted, 04/25/
95)
SEC. 7-1116.   ANIMAL CAGES, RUNS, PENS, ETC.
   (a)   Location requirements . Each cage, enclosure, house, hutch, pen, run,
shed or other structure used to harbor an animal hereafter erected, repaired or
reconstructed shall be placed not less than five (5) feet from all property
lines, and not less than twenty (20) feet from any neighboring building or
structure designed for or permitting human habitation.
   (b)   Construction requirements . Each cage, enclosure, pen, run, shed or
other structure used to harbor an animal hereafter erected, repaired or
reconstructed shall meet the following requirements:
   (1)    Outdoor dog runs: Each outdoor cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed
housing one (1) dog shall have an aggregate base floor, and shall be of
sufficient size to accommodate the size of the dog kept in such cage,
enclosure, pen, run or shed. Each outdoor cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed
housing two (2) or more dogs shall have a concrete floor with a two (2) inch
solid curb, and shall be of sufficient size to accommodate both the number and
size of the dogs kept in such cage, enclosure, pen, run or shed.    
   (2)   Outdoor houses: The owner or keeper of each dog kept or maintained
outdoors or outside an occupied residential structure must provide said dog
with a doghouse or other shelter constructed in a manner to assure the
protection of the dog from the elements, including a floor at least two (2)
inches off the ground, weatherproof solid sides and roof, and large enough for
the dog to have freedom to enter, turn around, sit, stand, and lie in comfort.
If the house or shelter is not radiantly heated, it shall have a sufficient
quantity of suitable bedding material to provide insulation and protection
against cold and dampness for comfort. The house or shelter shall be placed in
such location or protected to prevent the elements from injuring the dog’s
health.
   (3)   Outdoor rabbit cages: The owner or keeper of rabbits over six (6)
weeks old shall provide a cage, enclosure, hutch, pen or other structure no
smaller than eight (8) cubic feet for each rabbit, and located not less than
three (3) feet off the ground. The cage, enclosure, hutch, pen or other
structure shall be constructed in a manner to assure the protection of the
rabbit from the elements, including weatherproof sides and roof, shall have a
sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material to provide insulation and
protection against cold and dampness for comfort, and shall be placed in such
location or protected to prevent the elements from injuring the rabbit’s
health.
   (4)   Outdoor bird cages: The owner or keeper of pigeons and other outdoor
birds, with the exception of hens, shall provide a cage, enclosure, pen or
other structure located at least three (3) feet off the ground, and which shall
be constructed in a manner to assure the protection of the birds from the
elements, including weatherproof sides and roof, and shall be placed in such
location or protected to prevent the elements from injuring the birds’ health.
The keeping of hens shall be allowed pursuant to Sec.
7-1104A above, and the requirements of construction and maintenance of chicken
enclosures and chicken pens shall be pursuant to Sec.
7-1104A(d).
   (c)   Maintenance requirements. Each cage, enclosure, house, pen, run, shed
or other structure used to harbor an animal shall be cleaned and maintained in
a manner to assure the best possible sanitary conditions. Each person cleaning
dog and rabbit cages, enclosures, houses, hutches, pens, runs, sheds or other
structures, shall do so in a manner which prevents animal waste runoff onto
public right-of-way and which complies with the provisions set forth in the
City’s Stormwater Utility Ordinance,
Chapter 34 of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3021-2016; Sec. 7-1116(b)(4) repealed; new Sec. 7-1116(b)(4) enacted;
07/12/16)
SEC. 7-1117.   STRAY ANIMALS.
   (a)   Any person who picks up any stray animal shall promptly notify the
community service section or the department.
   (b)   No person shall harbor or hold for reward an animal which strayed upon
the person’s property or which has been picked up on a public street, highway
or other public place unaccompanied by its owner or keeper or other person or
which has been stolen from its owner or keeper.
SEC. 7-1118.   PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   Unless the section specifically provides otherwise, any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall on conviction be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus court costs and not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 98-10-1; §7-1117 repealed; new §7-1117 enacted; 10/06/98)
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter or a
like ordinance of another municipality or a like state statute three (3) times
within a twelve (12) month period and any member of such person’s household
shall be deemed ineligible to obtain or keep a license for a cat or dog within
the next twelve (12) month period following the third conviction.
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND CATS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 7-2100.   DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   No person shall permit any dog or cat to run at large or be at large
within the City. Any dog or cat found running at large within the City is
subject to apprehension and impound by the department and disposal as provided
in Article III of this chapter.
   (b)   For purposes of this Section
7-2100, "permit” means any of the following:
   (1)   to affirmatively permit or allow;
   (2)   inaction by one who knew or should have known the dog or cat was at
large and failed to end the "at large" behavior;
   (3)   placement of the dog or cat in a physical location or a set of
circumstances such that it is unreasonable to assume the animal will not run at
large or be at large.
   (c)   Any holder of an unaltered pet license who permits the unaltered
animal to run at large or be at large is subject to revocation of said license.
(Ord. No. 93-11-6; §7-3100 amended; (c) added; 11/23/93)
SEC. 7-2101.   REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS AND LEASHES FROM DOGS OR CATS
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person other than a community service officer, a peace officer, an owner
or keeper, or a person with the consent of the dog’s or cat’s owner or keeper,
shall remove the collar, inoculation tag, license tag or leash from any dog or
cat within the City.
SEC. 7-2102.   EXCESSIVE BARKING, HOWLING OR YELPING.
   (a)   Offense . No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat that, by
frequent or excessive loud barking, howling or yelping, unduly annoys or
disturbs the quiet of any neighborhood within the City. However, this
subsection shall not apply to the business property of a licensed kennel, pet
shop or veterinarian, or to the property of any licensed or City-owned animal
shelter or animal control facility. If the department finds that a dog or cat
has been left outdoors and unattended for longer than one (1) hour anytime
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and the department has
probable cause to believe that a violation of this section has occurred, and if
the dog’s or cat’s owner or keeper is not home or refuses to take said dog or
cat indoors, then, upon obtaining a signed statement from a complainant, the
department may impound the dog or cat, which may be disposed of as provided in
Article III of this chapter.
   (b)   Penalty . Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) above as a
first offense, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court
costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any
person convicted of violating subsection (a) above as a second offense shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person
convicted of violating subsection (a) above as a third or subsequent offense
shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
   (c)   Nuisance . Any dog or cat described in subsection (a) above is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and the City may, in addition to seeking any other
appropriate legal remedy, pursue equitable remedies to abate said nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 21 of the City Code. Upon finding a nuisance exists, and in order to
abate such a nuisance, the court may, in addition to ordering any other legal
or equitable relief, order any of the following:
   (1)   That the owner or keeper may no longer own, harbor or maintain the dog
or cat causing the nuisance on any property within the City; and/or
   (2)   The owner or keeper to surrender the dog or cat causing the nuisance
to the City for the purpose of adoption or euthanasia; and/or
   (3)   That the owner or keeper cause the dog or cat causing the nuisance to
be surgically altered such that said dog or cat will no longer be capable of
barking, howling or yelping in a manner which constitutes a nuisance.
SEC. 7-2103.   TAKING UP AND TREATING INJURED DOGS AND CATS.
   A community service officer or any peace officer may remove from any street
or public place within the City any injured or ill dog or cat not being
attended to and properly cared for by its owner or keeper and shall impound the
dog or cat, or place the dog or cat in the possession of a licensed
veterinarian and the dog or cat may be disposed of as provided in Article III
of this chapter. If a veterinarian renders needed or warranted veterinarian
treatment to an injured or ill dog or cat placed in his or her possession
pursuant to this section, the veterinarian shall advise the community service
section of the cost of the treatment, and in the event the owner or keeper of
the dog or cat redeems the dog or cat, the owner or keeper shall, in addition
to paying impound redemption fees as otherwise set forth in this chapter, pay
the full amount of the veterinarian’s charges. If the dog or cat is not
redeemed, it shall be disposed of in the manner provided in Article III of this
chapter.
SEC. 7-2104.   DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS – HEARING AND DETERMINATION.
   (a)    Notice.   The date of service of any notice under this section shall
be either the date of personal service or three (3) days from the date that the
notice was mailed.
   (b)   Impound. If a community service officer or peace officer determines
that probable cause exists to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog, the
community service officer or peace officer shall order the dog's owner or
keeper to confine the dog pending an administrative hearing. Failure to obey
said order constitutes a violation of this section. If a community service
officer or peace officer determines that probable cause exists to believe that
a dog is a vicious dog, the dog shall be impounded. Any owner or keeper of any
dog impounded under this section shall be responsible for the costs incurred
during the period of impoundment, such as food, veterinary care, and board,
unless following an administrative hearing the dog is found not to be vicious.
A dog impounded under this section will not be returned to the owner or keeper
or any other person unless following an administrative hearing the dog is found
not to be vicious. Dogs found to be vicious will be euthanized by the community
service section, or turned over by the City to an appropriate agent or agency
for euthanasia. Any owner or keeper shall further be responsible for all costs
incurred by the City in euthanizing the vicious dog.
    (c)   Administrative hearing to be conducted. An administrative hearing
shall be conducted to determine whether or not the dog is a dangerous dog or a
vicious dog.
   (d)   Notice and time for hearing. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be
served with a notice of the administrative hearing, either personally or by
first class mail to the owner or keeper's last known address. The
administrative hearing shall be held promptly within not less than five (5)
working days nor more than fifteen (15) working days following service of the
notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. The service of a notice to appear
in the circuit court on an ordinance violation charge, even if that notice
refers to charges of vicious or dangerous dogs, shall not start the running of
the clock for the administrative hearing process.
   (e)   Conduct of hearing. The administrative hearing shall be open to the
public and shall be recorded by a tape recorder, stenographer, or other
reliable means. The chief of police shall serve as the hearing officer. The
hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including
incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, and live testimony. The
hearing officer shall determine, based upon a preponderance of the evidence,
whether or not the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. If the notice of
the administrative hearing charged that the dog is vicious but does not charge
that the dog is dangerous, the hearing officer may nevertheless determine that
the dog is dangerous rather than vicious, if the evidence so warrants.
   (f)   Notice of determination. The dog's owner or keeper shall be notified
in writing of the hearing officer's determination either personally or by first
class mail to the owner or keeper's last known address.
      (1)   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is neither dangerous
nor vicious, the owner or keeper may redeem the dog, if impounded, as otherwise
provided in Article III of this chapter. The owner or keeper shall not be
required to pay those daily impoundment fees that are attributable solely to
the pendency of the administrative hearing but shall be required to pay all
other fees.
      (2)   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is dangerous, the
owner or keeper may keep or redeem and keep the dog, subject to the
requirements of Section
7-2105 and Article III of this chapter.
      (3)   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is vicious, the
animal may not be redeemed, and the notice of determination shall also state
that the dog shall be euthanized within five (5) working days of the date of
the notice unless the owner or keeper requests a stay of ten (10) working days
during which to file a complaint for court review of the hearing officer's
determination pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review
Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq., and amendments thereto.
    (g)   Failure to appear. If the dog's owner or keeper cannot be found or
fails to appear in person or by legal counsel for the administrative hearing,
the hearing officer shall make a determination by default, without need of any
testimony or other evidence, that the dog is vicious or dangerous, as well as
abandoned, and the dog shall be euthanized without further notice to the owner
or keeper.
   (h)   Time for euthanasia – stay. Upon the hearing officer's determination
that the dog is vicious, it shall be euthanized after five (5) working days
from the date of the notice of determination to the owner or keeper, unless the
owner or keeper within that time period delivers to the office of the chief of
police a request to stay the euthanasia for a period of ten (10) working days
for the purpose of filing a complaint for court review of the hearing officer's
determination pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review
Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq., and amendments thereto. If, at the end of that
period, the City has not received notice that a complaint has been filed, the
dog shall be euthanized without further notice to the owner or keeper.
   (i)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the hearing officer's decision may
appeal to the Circuit Court pursuant to the provisions of the of the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq., and amendments thereto.
SEC. 7-2105.   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog found to be a dangerous
dog inconsistently with this section within the City. A dog found to be a
dangerous dog and kept in a manner which violates this section is hereby
declared a nuisance and is subject to impound by the department and disposal as
provided in Article III of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; Sec. 7-2105 (a) repealed; new Sec. 7-2105 (a) enacted;
09/10/02)
   (b)   The owner or keeper of a dog found to be a dangerous dog must post in
clear view at all times, and at the most conspicuous or prominent point of
entry to the property, a sign indicating the presence of a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign shall be at least eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven
(11) inches in size, and shall contain in words and pictures a clear indication
that a dangerous dog is on the property.
   (c)   A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be muzzled and controlled by a
leash of no more than three (3) feet in length and of appropriate strength
whenever the dog is not contained within the owner’s or keeper’s residence or
an enclosure located on the owner’s or keeper’s property from which the dog
cannot escape. A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be spayed or neutered
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the written notice of determination,
and the owner or keeper must provide written proof of such spaying or neutering
to the community service section.
(Ord. No. 2002-07-07; Sec. 7-2105 (c) repealed; new Sec. 7-2105 (c) enacted;
07/23/02)
   (d)   No person shall transfer, sell or give away to any person within the
City any dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog, unless the transferor,
prior to the transfer, informs the receiving party of the finding and notifies
the community service section or department of the pertinent details of the
transfer, including without limitation, the address where the dog will be
located after the transfer.
   (e)   Any owner or keeper of a dog found to be a dangerous dog must, within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the hearing officer’s determination that the
dog is dangerous, present said dog to the City’s animal control facility for
the purpose of injecting a computer microchip (“microchip”) which identifies
the dog and contains information concerning the fact that the dog has been
found to be a dangerous dog. The dog’s owner or keeper shall be responsible for
paying the reasonable costs associated with injecting the microchip. Failure to
present said dog to the City’s animal control facility as herein described
shall be deemed a violation of the City Code.
   (f)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating Section
7-2105 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs, and to any and all other legal and equitable
remedies available to the City by law to abate said nuisances.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new Sec. 2105 (f) enacted; 09/10/02)
SEC. 7-2106.   KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, harbor, sell, abandon, or give away any dog
found to be a vicious dog within the City, whether or not owned by such person,
except to relinquish the dog for impoundment. Such dogs are hereby declared
nuisances and are subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided
in Article III of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating Section
7-2106 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs, and to any and all other legal and equitable
remedies available to the City by law to abate said nuisances.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; Sec. 7-2106 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 7-2106
enacted; 09/10/02)
SEC. 7-2107.   FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT.
   No owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall permit the dog or cat to
be in other than an enclosed structure or not within an enclosure during
periods of estrus (“heat”). Any such female dog or cat found outside an
enclosed structure or enclosure, whether on the property of the owner or keeper
or not, shall be subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided
in Article III of this chapter.
SEC. 7-2108.   LIMITATION UPON DOGS OR CATS PER RESIDENCE.
   (a)   No person shall own, keep, harbor or control more than four (4) dogs,
four (4) cats, or any combination of four (4) dogs and cats at said person's
residence. Any dogs or cats found within the City in violation of this section
are subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article
III of this chapter.
   (b)   In addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies, the dogs
and cats prohibited from being kept in the City by subsection (a), are hereby
declared to be nuisances, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21 of the City Code and amendments thereto.
SEC. 7-2109.   NEUTERING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   All dogs and cats must be neutered by the age of six (6) months or an
unaltered pet license issued to the owner or keeper of an unaltered animal.
(Ord. No. 93-11-6; Article III amended by adding new §7-3109; 11/23/93)
   (b)   Any dog or cat in violation of subsection (a) shall be subject to
impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this
chapter.
SEC. 7-2110.   EUTHANASIA.
   Any owner or keeper of a dog or cat may surrender such dog or cat to the
animal control facility for the purpose of euthanasia. The owner or keeper
shall be responsible for the charges of this service as the chief of police
determines and publishes in pamphlet form from time to time. A copy of such
pamphlet shall be made available for public review at the City’s animal control
facility.
(Ord. No. 93-11-6; Article III amended by adding new §7-3110; 11/23/93)
SEC. 7-2111.   USE OR POSSESSION OF DOGS IN CONJUNCTION WITH CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
   (a)   No person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses or controls any dog
shall use the dog in the course of committing or in furtherance of any criminal
or quasi-criminal act, nor suffer or permit such dog to be so used. If a dog,
in any manner, impedes a community service officer’s or peace officer’s efforts
to investigate or stop criminal or quasi-criminal behavior, to make any stop or
arrest, or to serve any process or warrant or execute any search or seizure,
the dog shall be irrebuttably presumed to have been so used.
   (b)   No person shall be in possession of any dog while said person is
manufacturing, delivering, or possessing with the intent to manufacture or
deliver any controlled substance or cannabis in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.) or the Cannabis Control
Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.) or any amendments thereto. No person shall possess
a dog in any dwelling unit or in or on the property of any single-family
dwelling while any person in said dwelling unit or in or on the property of
said single-family dwelling is manufacturing, delivering, or possessing with
the intent to manufacture or deliver any controlled substance or cannabis in
violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.)
or the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.) or any amendments thereto.
For the purpose of this section, any person present in said dwelling unit or in
or on the property of said single-family dwelling during the violation of the
Controlled Substances Act or the Cannabis Control Act shall be irrebuttably
presumed to be in possession of any dog found in said dwelling unit or in or on
the property of said single-family dwelling at that time.
   (c)   Any dog found in violation of this section is subject to impound by
the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this chapter.
   (d)   In addition to the impoundment and forfeiture of any dog used or
possessed in violation of subsections (a) or (b) above, any person violating
this section shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus
court costs.
SEC. 7-2112.   POLICE DOGS.
   (a)   Teasing, striking or tampering with police dogs prohibited . No person
shall willfully or maliciously taunt, torment, tease, beat, strike, or
administer or subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals or substance to any
dog used by a community service officer or peace officer in the performance of
his or her functions or duties, or when placed in confinement off duty; and no
person shall interfere or meddle with any such dog used by the department or
any other law enforcement department or agency or any handler thereof in the
performance of the functions or duties of the department or other law
enforcement department or agency.
   (b)   Injuring or killing police dogs prohibited . No person shall willfully
or maliciously torture, mutilate, injure, disable, poison, or kill any dog used
by the department or any other law enforcement department or agency in the
performance of the functions or duties of the department or other law
enforcement department or agency or when placed in confinement off duty.
However, a peace officer or veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency
situations when delay would cause the animal undue pain and suffering.
   (c)   Penalty . Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be
fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court costs. Any
person violating subsection (b) of this section shall be fined not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs.
SEC. 7-2113.   GUIDE AND SUPPORT DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall willfully or maliciously annoy, taunt, tease, harass,
torment, beat, or strike a guide or support dog or otherwise engage in any
conduct directed toward a guide or support dog that is likely to impede or
interfere with the dog's performance of its duties or that places the sight
impaired, hearing impaired, or disabled person being served or assisted by the
dog in danger of injury.
   (b)   No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, injure, or kill a
guide or support dog.
   (c)   No person shall willfully or maliciously permit a dog that is owned,
harbored, or controlled by the person to cause injury to or the death of a
guide or support dog while the guide or support dog is discharging its duties.
   (d)   Penalty . Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be
fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court costs. Any
person violating subsections (b) or (c) of this section shall be fined not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs.
SEC. 7-2114.   GUARD AND SENTRY DOGS.
   (a)   No person shall own, harbor, keep or control a guard or sentry dog
within the City unless said person registers said dog with the department. The
registration must include, in addition to such other information as required by
the department, a physical description of the dog and must state the location
where the dog will be stationed. Any change in the dog’s location, or the
removal of the dog from the City or the dog’s death must be reported to the
department within twenty-four (24) hours.
   (b)   The owner or keeper of a guard or sentry dog must comply with all
provisions of this chapter, including without limitation those provisions
relating to the care, maintenance and licensing of animals. In addition, the
owner or keeper of a guard or sentry dog shall comply specifically with the
following:
   (1)   Any dog utilized for guard or sentry dog purposes shall be immunized
against distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, and parvovirus, and proof of the
dog’s immunizations shall be provided to the department as well as retained on
file at the location where the dog is stationed. The required immunizations set
forth in this Section are in addition to the mandatory rabies immunization as
required by this chapter and state law.
   (2)   Any dog utilized or maintained as a guard or sentry dog shall be in a
physically healthy condition by gross observation and free from any apparent
disease or internal or external parasitic condition. Any dog that the
department has reasonable cause to believe is injured, sick, diseased, unwell,
or malnourished or constitutes a danger to the public health and safety may be
impounded as provided in this chapter and restricted from use until the dog is
examined by a licensed veterinarian and treated, if deemed necessary.
   (3)   In addition to a current City license tag, the owner or keeper of a
guard or sentry dog shall have, affixed to the dog’s collar, harness or other
device, a fluorescent medallion that signifies the dog is a guard or sentry
dog.
   (4)   No person shall own, keep, use, control or maintain a guard dog or
sentry dog on any property within the City unless a warning sign is posted in
plain view at each gate or point of entry onto the property. The warning signs
shall include the message "WARNING: GUARD DOG ON PREMISES" in bold print and
shall have the name of the guard or sentry dog’s owner or keeper and a 24-hour
manned emergency telephone number printed below the warning.
   (5)   Each guard or sentry dog shall, whenever the dog is kept on actual
duty, be visited by its owner or keeper, or his or her responsible designee, at
least once daily to insure that the dog's physical condition, its surroundings,
and its food and water supply are adequate as specified in this Section and if
inadequate the person shall do whatever may be necessary to correct or remedy
the situation.
   (c)   Any guard or sentry dog found in violation of this section is subject
to impound by the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this
chapter.
DIVISION 2. REGISTRATION.
SEC. 7-2200.   REGISTRATION.
   (a)   Every person other than those excepted by the provisions of Section
7-1110(b) of this chapter, that owns, harbors, keeps, or controls a dog or cat
within the City of Moline shall within thirty (30) days of acquisition of the
dog or cat, register the dog or cat or cause it to be registered for a license
with the County. The license tag shall be securely attached to a substantial
collar or harness and shall at all times be kept on the dog or cat for which
the license is issued.
   (b)   New residents and persons acquiring in any manner whatsoever a new dog
or cat shall have thirty (30) days in which to obtain a county license.
(Ord. No. 2002-11-01; Division 2, “REGISTRATION,” repealed in its entirety; new
Division 2, “LICENSING,” enacted; 11/05/02; Ord. No. 3060-2005; Division 2,
“LICENSING,” repealed; new Division 2, “REGISTRATION,” enacted; 09/20/05; CB/
Ord. No. 3060-2005; Division 2, “REGISTRATION,” repealed in its entirety; new
Division 2, “REGISTRATION,” enacted; 09/20/05)
DIVISION 3. RABIES CONTROL
SEC. 7-2300.   INOCULATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   The owner or keeper of any dog or cat within the City shall cause the
dog or cat to be inoculated by a licensed veterinarian and shall maintain a
current inoculation for such dog or cat at all times. “Current” status for
purposes of this division shall be determined by rules and regulations of the
Illinois Department of Agriculture and by the United States Department of
Agriculture, and amendments thereto.
   (b)   The accounts and finance officer, or designee thereof, shall have the
duty of issuing an inoculation tag for current rabies inoculation as outlined
above, upon submission of proof of current inoculation by the dog’s or cat’s
owner or keeper.
SEC. 7-2301.   DOGS OR CATS TO WEAR COLLAR WITH CURRENT INOCULATION TAG.
   The owner or keeper of any dog or cat within the City shall secure upon the
dog or cat a good and substantial collar with a securely attached current
inoculation tag which shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times.
SEC. 7-2302.   DOGS OR CATS WITHOUT COLLAR AND INOCULATION TAG SUBJECT TO
IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSAL.
   Any dog or cat found within the City off of the premises occupied by the
owner or keeper of the dog or cat and not wearing a collar with the inoculation
tag attached thereto as required by this division shall be subject to impound
by the department and disposal as provided in Article III of this chapter to
the extent that Article III does not conflict with Section
7-2303, below.
SEC. 7-2303.   CERTAIN DOGS OR CATS SUBJECT TO CONFINEMENT OR IMPOUNDMENT; NOT
TO BE REMOVED FROM CITY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or cat, when
notified that such dog or cat has bitten any person or animal, to refuse to
surrender possession of the dog or cat to a community service officer or peace
officer for confinement at a licensed veterinary hospital or clinic in the City
for not less than ten (l0) days, the cost of such confinement to be paid by the
owner or keeper.
   (b)   A community service officer or peace officer, when the owner or keeper
provides evidence that such dog or cat has a current inoculation and when such
dog or cat does not currently display symptoms of rabies, may allow the owner
or keeper to confine such dog or cat at the owner or keeper's property for the
same ten-day period; provided, the owner or keeper agrees in writing to return
to a community service officer or peace officer a release form approved by the
department and executed by a licensed veterinarian at the end of such ten-day
period.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or cat, when
such owner or keeper has knowledge that any person or animal has been bitten by
such dog or cat, to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of or
remove from the City any such dog or cat until a community service officer has
given written permission to do so.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with
the written or printed instructions of a community service officer or peace
officer made pursuant to this section. If such instructions cannot be delivered
personally, they shall be mailed to the owner or keeper of such dog or cat by
regular mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit of the community service officer
or peace officer delivering or mailing such instructions is prima facie
evidence that the owner or keeper of such dog or cat was notified of his or her
responsibilities.
SEC. 7-2304.   PROCEDURE WHEN RABIES IS SUSPECTED.
   Any dog or cat having symptoms of the disease known as rabies shall be
confined under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days.
Any dog or cat having any symptoms of rabies, when impounded by the department,
shall immediately be placed in the care of a licensed veterinarian. If a
licensed veterinarian determines that the dog or cat is suffering from rabies,
the dog or cat may not be destroyed or euthanized without a licensed
veterinarian’s specific authorization. If a licensed veterinarian determines
that the dog or cat is not suffering from rabies, the dog or cat is subject to
a redemption or disposal as provided in Article III of this chapter.
ARTICLE III. IMPOUNDMENT
SEC. 7-3100.   GROUNDS FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   An animal is subject to impoundment if it:
   (1)   Has been treated cruelly in violation of Section
7-1101;
   (2)   Has been used in entertainment in violation of Section
7-1102;
   (3)   Is domestic livestock or fowl in violation of Section
7-1104(a);
   (4)   Is a dangerous animal pursuant to Section
7-1107(a);
   (5)   Is a rabbit found in violation of Section
7-1108(b);
   (6)   Is a wild animal found in violation of Section
7-1109;
   (7)   Is an animal kept in the City by a non-resident in violation of
Section
7-1110(1);
   (8)   Has bitten any animal or person as set forth in Section
7-1111;
   (9)   Is a dog or cat running at large in violation of Section
7-2100;
   (10)   Is a dog or cat making excessive noise in violation of Section
7-2102(a);
   (11)   Is a dog or cat that is injured or ill as set forth in Section
7-2103, or is otherwise in distress or in imminent danger of harm to its health
or safety;
   (12)   It is a dog and there is probable cause to believe that the dog is a
dangerous dog, and has not been confined as provided in Section
7-2104(b);
   (13)   Is a dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog under Section
7-2104 and is not kept in compliance with Section
7-2105;
   (14)   Is a dog and there is probable cause to believe that the dog is a
vicious dog under Section
7-2104(b);
   (15)   Is a dog that has been found to be a vicious dog, as provided in
Section
7-2106;
   (16)   Is a female dog or cat that is in other than an enclosed structure or
not within an enclosure during periods of estrus (“heat”) for said female dog
or cat in violation of Section
7-2107, whether said female dog or cat is on or off the property of its owner,
except as part of a planned and supervised breeding;
   (17)   Is a dog or cat found in violation of Section
7-2108;
   (18)   Is a dog or cat that has not been neutered by the age of six (6)
months and does not have an unaltered pet license in violation of Section
7-2109;
   (19)   There is probable cause to believe that it was used or possessed in
connection with a violation of Section
7-2111 regarding use or possession of dogs in conjunction with criminal
activity;
   (20)   Is an unregistered guard or sentry dog under Section
7-2114, or is a guard or sentry dog otherwise not kept in compliance with
Section
7-2114;
   (21)   Is an unlicensed dog or cat in violation of Section
7-2200;
   (22)   Is a dog or cat failing to display a current and valid license tag in
violation of Section
7-2200;
   (23)   Is a dog or cat failing to display a current and valid inoculation
tag in violation of Section
7-2302;
   (24)   Is a dog or cat that has bitten any person or animal as set forth in
Section
7-2303;
   (25)   Is a dog or cat displaying symptoms of rabies as provided in Section
7-2304;
   (26)   Is believed to be a source or threat of rabies or other infectious
disease, is otherwise diseased, or presents a threat or hazard to public health
or safety;
   (27)   Is otherwise subject to impoundment under any other section of this
chapter or state law.
SEC. 7-3101.   NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT TO OWNER OR KEEPER.
   (a)   When any dog or cat displaying an inoculation tag or City-issued
license tag is impounded by the department subject to this chapter or state
law, a community service officer shall search City records or contact the
veterinarian who issued the inoculation tag to determine the identity of the
dog’s or cat’s owner or keeper, and shall immediately provide the apparent
owner, if any, with written notice of the impoundment by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   (b)   When any dog or cat not displaying an inoculation tag or City-issued
license tag or any other animal is impounded by the department subject to this
chapter or state law, a community service officer shall make a reasonable
attempt to discover the identity of the animal’s owner or keeper, and if such
an identity is discovered, the community service officer shall immediately
provide such person with written notice of the impoundment by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
   (c)   In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above,
whenever the department impounds any animal subject to this chapter or state
law, the community service section shall enter the date of impounding, a
description of the impounded animal, and the reason for the impound upon the
records of the City’s animal control facility in a book to be kept by the
community service section solely for such purpose. Public notice of the
animal’s impoundment shall be given by making said book available for public
inspection at the City’s animal control facility.
   (d)   The notice provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above shall be in
the following or a substantially similar form:
NOTICE
   Date:   ________________________
   To:   _____________________________________________   Animal:   ? Male    ?
Female
   _____________________________________________      ? Cat      ? Dog
   _____________________________________________      ? Other
(describe)____________
         ____________________________
   You are hereby notified that the Moline Police Department – Community
Service Section has impounded the animal described above because it:
_____   Has been treated cruelly in violation of Section
7-1101;
_____   Has been used in entertainment in violation of Section
7-1102;
_____   Is domestic livestock or fowl in violation of Section
7-1104(a);
_____   Is a dangerous animal pursuant to Section
7-1107(a);
_____   Is a rabbit found in violation of Section
7-1108(b);
_____   Is a wild animal found in violation of Section
7-1109;
_____   Is an animal kept in the City by a non-resident in violation of Section
7-1110(1);
_____   Has bitten any animal or person as set forth in Section
7-1111;
_____   Is a dog or cat running at large in violation of Section
7-2100;
_____   Is a dog or cat making excessive noise in violation of Section
7-2102(a);
_____   Is a dog or cat that is injured or ill as set forth in Section
7-2103, or is otherwise in distress or in imminent danger of harm to its health
or safety;
_____   It is a dog and there is probable cause to believe that the dog is a
dangerous dog, and has not been confined as provided in Section
7-2104(b);
_____   Is a dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog under Section
7-2104 and is not kept in compliance with Section
7-2105;
_____   Is a dog and there is probable cause to believe that the dog is a
vicious dog under Section
7-2104(b);
_____   Is a dog that has been found to be a vicious dog, as provided in
Section
7-2106;
_____   Is a female dog or cat that is in other than an enclosed structure or
not within an enclosure during periods of estrus (“heat”) for said female dog
or cat in violation of Section
7-2107, whether said female dog or cat is on or off the property of its owner,
except as part of a planned and supervised breeding;
_____   Is a dog or cat found in violation of Section
7-2108;
_____   Is a dog or cat that has not been neutered by the age of six (6) months
and does not have an unaltered pet license in violation of Section
7-2109;
_____   There is probable cause to believe that it was used or possessed in
connection with a violation of Section
7-2111 regarding use or possession of dogs in conjunction with criminal
activity;
_____   Is an unregistered guard or sentry dog under Section
7-2114, or is a guard or sentry dog otherwise not kept in compliance with
Section
7-2114;
_____   Is an unlicensed dog or cat in violation of Section
7-2200;
_____   Is a dog or cat failing to display a current and valid license tag in
violation of Section
7-2200;
_____   Is a dog or cat failing to display a current and valid inoculation tag
in violation of Section
7-2302;
_____    Is a dog or cat that has bitten any person or animal as set forth in
Section
7-2303;
_____   Is a dog or cat displaying symptoms of rabies as provided in Section
7-2304;
_____   Is believed to be a source or threat of rabies or other infectious
disease, is otherwise diseased, or presents a threat or hazard to public health
or safety;
_____   Is otherwise subject to impoundment under any other section of this
chapter or state law.
_____   Other   _______________________________________________________________________________
   _______________________________________________________________________________
[ ]    You may redeem the animal upon the following conditions:
_____ Providing proof of inoculation against rabies or providing payment for
inoculation;
_____ Payment of a $15.00 redemption fee;
_____ Payment of a fee of $5.00 pending for each day the animal has been
impounded;
_____ Providing proof of license or providing payment of the applicable license
fee;
_____ Payment of necessary costs of veterinary or other care.
   If you fail to redeem the animal within five (5) days of impoundment, the
Community service section shall cause the animal to be euthanized or disposed
of by adoption.
[ ]    You may not redeem the animal until legal proceedings involving the
animal are concluded and the animal is ordered as permitted to be redeemed by a
court or administrative hearing officer or unit of competent jurisdiction. The
animal must be redeemed within five (5) days of the entry of such order. If the
court or administrative hearing officer or unit orders that you may not redeem
the animal, it will be placed for adoption or euthanized as maybe appropriate.
_______________________________________
   Community Service Officer
 SEC. 7-3102.   REDEMPTION; FEES.
   (a)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of Sections
7-3100(3), (5), (7), (9), (10), (11), (16), (17), (18), (20), (21), (22) and
(23) may be redeemed by its owner or keeper or authorized representative within
five (5) days from the date of impoundment upon payment by such person to the
community service section for the use of the City, the following fees:
   (1)   A redemption fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 93-11-6; §7-3300(a)(1) repealed; new (a)(1) enacted; 11/23/93)
   (2)   The amount of the veterinarian’s current inoculation fee unless
current inoculation is proven.
   (3)   Ten dollars ($10.00) for each day that the animal has been impounded.
   (4)   The license fee imposed by Section
7-2201 unless a valid City license or license from another jurisdiction is
proven.
   (5)   Any other costs as provided in this chapter.
   No animal will be released pursuant to this section, unless payment of fees
is received or proof established excusing payment.
   (b)   If any animal subject to redemption under subsection (a) above is not
redeemed within five (5) days after impoundment, the department shall cause the
animal to be euthanized by approved methods or disposed of by adoption.
   (c)   If an animal is impounded pursuant to Section
7-3100(17) for violation of Section
7-2109, the owner will be offered the option of paying the scheduled pound fees
set forth in subsection (a) above or voluntarily neutering the animal within
seven days. A deposit of forty-five dollars ($45.00) shall be made at the time
of redemption. If proof of neutering (by way of veterinarian certification) is
provided to the department within fourteen (14) days of the violation, then the
underlying violation of Section
7-2109 shall not be filed as a complaint, or if previously filed, shall be
dismissed by the city attorney or designee thereof and the deposit shall be
returned.
(Ord. No. 93-11-06; §7-3107 amended by adding new (d); 11/23/93)
SEC. 7-3103.   ANIMALS NOT SUBJECT TO IMMEDIATE REDEMPTION.
   (a)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of Section
7-3100(1), (2), (4), (6), (8), (12), (13), (14), (15), (19), (24), (25) and
(26) shall not be subject to immediate redemption, but instead shall be
impounded pending the conclusion of judicial or administrative proceedings
against the person violating this chapter. Upon rendering a decision with
respect to the underlying judicial or administrative proceeding, the judge or
administrative hearing officer or unit shall enter an order providing for the
disposition of the animal by redemption, adoption pursuant to department
policies and procedures, or euthanasia. Any animal impounded under Section
7-3100(27) shall be disposed of as provided in this chapter or applicable state
law.
   (b)   If redemption is ordered under subsection (a), the animal may be
redeemed within five (5) working days from the date that notice of the order is
given. Any person redeeming such animal shall be required to pay the fees and
costs set forth in Section
7-3102.
   (c)   If adoption or euthanasia is ordered under subsection (a), the order
shall also provide that if the animal is euthanized its owner or keeper shall
pay the costs associated with euthanasia.
SEC. 7-3104.   ADOPTION.
   (a)   Any animal placed for adoption under the provisions of this chapter
may be adopted upon payment to the community service section, for the use of
the City, the following fees:
   (1)   Dogs and cats    $ 8.00
      Other animals    $10.00
   (2)   The amount of the veterinarian’s current inoculation fee unless
inoculation is proven;
   (3)   The amount of forty-five dollars ($45.00) for neuter/spay deposit;
   (4)   The license fee imposed by Section
7-2201.
   (b)   Any animal adopted under the provisions of subsection (a) shall be
presented for neutering or spaying to a veterinarian within sixty (60) days of
the date of adoption and proof of said neutering or spaying shall be presented
to the community service section and upon presentation the deposit shall be
returned to the adopting person.
   (c)   The owner or keeper of any animal may release said dog or cat to the
community service section impounded for disposition as an impounded animal free
of charge, provided said owner or keeper signs a written waiver relinquishing
all rights to the animal and supplies satisfactory proof of ownership. If proof
of ownership is unavailable, the community service section shall follow the
procedures set forth in this chapter for impounded stray animals.
ARTICLE IV. KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
SEC. 7-4100.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall engage in business as a pet shop operator, kennel
operator, animal shelter or any combination thereof, or otherwise engage in the
business of buying, selling or dealing in animals, without first obtaining a
license from the City issued to such person by the accounts and finance officer
or his or her designee (“accounts and finance officer”).
   (b)   Only a person who complies with all of this article’s requirements
shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license. Licenses are not
transferable from one person to another or from one premises to another. A
valid license shall be posted in every licensed place of business pursuant to
Section
7-4104 and shall expire April 30 of each year and shall be renewed before May 1
of each year.
SEC. 7-4101.   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license required by this article shall make written
application therefore to the accounts and finance officer on forms provided by
the accounts and finance officer, stating the name and residence of the
applicant and the place at which the applicant intends or desires to carry on
the business, giving the street location as well as a description of the
premises.
SEC. 7-4102.   LICENSE FEE.
   Any person desiring a license required by this article shall pay a license
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. Any person failing to obtain a license
prior to engaging in business as a pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal
shelter or any combination thereof, or otherwise engaging in the business of
buying, selling or dealing in animals, shall be assessed two (2) times the
applicable fee in addition to any other fine, penalty or cost assessed for
violating this article.
SEC. 7-4103.   INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   Upon the filing of an application for a license required by this article,
the accounts and finance officer shall forward copies of same to the department
and the land development manager or his or her designee for inspection of the
premises for compliance with all relevant state and City health regulations and
all City ordinances for compliance with this article and the City’s zoning
ordinances. Upon receipt of compliance reports with said regulations and
ordinances from the appropriate City officials, and upon receipt of the license
fee, the accounts and finance officer shall issue a license to the applicant.
SEC. 7-4104.   POSTING LICENSE ON PREMISES.
   Any person receiving a license under the provisions of this article shall
display said license conspicuously in the licensed premises.
SEC. 7-4105.   INFORMATION ON DOGS AND CATS FOR SALE.
   Every pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal shelter or any combination
thereof, or any person otherwise engaged in the business of buying, selling or
dealing in animals shall provide the following information for every dog or cat
available for sale or offered as a gift or promotional consideration:
   (1)   The age, sex, and weight of the dog or cat;
   (2)   The dog or cat’s breed;
   (3)   A record of the dog or cat’s vaccinations and veterinary care and
treatment;
   (4)   A record of the dog or cat’s surgical sterilization or lack of
surgical sterilization, and if the dog or cat has not undergone surgical
sterilization, information concerning the benefits to the dog or cat of such
sterilization;
   (5)   The name and address of the dog’s or cat’s breeder;
   (6)   The name and address of any other person who owned or harbored the dog
or cat between its birth and the point of sale.
SEC. 7-4106.   SALE OR GIFT OF REPTILES AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (a)   Every pet shop operator, kennel operator, animal shelter or any
combination thereof, or any person otherwise engaged in the business of buying,
selling or dealing in animals shall provide the information set forth in
subsection (b) below for every reptile for sale, or offered as a gift or
promotional consideration, by conspicuously and prominently posting a notice
containing such information regarding safe reptile-handling practices on the
premises where reptiles are displayed, housed, or held and by distributing such
information in written form to the reptile’s purchaser or recipient.   
   (b)   The following information must be posted on the premises and provided
to the purchaser or recipient as set forth in subsection (a) above:
   (1)   “As with many other animals, reptiles carry salmonella bacteria, which
can make people sick. Safe reptile-handling steps should be taken to reduce the
chance of infection.”
   (2)   “Always wash your hands thoroughly after you handle your pet reptile,
its food, and anything it has touched.”
   (3)   “Keep your pet reptile and its equipment out of the kitchen or any
area where food is prepared. Kitchen sinks should not be used to bathe reptiles
or wash their dishes, cages, or aquariums. If a bathtub is used for these
purposes, it should be cleaned thoroughly and disinfected with bleach.”
   (4)   “Do not nuzzle or kiss your pet reptile.”
   (5)   “Keep reptiles out of homes where there are children under 5 years of
age or people with weakened immune systems. Children under 5 years of age or
people with weakened immune systems should avoid contact with reptiles.”
   (6)   “Pet reptiles should not be allowed in child care centers.”
   (7)   “Pet reptiles should not be allowed to roam freely throughout the home
or living area.”
SEC. 7-4107.   ENFORCEMENT.
   Any licensee or any licensee’s agent shall permit any community service
officer or any peace officer or other City official free and unrestricted
access to the licensed premises for the purposes of inspecting such premises.
Inspections shall be performed as often as deemed necessary by the community
service officer or any peace officer or other City official for the enforcement
of this article. This section does not provide an exclusive enforcement scheme,
and any and all other enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter may be
utilized to enforce this article’s provisions.
SEC. 7-4108.   LICENSE SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.
   (a)    In general . The department may suspend or revoke any license granted
hereunder if the operation of the licensed premises is found to be detrimental
to the health or safety of the animals in the licensed premises or the public
in general, is found to be noncompliant with state law or City ordinances, or
if the licensee has been found to be guilty of violating any City ordinance or
state law in the operation of the licensed premises. Said suspension or
revocation shall occur after notice and an opportunity for hearing, as provided
in this section.
   (b)   License suspension . Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the
department by notifying the licensee in writing that the license is, upon
service of a notice, immediately suspended or that the suspension shall be
effective on a specific future date, and that an opportunity for a hearing
before the chief of police will be provided if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the department.
   (c)   Emergency license suspension . Notwithstanding any other provision of
this article, if the department finds unsanitary or other conditions which, in
the judgment of the department, constitutes a substantial hazard to the health
and safety of animals on the licensed premises or to the public health and
safety, the license may be immediately suspended without warning, notice, or
hearing, but with written notice from the department following the immediate
suspension as soon as is practicable, specifying the corrective action to be
taken, and specifying the time
period within which such action shall be taken. The licensee shall cease
operating the licensed business immediately upon suspension, but upon written
application to the department, the license holder shall be afforded a hearing
before the chief of police as soon as practicable.
   (d)   Reinstatement of suspended license . Any person whose license has been
suspended may, at any time, make application for a re-inspection for the
purpose of license reinstatement. This application shall include a statement
signed by the applicant that, in the applicant’s opinion, the conditions
causing the license suspension have been corrected. The application shall also
contain any necessary documentation required by the department to assure the
licensee’s compliance with state law or City ordinances.
   (e)   License revocation . For serious or repeated violations of any
applicable state law or City ordinances, or for interference with a community
service officer or peace officer or any other City official in the performance
of any duties with respect to this article or any other provision of this
chapter or other City ordinances, the license may be permanently revoked after
an opportunity for a hearing before the chief of police has been provided to
the licensee. Prior to revoking a license, the community service officer, peace
officer or other City official shall notify the license holder in writing
stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising
that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) calendar
days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed
with the health authority by the license holder within such five (5) calendar
day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a
hearing relative to license revocation.
   (f)   Notice . A notice provided for in this article is properly served when
it is delivered to the license holder or an agent of the license holder at the
license holder’s premises, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder.
   (g)   Hearings . Hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted at
a place and time designated by the chief of police or his or her designee and
shall be open to the public and recorded by a tape recorder, stenographer or
other reliable means. The chief of police may admit into evidence all relevant
evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, and live
testimony. Based upon the record of the hearing, the chief of police shall make
written findings and shall sustain, modify or rescind any license suspension or
revocation notice or order considered in the hearing.
   (h)   Appeal . Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may
appeal to the circuit court under the provisions of the Illinois Administrative
Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq., and amendments thereto.
SEC. 7-4109.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Fines . In addition to the license suspension and revocation
procedures set forth in this article, any person violating the provisions of
this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus
court costs, and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court
costs.
   (b)   Nuisance . Any person engaging in business as a pet shop operator,
kennel operator, animal shelter or any combination thereof, or otherwise
engaging in the business of buying, selling or dealing in animals, contrary to
the provisions of this article or contrary to any applicable state law or City
ordinances shall be guilty of creating a public nuisance, which, in addition to
any other remedy available at law or in equity, may be abated by the City
pursuant to the provisions set forth in
Chapter 21 of the City Code.
SEC. 7-4110.   THIS ARTICLE DECLARED SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE LAW.
   The provisions of this article are in addition to, and not in replacement
of, any law of the state of Illinois.
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. COMMUNITY SERVICE SECTION
SEC. 7-5100.   IN GENERAL.
   The community service section is responsible for enforcing this chapter and
state laws and regulations pertaining to animals and their care and treatment
and the proper operation of the City’s animal control facility. A community
service officer shall have authority to make arrests, issue summons, and take
other actions necessary to enforce this chapter and such state law and
regulations whenever peace officers are authorized to enforce the provisions
thereof. Community service officers shall be considered special peace officers
of the City for the purposes herein set forth upon being administered the oath
of office required in
Chapter 26 of the City Code.
SEC. 7-5101.   IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS; RECORDS.
   Community service officers and other peace officers are hereby authorized to
impound animals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, department
procedures and other applicable state laws and regulations.
SEC. 7-5102.   BOND.
   All community service officers assigned to the community service section
shall be bonded.
DIVISION 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 7-5200.   AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENFORCING THE
PROVISION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (a)   In general . Community service officers or any other peace officers,
or both, are authorized to enter any premises wherein such officer has
reasonable grounds to believe that any animal might be harbored in violation of
this chapter. In the event that the owner, occupant or other person in control
of the premises refuses any officer authorized entry by this section admittance
to the premises, the officer shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
and obtain either a search warrant or an administrative search warrant
(hereinafter referred to in this article as a “warrant”) as may be appropriate
under the circumstances.
   (b)   Execution of search warrant . A warrant obtained pursuant to
subsection (a) above shall be executed within ninety-six (96) hours from the
time of issuance. If the warrant is executed, a duplicate copy shall be left
with any person from whom any animals or other evidence is seized; if no person
is available the copy shall be left at the place from which the animal or other
evidence was seized. Any warrant not executed within such time shall be void
and shall be returned to the court of the judge issuing the same as not
executed.
   (c)   Command of search warrant . The warrant shall command the person
directed to execute the same to search the place particularly described in the
warrant and to seize the animal or other evidence particularly described in the
warrant.
   (d)   Use of force in execution of search warrant . All necessary and
reasonable force may be used to effect an entry into any building or property
or part thereof to execute a warrant.
   (e)   Detention and search of persons on premises . During the execution of
the warrant the person executing the same may reasonably detain to search any
person in the place at the time to protect himself or herself from attack or to
prevent the disposal or concealment of any animal or evidence particularly
described in the warrant.
   (f)   Return and inventory to court of things seized . Return of all animals
and evidence seized shall be made without unnecessary delay before the judge
issuing the warrant or before any court of competent jurisdiction. An inventory
of any animals or evidence seized shall be filed with the return and signed
under oath by the person executing the warrant. The judge shall upon request
deliver a copy of the inventory to the person from whom or from whose premises
the animal or evidence was taken and to the applicant for the warrant.
   (g)   Disposition of animal or evidence seized .   The court before which
the animal or evidence is returned shall enter an order providing for custody
pending further proceedings.
   (h)   When search warrant may be executed . A warrant may be executed at any
time of any day or night.
   (i)   No search warrant quashed for technicality . No warrant shall be
quashed nor evidence suppressed because of technical irregularities not
affecting the substantial rights of the accused.
   (j)   Nothing herein shall be deemed an exclusive remedy nor shall anything
herein be deemed to preclude community service officers and peace officers from
conducting or making warrantless entries, searches and seizures as allowed by
law.
SEC. 7-5201.   HINDERING COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER DUTIES.
   No person shall hinder, delay, impede, interfere with or obstruct any
community service officer, peace officer or other department personnel
performing his or her duties under this
Chapter 7, or engaged in capturing, impounding or taking to the City’s animal
control facility any animal subject to impoundment.
SEC. 7-5202.   CITY TO PROVIDE ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   The City shall provide and maintain an animal control facility suitable for
impounding and maintaining dogs and cats and other small animals, and shall
provide and furnish all other equipment and supplies required in the
application of this chapter. In lieu thereof, the City may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement to accomplish the objectives of this section.
(Ord. No. 2001-07-03; chapter repealed; new chapter enacted; 07/03/01)
CHAPTER 8
BUILDINGS AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING SERVICES
See end of chapter for list of chapter amendments.
   Art. I.   Division of Inspections
         Div. 1.   In General, §8-1100 - §8-1105
         Div. 2.   Inspector Positions Created; Employment; Responsibility;
Qualifications, §8-1200 - §8-1210
         Div. 3.   Appeals Boards, §8-1300 - §8-1305
         Div. 4.    Licensing, §8-1400 - §8-1408
      Div. 5.   Certificates of Occupancy, §8-1500 - §8-1501
   Art. II.   Building and Residential Codes
         Div. 1.   Moline Building Code, §8-2100 - §8-2101
         Div. 2.   Moline Residential Code, §8-2200 - §8-2201
   Art. III.   Mechanical Code
         Div. 1.   Moline Mechanical Code, §8-3100 - §8-3101
         Div. 2.   Moline Fuel Gas Code, §8-3200 - §8-3201
   Art. IV.   Property Maintenance Code, §8-4100 - §8-4102
   Art. V.   Plumbing Code, §8-5100 - §8-5101
   Art. VI.   Electrical Code, §8-6100 - §8-6101
   Art. VII.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, §8-7100 - §8-7101
   Art. VIII.   Miscellaneous
      Div. 1.    Rental Housing Inspection Program, §8-8100 - §8-8108
      Div. 2.    Emergency Radio System Coverage, §8-8200 - §8-8209
      Div. 3.    Filling and Grading Requirements, §8-8300 - §8-8303
ARTICLE I. DIVISION OF INSPECTIONS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 8-1100.   CREATED; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby created the building division. The purpose of the building
division shall be to administer and enforce the building, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical, and housing codes of the City of Moline and such other codes and
ordinances of the City as may be provided from time to time by ordinance and to
administer and enforce public health ordinances of the City of Moline, and to
assist in the enforcement of zoning, subdivision and fire codes.
SEC. 8-1101.   POSITION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL CREATED; APPOINTMENT;
RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
   There is hereby created the position of building official which position
shall be the head of the building division. The building official shall be
appointed by the city administrator or designee thereof and may be dismissed by
the city administrator at any time in accordance with the provisions of this
Code for the removal of officers set forth in Sec. 2-3202(c)(8). The building
official shall be responsible for the administration, direction, and
supervision of the building division and its personnel; actively participate in
actual field inspection work; and carry out such other functions as may be
assigned from time to time by the city administrator, City Council, or by
ordinance. The individual appointed to the position of building official shall
be a person skilled in the field of building construction by education,
training, and experience including a minimum of ten (10) years experience in
building construction or an equivalent combination of education, training and
experience.
   Any references to the building official throughout this chapter shall also
be construed to mean code manager, and references to code manager shall also be
construed to mean building official.
SEC. 8-1102.   PERSONNEL; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (a)   The building division shall consist of the building official; the
building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, health and housing inspectors; and
such clerical help and assistants as the City Council shall authorize from time
to time. Position titles of personnel at the time of creation of the division
or at the time a function was transferred to the division shall remain
unchanged until such positions are vacated by such personnel; and thereafter
such position titles and grade classifications may be changed in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the City Code.
   (b)   When vacant positions occur in the building division, the city
administrator or designee thereof shall employ personnel to fill such positions
in the manner provided by the City Code. When filling vacant positions, the
city administrator shall employ individuals with sufficient skill and knowledge
by education, training, and experience to adequately carry out the
responsibilities of the division. As guidance in filling vacant positions, the
city administrator shall use the qualifications set forth in the job
description then current for said positions.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city administrator or the
City Council from combining any of the positions listed hereinabove provided
the appropriate licensure and experience are still obtained.
SEC. 8-1103.   VIOLATION PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Section
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 8-1104.   INJUNCTION; CORPORATION COUNSEL.
   The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized to seek, in addition to any
penalty or punishment provided for by Sec.
8-1103, injunctive relief to abate violations of this chapter as authorized by
65 ILCS 5/11-13-15 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 to 5/11-31-2, or any other pertinent
authorization.
SEC. 8-1105.   SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses, and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
DIVISION 2. INSPECTOR POSITIONS CREATED; EMPLOYMENT; RESPONSIBILITY;
QUALIFICATIONS
SEC. 8-1200.   EMPLOYMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST.
   (a)   The environmental health specialist shall be under the direct
supervision of the building official, who shall have authority to designate
other persons in the building division to assist in the performance of or to
perform some of the duties listed below. Said building official shall employ
the person to fill such position after the applicant is interviewed in
accordance with the City of Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and
applicable collective bargaining agreements, if any so apply.
   (b)   Duties: The environmental health specialist shall have the following
duties and responsibilities, and shall also be known as the health inspector,
the health authority, and sanitarian if such terms appear elsewhere in this
Code:
   (1)   the enforcement of food service sanitation and food handling
regulations contained in
Chapter 14;
   (2)   the review of state and federal laws dealing with public health and
recommendations to the city administrator or designee thereof regarding same;
   (3)   the coordination of public health programs of the City with those of
neighboring cities and with the State of Illinois and the County of Rock Island
Departments of Public Health;
   (4)   other duties as assigned by the city administrator or designee
thereof, the City Council, or ordinance.
   (c)   Inspection; Right of Entry; Enforcement Powers.
   (1)   The environmental health specialist, in the performance of the duties
of the position, shall be required to inspect private and public property and
business records when called for by this Code or when the environmental health
specialist or one with authority has reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any building or upon any premises any condition constituting a danger
to the public health or a violation of this Code.
   (2)   Therefore, the environmental health specialist or one with authority
shall have the right to enter any building or premises at all reasonable times
to perform such inspections; provided, if such building or premises be
occupied, said officer shall first present proper credentials and request
entry; and provided, if such building or premises be unoccupied, said officer
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons
having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such
entry is refused, the environmental health specialist or one with authority
shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the
environmental health specialist or one with authority has obtained an
administrative search warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry,
no person shall fail or neglect to permit prompt entry after identification of
the environmental health specialist and presentation of such warrant or remedy
for the purpose of making such inspection.
   (3)   Nothing in subsection (b) above shall be construed to require a
warrant where the common law would not require one (i.e., search incident to
lawful arrest, hot pursuit, recognized emergencies where destruction of
contraband or evidence is imminent, search without entry, etc.).
   (4)   The environmental health specialist or one with authority shall have
the power to issue any order, notice of violation, or notice to abate public
nuisance or revoke a permit or to seize any contraband where expressly provided
elsewhere in this Code.
   (d)   Police Powers. The environmental health specialist, or one acting with
authority, shall be vested with powers of a police officer in the performance
of the powers set forth in this article and shall cause all buildings and
premises or their contents to be kept in a sanitary condition or to be closed
or the occupant quarantined or removed.
SEC. 8-1201.   EMPLOYMENT OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR.
   The plumbing inspector shall be under the direct supervision of the building
official. Said building official shall employ the person to fill such position
after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the City of Moline
Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective bargaining
agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1202.   POSITION CREATED; COMBINATION INSPECTOR – PLUMBING I.
   There is hereby created within the building division the position of
combination inspector – plumbing I, who shall be under the direct supervision
of the building official. Said building official shall employ the person to
fill such position after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the
City of Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective
bargaining agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1203.   EMPLOYMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   The electrical inspector shall be under the direct supervision of the
building official. Said building official shall employ the person to fill such
position after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the City of
Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective bargaining
agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1204.   POSITION CREATED; COMBINATION INSPECTOR – ELECTRICAL II.
   There is hereby created within the building division the position of
combination inspector – electrical II, who shall be under the direct
supervision of the building official. Said building official shall employ the
person to fill such position after the applicant is interviewed in accordance
with the City of Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable
collective bargaining agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1205.   EMPLOYMENT OF MECHANICAL INSPECTOR.
   The mechanical inspector shall be under the direct supervision of the
building official. Said building official shall employ the person to fill such
position after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the City of
Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective bargaining
agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1206.   EMPLOYMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The building inspector shall be under the direct supervision of the building
official. Said building official shall employ the person to fill such position
after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the City of Moline
Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective bargaining
agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1207.   POSITION CREATED; COMBINATION INSPECTOR – BUILDING I.
   There is hereby created within the building division the position of
combination inspector – building I, who shall be under the direct supervision
of the building official. Said building official shall employ the person to
fill such position after the applicant is interviewed in accordance with the
City of Moline Recruitment and Selection Policy and applicable collective
bargaining agreements, if any so apply.
SEC. 8-1208.   INSPECTOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   The inspector of a specific trade shall possess the training, experience,
education and license(s) called for by the job description for said position.
SEC. 8-1209.   INSPECTOR DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   It shall be the duty of the inspector to perform skilled field work in
securing compliance with ordinances and regulations governing existing and new
buildings and other construction regulated by the adopted codes for the
appropriate trades and related work as required.
SEC. 8-1210.   NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT OFFICER.
   (a)   The neighborhood improvement officer shall be under the direct
supervision of the building official after the applicant for said position is
interviewed in accordance with the City of Moline Recruitment and Selection
Policy and applicable collective bargaining agreements, if any so apply.
   (b)   Qualifications of Neighborhood Improvement Officer. The neighborhood
improvement officer shall possess the training, experience, and education
called for by the job description for said position.
   (c)   Inspection; Right of Entry. The neighborhood improvement officer,
under the authority of the building official, is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the neighborhood improvement officer is authorized to pursue recourse
as provided by law.
   (d)   Duties. The neighborhood improvement officer shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:
   (1)   prevent, enforce and abate violations of the housing, nuisance,
vegetation, zoning and sign codes;
   (2)   serve as the City’s liaison to neighborhood groups and residents in
identification of housing, nuisance, vegetation, zoning and sign code issues
and resolution of said issues;
   (3)   administer the weed and noxious vegetation program of the City;
   (4)   perform skilled field work in securing compliance with ordinances and
regulations governing property maintenance codes and related work as required;
   (5)   schedule and coordinate cases involving violations of this Chapter as
well as violations of the zoning and sign codes brought before the code hearing
officer and the circuit court and prosecute cases before the code hearing
officer.
DIVISION 3. APPEALS BOARDS
SEC. 8-1300.   BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (a)   Jurisdiction. In order to determine the suitability of alternate
materials and methods of construction that still meet the intent and
requirements of the building codes and to provide for reasonable
interpretations of the building codes, there shall be and is hereby created a
building board of appeals.
   (b)   Membership. Said board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. One (1) member shall
be a licensed architect; one (1) member shall be a structural, metallurgical,
or hydraulic engineer; one (1) member shall be a heavy construction contractor
licensed as a general contractor; and two (2) members shall be construction
contractors licensed as general contractors. In addition, the code manager
shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary of the board. The ex
officio member shall not be entitled to vote on matters before the board. Each
appointed member shall serve a staggered term of four (4) years and they shall
hold office until their successors are appointed and qualify. Said board is a
continuation of the current building commission, and the staggering of terms
shall follow the current practice.
   (c)   Rules and decisions. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions
and findings in writing to the code manager with a duplicate copy to the
appellant.
   (d)   Appeals. Any owner or agent thereof not in accord with a decision of
the code manager shall have the right to appeal from such order or ruling to
the board of appeals within five (5) days after written notice of such order or
ruling shall have been served upon the person or persons required to be served.
Such appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the order of ruling from
which the appeal is taken and shall set forth the remedy sought and reasons
justifying the granting of said remedy. Said appeal shall be filed with the
code manager; and, upon its filing, the application for permit, plans and
specifications submitted therewith, inspection records, and any other material
contained in the permit file shall be considered part of the official record.
No appeal shall be considered unless timely filed.
SEC. 8-1301.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code, to mitigate specific provisions of
the International Property Maintenance Code that create practical difficulties
in their enforcement, and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, there is
hereby created a property maintenance appeals board consisting of five (5)
members, who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters
pertaining to construction and who are not employees of the City. The board
shall consist of one (1) practicing attorney, one (1) licensed architect or
engineer, one (1) organized neighborhood association board member, one (1)
multiple property owner, and one (1) Illinois realtor. The code manager shall
be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board, but shall
have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by
the mayor and shall hold office at said mayor's pleasure. The board shall adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business and shall render
all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the code
manager. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions contained in this Code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted
by the board shall be delivered to the code manager, who shall make them freely
accessible to the public.
   (b)   Each appointed member shall serve a staggered term of three (3) years,
and they shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualify.
Said board is a continuation of the housing advisory and appeals board, and the
staggering of terms shall follow the current practice.
SEC. 8-1302.   MECHANICAL APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and
methods of construction and to provide reasonable interpretations of this Code,
there shall be and hereby is created the mechanical board of appeals consisting
of five (5) members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon
matters pertaining to mechanical design, construction and maintenance and the
public health aspects of mechanical systems and who are not employees of the
City. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as
secretary to said board. The mechanical board of appeals shall be appointed by
the mayor. The board shall adopt reasonable rules of procedure for conducting
its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
   (b)   The term of office for members of the mechanical board of appeals
shall be two (2) years, and they shall hold office until their successors are
appointed and qualify. Said board is a continuation of the current heating and
air conditioning board, and the staggering of terms shall follow the current
practice.
SEC. 8-1303.   PLUMBING APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and
methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the
plumbing code, there shall be and hereby is created a plumbing appeals board
consisting of five (5) members who are qualified by experience and training to
pass upon plumbing matters and who are not employees of the City. The building
official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said
board. The members of said board shall be appointed by the mayor. The board
shall adopt reasonable rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the building official.
   (b)   The term of office for members of the plumbing appeals board shall be
two (2) years, and they shall hold office until their successors are appointed
and qualify. Said board is a continuation of the current plumbing board and the
staggering of terms shall follow the current practice.
SEC. 8-1304.   ELECTRICAL APPEALS BOARD.
   (a)   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and
methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the
electrical code, there shall be and hereby is created an electrical appeals
board consisting of five (5) members who are qualified by experience and
training to pass upon electrical matters and who are not employees of the City.
The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as
secretary to said board. The members of said board shall be appointed by the
mayor. The board shall adopt reasonable rules of procedure for conducting its
business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
   (b)   The term of office for members of the electrical appeals board shall
be three (3) years, and they shall hold office until their successors are
appointed and qualify. Said board is a continuation of the current electrical
commission, and the staggering of terms shall follow the current practice.
SEC. 8-1305.   COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the various appeals boards provided for in Sections
8-1300 through
8-1304 shall serve without compensation but may receive reimbursement for
reasonable expenditures made in the performance of their duties, if such
reimbursement is provided for in the annual budget of the City.
DIVISION 4. LICENSING
SEC. 8-1400.   GENERAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
general contracting in the City of Moline shall file with the building
inspector, to be approved by the building official, a license/permit bond in
the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned on the faithful
performance of all of the provisions of this Code and for all work performed
under the license sought. Such surety is to be a company authorized to transact
business in the State of Illinois. This shall be a continuing bond until
canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to cancel this bond for
future liability upon sixty (60) days written notice to the City of Moline
building official.
   (b)   Said person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of general
contracting in the City of Moline also shall register annually with the
building official and no such person, firm or corporation shall engage in such
business unless and until so registered. Registration shall consist of
providing the business name of the person, firm or corporation; the legal name;
the address of the business; the telephone number, if any; and the names and
addresses of representatives, officers, or employees authorized to obtain
permits in the business name.
   (1)   Proof of liability insurance acceptable to the office of the building
official in the type and amount listed below:
      Each applicant wishing registration as a contractor in the City of Moline
shall obtain and maintain for the duration of such registration, public
liability and property damage insurance in the minimum amount and form as
hereby specified: $100,000.00 for each occurrence of property damage; and
$300,000.00 for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such policy
shall provide that it cannot be cancelled except upon written notification to
the office of the building official at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
of cancellation. Proof shall be a certificate of insurance; and
   (2)   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers' compensation insurance
or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers’ compensation.
Proof shall be either the Certificate of Insurance from the insurance provider
or the Certificate of Approval as a self-insurer issued by the Illinois Workers
Compensation Commission.
      If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or partnership and the applicant
has no employees, the applicant shall not be required to provide proof of
workers’ compensation insurance. Such applicant’s application shall include a
sworn statement that said applicant has no employees.
   (c)   The annual fee for registering shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00)
and registration shall be valid for a one-year period commencing on January 1.
   (d)   A “general contractor” shall be taken to be any person, firm,
partnership or corporation employed directly by any firm, person, partnership
or corporation, who erects or reconstructs any building or parts thereof. A
person engaged in any branch of building construction for which a license/
permit bond is not required by ordinance shall be exempted from giving such
bond under this section.
(Ord. No. 3010-2019; Sec. 8-1400(c) repealed; new Sec. 8-1400(c) enacted; 04/
09/19)
SEC. 8-1401.   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE AND REGISTRATION.
   (a)   DEFINITIONS
   (1)   As used in this chapter, the term “Electrical Contractor” shall mean
and include any person who is registered as such with the City, maintains a
bond and insurance as required, and employs a Licensed Electrician to perform
and supervise all electrical work undertaken by the contractor. Licensed
Electricians employed by a firm or corporation to perform or to supervise
electrical work do not need to individually register, so long as the firm or
corporation is registered pursuant to this chapter and they remain employed by
the firm or corporation.
   (2)   As used in the chapter, the term “Licensed Electrician” shall mean and
include any individual who is engaged in and has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience, and technical knowledge to supervise and do electrical
work in accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing the work
and is licensed as required herein.
   (b)   REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED
   (1)   Securing Permits: Only a registered Electrical Contractor may secure
electrical permits and furnish electrical equipment and components for
installation by the holder of a valid electrician license in the employ of the
contractor, or to be installed under the supervision of the holder of a valid
electrician license.
   (2)   Licensed Electrician Status Required: If the person seeking to
register as an Electrical Contractor is an individual acting as a sole
proprietor, he or she must be a Licensed Electrician. If the individual seeking
to register is a corporation, partnership, group or association, it must have
an officer, partner, member or employee, an individual who is a Licensed
Electrician. Proof of license can be shown as follows:
      a.   An individual who presents an electrical license or registration
from another city in Illinois will be required to submit a copy of that license
and an affidavit verifying:
         i.   They have worked for a minimum of five (5) years as an Electrical
Contractor.
         ii.   If such individual took and passed either the master’s
examination through Thomson Prometric or the International Code Council
National Contractor Trades Examination Program, Standard Master Electrician
exam, or a master’s electrical examination administered through another state,
they may state such in their affidavit, but testing is not required to prove
proof of license under this subsection (b)(2)(a).
      b.   An individual who does not present an electrical license or
registration from another city in Illinois must provide proof thereof of a
passing grade on either the master’s examination through Thomson Prometric,
1260 Energy Lane, St. Paul, MN 55108, 1-(800)-280-3926; or the International
Code Council National Contractor Trades Examination Program, Standard Master
Electrician exam only, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, AL 35213, 1-888-422-
7233, www.iccsafe.org/contractor; or a master’s electrical examination
administered through another state. The passing test results are not subject to
expiration as long as the individual is active in the electrical trade and
submits an affidavit verifying a minimum of five (5) years electrical
experience.
   (3)   Notice of Discharge: Whenever a Licensed Electrician shall leave or be
discharged from the employ of any person who is required by this section to
employ a Licensed Electrician, a notice in writing thereof shall be given
within five (5) days by both the employer and the Licensed Electrician to the
building official, and the permit privileges of such person and Electrical
Contractor shall without further order or action by the electrical inspector
stand suspended until the employment of a Licensed Electrician.
   (4)   Electrical Contractor Registration Application: The registration
application shall state:
      a.   The name of the applicant;
      b.   The name of the contractor’s business;
      c.   Whether individual, corporation or partnership (if partnership, it
shall include the names of all partners);
      d.   The residence of the applicant;
      e.   The address of the applicant’s place of business; and
      f.   The name, address and position of all Licensed Electricians in the
Electrical Contractor’s employ.
   (5)   Electrical Contractor Registration Fee: The annual registration fee
for an Electrical Contractor shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The annual fee
shall be valid for a period commencing on January 1 to December 31 of the
following year, and shall remain in force and effect for that period of time,
unless revoked pursuant to this division.
   (6)   Bond Requirements: Every person desiring to register as an Electrical
Contractor shall furnish a license/permit bond in the penal sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the applicant’s work in accordance with the provisions of this
Code and for all work performed under the license sought. Such surety is to be
a company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. This shall be a
continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to
cancel this bond for future liability upon sixty (60) days written notice to
the building official.
   (7)   Certificate of Liability Insurance: Every person desiring to register
as an Electrical Contractor shall submit a certificate of liability insurance
naming the City of Moline as the certificate holder and in the type and amounts
listed below:
      a.   Public liability and property damage insurance in the minimum amount
and form as hereby specified: $100,000.00 for each occurrence of property
damage; and $300,000.00 for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm.
Such policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled except upon written
notification to the building official at least thirty (30) days prior to the
date of cancellation.
      b.   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers’ compensation
insurance or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers’
compensation shall be either the certificate of insurance from the insurance
provider or the certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued by the
Illinois Workers’ Compensation Commission.
      c.   If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or partnership and the
applicant has no employees, the applicant shall not be required to provide
proof of workers’ compensation insurance. Such applicant’s application for
registration shall include a sworn statement that said applicant has no
employees.
   (8)   Renewal of Registration: This annual fee for renewing a registration
as an Electrical Contractor, pursuant to this division, shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) and shall be valid for an annual period commencing on January 1 to
December 31 of the following year, and shall remain in force and effect for
that period of time, unless revoked for cause. The Electrical Contractor shall
be required to confirm that certain requirements are met each year before the
registration will be renewed. The Electrical Contractor must also have proof of
valid insurance meeting the requirements set forth herein on file and that the
bond continue to be in place before the renewal will be completed.
   (9)   No person permitted to register under the provisions of this division
shall install or perform any electrical work after the expiration of the
registration or the revocation of the registration pursuant to this division,
unless the registration or renewal thereof shall have been received.
   HOMEOWNERS, EXCEPTION: Persons performing electrical work in the single
family residence that they own and where they reside will not be required to
register as an electrical contractor nor shall they be required to pay a
registration fee; however, the building official shall require a sufficient
display of electrical experience of a practical and elementary character so as
to test their knowledge and qualifications of the electrical work to be done in
the interest of safeguarding life and property.
(Ord. No. 3010-2019; Sec. 1401(b)(5) and (b)(8) repealed; new Sec. 1401(b)(5)
and (b)(8) enacted; 04/09/19)
SEC. 8-1402.   MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, alter, repair,
service, reset or replace any system or parts or appurtenances thereto,
regulated by the mechanical code unless such person or some member of the firm
or corporation shall first have obtained a mechanical license pursuant to this
division, or unless such person or the firm or corporation has regularly and
steadily in said person, firm or corporation's employ a holder of a mechanical
license, who shall be the authorized representative of the person, firm or
corporation in all matters pertaining to this chapter.
   (b)   The owner-occupant of a single dwelling house may, with the assistance
of any member of said owner-occupant's family and household, personally carry
on in said house, any work governed by this chapter without the license
required by subsection (a), except for gas pressure testing; however, the
owner-occupant shall obtain a permit for any such work and shall call for an
inspection as provided in this chapter. Gas pressure testing must be done by a
licensed mechanical contractor.
   (c)   The eligibility of an applicant for a mechanical contractor license
shall be of legal age to conduct business in the State of Illinois, and shall
have a minimum of five (5) years experience in mechanical work under the
supervision of a licensed mechanical contractor, or shall be a graduate
mechanical engineer having not less than one (1) year experience in mechanical
construction. Five (5) years experience may be reduced to one (1) year
providing the applicant has satisfactorily completed a course of study, such as
four (4) years apprenticeship or its equal, as determined and recognized by the
mechanical board, pertaining to his/her mechanical license.
   (d)   The license required by this article shall be issued only to an
individual, and not to a corporation or firm.
   (e)   A mechanical contractor who has registered as same in any city or
village in the State of Illinois shall be required to register and pay a fifty
dollar ($50.00) administrative filing fee to engage in mechanical contracting
in the City of Moline. The annual fee shall be valid for a period commencing on
January 1 to December 31 of the following year, and shall remain in force and
effect for that period of time, unless revoked for cause. An individual who
presents a mechanical license from another city in Illinois will not be
required to provide proof of testing, but will be required to submit an
affidavit verifying a minimum of five (5) years as a mechanical contractor.
   (f)   Any person who first shall have filed proper application and later
shall have satisfactorily passed an examination, as required by this division,
shall be entitled to receive a license to do mechanical work and to register as
a mechanical contractor and engage in the business of mechanical contracting.
   (g)   The registration of a mechanical contractor, as required by this
division, shall be made in writing to the code manager stating the name and
place of business of the applicant and the name of the representative of the
applicant who will act as supervisor of the work to be done under the
registration. The application shall be accompanied by a satisfactory affidavit
that the applicant or representative thereof passed the master’s mechanical
examination through Thomson Prometric, 1260 Energy Lane, St. Paul, MN 55108, 1-
(800)-280-3926 or the International Code Council National Contractor Trades
Examination Program, Standard Master Mechanical exam only, 900 Montclair Road,
Birmingham, AL 35213, 1-888-422-7233, www.iccsafe.org/contractor. Applicant
must have tested and passed the master’s mechanical examination and provided
proof of passing grade. The passing test results are not subject to expiration
as long as the individual is active in the mechanical trade and submits an
affidavit verifying a minimum of five (5) years mechanical experience.
   (h)   Before any license required by this chapter is issued, the applicant
therefor shall furnish a license/permit bond in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the applicant's work in accordance with the provisions of this
Code and for all work performed under the license sought. Such surety is to be
a company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. This shall be a
continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right to
cancel this bond for future liability upon sixty (60) days written notice to
the code manager.
   (i)   The annual fee for registering a mechanical contractor pursuant to
this division shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be valid for an annual
period commencing on January 1 to December 31 of the following year, and shall
remain in force and effect for that period of time, unless revoked for cause.
   (j)   Said person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of
mechanical contracting in the City of Moline shall provide proof of insurance
to the code manager in the type and amounts listed below:
   (1)   Proof shall be a certificate of insurance for public liability and
property damage insurance in the minimum amount and form as hereby specified:
$100,000.00 for each occurrence of property damage; and $300,000.00 for each
occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such policy shall provide that it
cannot be cancelled except upon written notification to the code manager at
least thirty (30) days prior to the date of cancellation.
   (2)   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers’ compensation insurance
or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers’ compensation
shall be either the certificate of insurance from the insurance provider or the
certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued the Illinois Industrial
Commission.
      If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or partnership and the applicant
has no employees, the applicant shall not be required to provide proof of
workers’ compensation insurance. Such applicant’s application shall include a
sworn statement that said applicant has no employees.
   (k)   No person permitted to register under the provisions of this division
shall install or repair mechanical equipment after the expiration of the
registration or after the registration shall have been revoked pursuant to this
division, unless the registration or renewal thereof shall have been received.
   (l)   A license required by this division is prohibited from being loaned,
rented, assigned, or transferred.
(Ord. No. 3010-2019; Sec. 8-1402(e) and (i) repealed; new Sec. 8-1402(e) and
(i) enacted; 04/09/19)
SEC. 8-1403.   PLUMBING LICENSE.
   No person shall be allowed to do plumbing or receive a permit therefor
within the City of Moline unless and until licensed as a plumber under the
Plumbing License Law (225 ILCS 320/1 et seq.), or unless exempted from the
licensing requirements of said law. In order to obtain a plumbing permit, the
person applying therefor shall post a State of Illinois plumbing license for
the business or corporation and a State of Illinois plumbing license for the
individual holding a plumbing license who shall be an officer of the business
or corporation.
SEC. 8-1404.   ROOFING CONTRACTOR LICENSE.
   No person shall be allowed to engage in the business of roofing contractor
or receive a permit to perform such work within the City of Moline unless and
until licensed or certified as a roofing contractor under the Roofing Industry
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 335/1 et seq.), or unless exempted from the licensing
requirements of said Act, and shall follow the registration and licensing
requirements for a general contractor.
SEC. 8-1405.   SEWER SERVICE AND MAINTENANCE BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   “Service and maintenance business” for purposes of this chapter shall
mean the trade, practice, performance for valuable consideration, or occupation
of cleaning sewer laterals and mains and septic systems by mechanical,
hydraulic, or other means.
   (b)   No person shall engage in the service and maintenance business unless
and until such person or the firm by whom such person is employed is registered
with the building official, and no permit will be issued for such work unless
so registered.
   (c)   A person registering as a service and maintenance business shall
provide the business name, the legal name, the address, and telephone number,
if any, of the person, firm, or corporation registering hereunder. In addition,
such person shall provide the names and addresses of representatives, officers,
or employees authorized to obtain permits in the business name.
   (d)   The annual fee for registration pursuant to this division shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00). Such registration shall be valid for one (1) year
commencing on January 1 of each year.
   (e)   In order to obtain a license, the person applying therefor must post a
license/permit bond in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the applicant’s work in accordance
with all laws of the state and the City relating to plumbing or service and
maintenance work and for all work performed under the license sought. Such
surety is to be a company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois.
This shall be a continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have
the right to cancel this bond for future liability upon sixty (60) days written
notice to the building official.
   (f)   Said person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of sewer
cleaning in the City of Moline shall provide proof of insurance to the building
official in the type and amounts listed below:
   (1)   Proof shall be a certificate of insurance for public liability and
property damage insurance in the minimum amount and form as hereby specified:
$100,000.00 for each occurrence of property damage; and $300,000.00 for each
occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such policy shall provide that it
cannot be cancelled except upon written notification to the building official
at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of cancellation.
   (2)   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers’ compensation insurance
or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers’ compensation
shall be either the certificate of insurance from the insurance provider or the
certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued the Illinois Workers
Compensation Commission.
      If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or partnership and the applicant
has no employees, the applicant shall not be required to provide proof of
workers’ compensation insurance. Such applicant’s application shall include a
sworn statement that said applicant has no employees.
Ord. No. 3010-2019; Sec. 8-1405(d) repealed; new Sec. 8-1405(d) enacted 04/09/
19)
SEC. 8-1406.   LICENSE AND REGISTRATION NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No license or registration required by this division is transferable or
assignable, and no license or registration may be loaned or rented to any
person, and a license or registration must be in the possession of the person
to whom said license or registration was issued or be surrendered to the City.
SEC. 8-1407.   CHANGE OF STATUS.
   Whenever a designated representative of an electrical, mechanical or
plumbing contractor severs a relationship with an electrical, mechanical or
plumbing contractor, or a general contractor revokes an agency agreement to
allow persons to take out permits in the licensee's name, or an electrical,
mechanical or plumbing licensee severs a relationship with a firm engaging in
such work, the electrical contractor, mechanical contractor, plumbing
contractor, or general contractor, engaging in such work shall immediately
notify the building official in writing and designate new representatives, if
any, if required to engage in work within the City.
SEC. 8-1408.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The respective board having authority to examine applicants or the building
official, if no board has such authority, shall have the authority to suspend
or revoke for cause, any license or registration granted under this division
for a violation of this chapter, after due hearing and upon notice to the party
charged. The notice shall be in writing and served by registered mail to the
party charged, and shall be not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing.
DIVISION 5. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
SEC. 8-1500.   CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   Definitions .  As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
   (1)   Certificate of Occupancy means a certificate that states that all the
permitted work was done in compliance with the approved construction documents,
current code and that the building/structure may be occupied.
   (2)   Certificate of Occupancy Deposit means a refundable security deposit
that is required for all new commercial and residential buildings, additions,
remodels, changes of “occupancy” use or other structures that are intended to
be occupied for either private or public use.
   (3)   Inspection Request means notification from the building permit holder
to the code manager or his designee that the work is ready for inspection. It
shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for
inspections of such work that are required by the building code.
   (4)   International Building Code means a building code that has provisions
that apply to all structures with three or more dwellings, non-habitable
structures and all commercial buildings.
   (5)   International Residential Code means a building code that has
provisions that apply to all one and two-family dwellings and multiple single-
family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with
separate means of egress and any accessory structures.
   (6)   Permit means an official document issued by the authority having
jurisdiction which authorizes performance of a specified activity.
   (7)   Permit Extension means an extension of time, not to exceed 180 days,
to complete the permitted project.
   (8)   Required Inspections means mandatory inspections as outlined (in the
building and residential codes) on the permit card and based on the scope of
the project.
   (9)   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy means that temporary occupancy may
be permitted while non-life safety issues are being completed within a
specified amount of time.
   (b)   Certificate of Occupancy.
   (1)   No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in
the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the code manager has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided in the International Residential Code and
International Building Code unless exempted as set forth in subsection (e)
below.
   (2)   A certificate of occupancy shall be requested by the building permit
holder prior to the expiration of the building permit and prior to occupancy
for all new commercial and residential buildings, including additions and
remodels of such buildings or structures.
   (c)   Certificate of Occupancy Deposit.
   (1)   All building permit applications that involve any new commercial and
residential buildings, additions, remodels or other structures that are
intended to be occupied for either private or public use shall be required to
submit a certificate of occupancy deposit to the City prior to the issuance of
a building permit. The permit holder is responsible for the certificate of
occupancy deposit. All projects within the above scope of work are required to
submit a deposit unless exempt under subsection (e) or if the project is
subject to a development agreement with the City of Moline. If a project is
subject to a development agreement with the City of Moline, no incentive
pursuant to the agreement will be paid out unless and until a certificate of
occupancy is obtained.
   (2)   The certificate of occupancy deposit amount shall be equal to one
percent (1%) of the total valuation of the construction cost of the project or
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater, up to a maximum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). A performance bond of equal or greater value
may be posted in lieu of a cash deposit.
   (3)   The certificate of occupancy deposit shall be returned in full if all
required final inspections have been completed and approved, including
building, sidewalk, approaches, storm water compliance and landscaping
requirements, and a request for a certificate of occupancy has been received
prior to the building permit’s expiration date.
   (4)   Once the certificate of occupancy has been issued prior to expiration
of the building permit, the full deposit will be sent by form of a check to the
building permit holder.
   (5)   If the permit holder fails to obtain a certificate of occupancy prior
to the building permit’s expiration date, the deposit shall be forfeited,
unless a building permit renewal has been requested and granted prior to the
expiration date.
   (d)   Violation. Violators of this ordinance requirement are subject to
legal action by the City, including fines of up to $750 per day, per violation.
   (e)   Exemptions. The following building permits are exempt from the
certificate of occupancy requirement:
   (1)   detached accessory structures;
   (2)   retaining walls;
   (3)   swimming pools, hot tubs, spas;
   (4)   fences;
   (5)   decks;
   (6)   staircases;
   (7)   open porches;
   (8)   signs;
   (9)   windows;
   (10)   doors;
   (11)   roofs;
   (12)   siding;
   (13)   demolition.
SEC. 8-1501.   EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.
   Notwithstanding and in addition to any provision contained in any other
Article herein, every permit issued by the building official under the
provisions of this Code shall expire within one year from the date of its
issuance. Failure to complete work prior to expiration date shall terminate the
permit. Any permittee may apply for an extension of the time to complete the
work so long as the extension is requested prior to the expiration date. The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extension of
time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested
in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated.
ARTICLE II. BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES
DIVISION 1. MOLINE BUILDING CODE.
SEC. 8-2100.   INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Building Code, 2021 Edition, and all appendices, unless
deleted, published therewith, as published by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted by reference as the “Moline Building Code,” and is
incorporated herein by reference thereto as if it were set out in haec verba.
Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s office
for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such purposes.
SEC. 8-2101.   AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE.
   The Moline Building Code adopted in this article by reference is hereby
specifically amended as follows:
   (a)   Section 101.1 Title.
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [name of jurisdiction].
   (b)   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 101.2.1 Appendices.
      The following appendices are hereby adopted; appendices not named herein
do not apply:
      C - Agricultural Buildings; E - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements;
F - Rodent Proofing; G - Flood Resistant Construction; H - Signs; I - Patio
Covers; J - Grading; and one new Appendix P - Climatic and Geographic Design
Criteria, which shall read as follows:
      Appendix P – Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
      Unless otherwise approved by the building official, the following minimum
basic design criteria shall be used:
 
                                       Wind  Seismic  Subject to damage from
Roof Snow Load (ps) pounds per square Speed Design              Frost                 Winter Flood
foot                                   (mph) Category Weathering Line  Termite  Decay  Design Hazards
                                                                 Depth                 Temp
                                                                 42    Moderate Slight
(ps) = 30 psf                          107   0(A)     Severe     in.   to Heavy to     -4° F FIRM
                                                                                Heavy
 
   (c)   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing.
      1.   Delete the words “International Plumbing Code” and replace with
“Moline Plumbing Code, as amended.”
      2.   Delete the sentence reading: “The provisions of the International
Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.”
      3.   Add the sentence: “All references to the International Plumbing Code
in this and all other adopted supporting codes are to be interpreted as meaning
the Moline Plumbing Code, as amended, unless explicitly stated otherwise by
this jurisdiction.”
   (d)   Section 101.4.5 Fire prevention.  
      1.   Add “and the Fire Code adopted by reference in
Chapter 11 of the Moline Code of Ordinances” after “The provisions of the
International Fire Code ...”
      2.   Add the sentence: “All references to the International Fire Code in
this and all adopted supporting codes are to be interpreted as meaning the Fire
Code adopted by reference in
Chapter 11 of the Moline Code of Ordinances unless explicitly stated otherwise
by this jurisdiction.”
   (e)   Section 101.4.6 Energy.
      Delete entire section.
   (f)   Section 102.6 Existing structures.   
      Change:
      “…except as is specifically covered in this code, the International
Property Maintenance Code, or the International Fire Code, or as is…”
      to:
      “…except as is specifically covered in this code, the International
Property Maintenance Code, the International Fire Code, or the fire code
adopted by reference in
Chapter 11 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, or as is…”
   (g)   Section 103 Code Compliance Agency.
   (h)   Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The building division is
responsible for enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge
of the building division shall be known as the building official.”
   (i)   Section 104.8 Liability.
      Add to the beginning of the paragraph:
      “Subject to Section
2-1109 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, . . .”
   (j)   Section 105.3.2 Time limitation of application.
      Change:
      180 days
      To:
      30 days
   (k)   Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees."
TABLE 109.2 (1)
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
1 - 500             24.00
500 - 600           27.00
601 - 700           31.00
701 - 800           35.00
801 - 900           38.00
901 - 1000          41.00
1,001 - 1100        45.00
1,101 - 1200        48.00
1,201 - 1300        52.00
1,301 - 1400        55.00
1,401 - 1500        58.00
1,501 - 1600        62.00
1,601 - 1700        65.00
1,701 - 1800        69.00
1,801 - 1900        72.00
1,901 - 2000        75.00
2,001 - 3000        89.00
3,001 - 4000        103.00
4,001 - 5000        117.00
5,001 - 6000        131.00
6,001 - 7000        144.00
7,001 - 8000        158.00
8,001 - 9000        172.00
9,001 - 10,000      186.00
10,001 - 11,000     200.00
11,001 - 12,000     214.00
12,001 - 13,000     227.00
13,001 - 14,000     241.00
14,001 - 15,000     255.00
15,001 - 16,000     270.00
16,001 - 17,000     285.00
17,001 - 18,000     300.00
18,001 - 19,000     315.00
19,001 - 20,000     330.00
20,001 - 21,000     345.00
21,001 - 22,000     359.00
22,001 - 23,000     374.00
23,001 - 24,000     389.00
24,001 - 25,000     404.00
25,001 - 26,000     415.00
26,001 - 27,000     425.00
27,001 - 28,000     435.00
28,001 - 29,000     446.00
29,001 - 30,000     456.00
30,001 - 31,000     466.00
31,001 - 32,000     477.00
32,001 - 33,000     487.00
33,001 - 34,000     497.00
34,001 - 35,000     508.00
35,001 - 36,000     518.00
36,001 - 37,000     529.00
37,001 - 38,000     539.00
38,001 - 39,000     549.00
39,001 - 40,000     560.00
40,001 - 41,000     570.00
41,001 - 42,000     580.00
42,001 - 43,000     591.00
43,001 - 44,000     601.00
44,001 - 45,000     611.00
45,001 - 46,000     622.00
46,001 - 47,000     632.00
47,001 - 48,000     642.00
48,001 - 49,000     653.00
49,001 - 50,000     663.00
50,001 - 51,000     670.00
51,001 - 52,000     677.00
52,001 - 53,000     684.00
53,001 - 54,000     691.00
54,001 - 55,000     698.00
55,001 - 56,000     704.00
56,001 - 57,000     711.00
57,001 - 58,000     718.00
58,001 - 59,000     725.00
59,001 - 60,000     732.00
60,001 - 61,000     740.00
61,001 - 62,000     748.00
62,001 - 63,000     756.00
63,001 - 64,000     764.00
64,001 - 65,000     772.00
65,001 - 66,000     780.00
66,001 - 67,000     788.00
67,001 - 68,000     796.00
68,001 - 69,000     805.00
69,001 - 70,000     813.00
 
   Continue with $8.00 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof including
$100,000.
   $100,001 to $500,000 = $1054.00 for first $100,000, plus $5.00 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof including $500,000.
   $500,001 to $1,000,000 = $3354.00 for first $500,000, plus $4.50 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof including $1,000,000.
   $1,000,001 and up = $5942.00 for first $1,000,000 plus $3.00 for each
additional $1,000 or fraction thereof.
   MOVING any building      $115.00
   WRECKING
   Frame garage or accessory bldg/shed      $28.00
   House      $86.00
   Commercial bldg, one story      $143.00
   Plus $28.00 for each additional story over one story for commercial
   Inground swimming pools      $28.00
GRADING/FILLING PERMIT FEES
ESTIMATED CUBIC YARDS FEE
ESTIMATED CUBIC YARDS FEE
1 - 50                28.00
51 - 100              49.00
101 - 200             70.00
201 - 300             90.00
301 - 400             111.00
401 - 500             132.00
501 - 600             152.00
601 - 700             173.00
701 - 800             194.00
801 - 900             215.00
901 - 1,000           235.00
1,001 - 2,000         253.00
2,001 - 3,000         270.00
3,001 - 4,000         287.00
4,001 - 5,000         304.00
5,001 - 6,000         322.00
6,001 - 7,000         339.00
7,001 - 8,000         356.00
8,001 - 9,000         373.00
9,001 - 10,000        391.00
10,001 - 20,000       466.00
20,001 - 30,000       542.00
30,001 - 40,000       618.00
40,001 - 50,000       694.00
50,001 - 60,000       770.00
60,001 - 70,000       846.00
70,001 - 80,000       922.00
80,001 - 90,000       998.00
90,001 - 100,000      1074.00
100,001 - 110,000     1116.00
110,001 - 120,000     1159.00
120,001 - 130,000     1201.00
130,001 - 140,000     1244.00
140,001 - 150,000     1286.00
150,001 - 160,000     1329.00
160,001 - 170,000     1371.00
170,001 - 180,000     1414.00
180,001 - 190,000     1457.00
190,001 - 200,000     1499.00
 
   Continue with $42.00 for each additional $10,000 or fraction thereof.
SIGN PERMIT FEES
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
1 – 500           19.00
501 – 600         21.00
601 – 700         24.00
701 – 800         26.00
801 – 900         28.00
901 – 1000        31.00
1001 or more        31.00 plus $2.00 for each additional $100 or fraction
                    thereof
 
STORAGE TANK PERMIT FEES
   Installation, per tank   $100.00
   Removal, per tank   $ 50.00
SIDEWALKS & APPROACHES
CITY SIDEWALKS……………………………..   $ 20.00
APPROACHES & CURB CUTS……………….   $ 86.00 for first 15 feet
……………………………….................................   $ 6.00 for each additional foot
INSPECTION AND REINSPECTION FEES
   Inspections outside normal business hours (minimum charge - 2
hours)   $47.00*
   Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 109   $47.00*
   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge - ½
hour)   $47.00*
   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
plans   $47.00*
   For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both…………   ……Actual costs**
*   Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest.
This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.”
   (l)   Section 109.7 Plan review fees.
      Add one new Section 109.7:
      “Section 109.7 Plan review fees. When submittal documents are required by
Section 107, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time said submittal
documents are submitted for plan review. Said plan review shall be sixty-five
percent (65%) of the permit fee as shown in Table 109.2(1) calculated on the
total value of all construction work. Total value of construction includes all
finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating and air
conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent
equipment.
      The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees.
      When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, or when the project involves deferred submittal items
as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan review fee shall be charged
at the rate shown in Table 109.2(1).
      The following are exceptions and shall not be charged a plan review fee:
      (a)   One (1) and two (2) family dwellings;
      (b)   Commercial remodeling less than $20,000.00;
      (c)   “U” occupancies.”
   (m)   Section 113 Means of Appeal.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 113 Board of Appeals.
      Refer to the Moline Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 8, Article I, Division 3, Appeals Boards, Section
8-1300, Building Board of Appeals.”
   (n)   Section 202 Definitions.
      Amend as follows:
      “PERSON. An individual or such individual’s heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns; and includes and extends to associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate or its or
their successors or assigns; or the agent of any of the aforesaid.”
   (o)   Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2.
      Change: “2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more”
      to: "2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more."
   (p)   Section 1011.11 Handrails.
      Exception:
      6.   Handrails within a dwelling or serving an individual dwelling unit
may have one (1) offset or interruption per flight of stairs, not both, of a
maximum of sic (6) inches in total length and shall be considered for the
purpose of this code to be continuous.
   (q)   Section 1102 Compliance.
      Change: "Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code and ICC A117.1."
      to: "Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code, the Illinois Accessibility Code, and
ICC/ANSI A117.1."
   (r)   Section 1208.2 Minimum ceiling heights.  
      Add one new Exception 5:
      "5. Conversions of attics and basements of a group R-3 occupancy utilized
as a single family dwelling unit shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6
feet and 8 inches. Ductwork projections may be lower than this if located
against partition walls. Doorway heights must be at least 6 feet 4 inches."
   (s)   Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency.  
      Delete entire chapter and replace with:
      "Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency. Designers and builders are required to
design and construct buildings in accordance with the current International
Energy Conservation Code" adopted by the State of Illinois."
   (t)   Section 1608.1 General.  
      Add:
      "Note: All snow loads shall be based on a minimum roof snow load (ps) of
30 pounds per square foot, except that calculations for additional snowdrift
loads shall be based on a ground snow load pg = 25 pounds per square foot."
   (u)   Section 1807.3 Embedded post and poles.
      Add:
      All building or portions of buildings containing mechanical installation
and connected to underground utilities shall be supported on a continuous
perimeter frost-free foundation to a minimum depoth of 42 inchese below
finished grade.
   (v)   Section 1809.5 Frost protection.
      1.   Change: "1. Extending below the frost line of the locality" to "1.
Extending below the 42-inch frost line"
      "1809.5.2 Floating slabs. For group U occupancies 720 square feet or
less, with no side dimension longer than 30 feet, and no wall height taller
than 10 feet, and no more than 3 courses of masonry block, located on
undisturbed soil, may be constructed with a floating slab. This slab shall be a
minimum of 4 inches thick, air-entrained concrete having a minimum compressive
strength at 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch, reinforced
with a 21-pound wire mesh, and having a 12-inch thick by 12-inch wide perimeter
reinforced with no less than two number 4 reinforcement bars. This slab shall
be continuously poured with no cold joints."
   (w)    Table 1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light frame construction.  
      Delete entire Table 1809.7 and replace with:
      TABLE 1809.7
      FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION a, b, c, d
 
           Minimum Thickness of
           Foundation Wall                            Footings    Footings not
Number of                       Minimum  Minimum      subject to  subject to
Floors                          Width of Thickness of frost Min.  frost Min.
Supported  Concrete  Unit       Footing  Footing      Depth below Depth below
by the     (inches)  Masonry    (inches) (inches)     undisturbed undisturbed
Foundation           (inches)                         ground      ground
                                                      (inches)    (inches)

1          8         8          16       8            42          12
2          8         8          16       8            42          18
3          10        12         18       12           42          24
 
(Application note: Only the table proper is replaced. Existing title and notes
remain.)”
   (x)     Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems.  
      Delete entire chapter and replace with:
      “Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Refer to the Moline Plumbing Code, as
amended.”
   (y)   Section 3303. Demolition.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “SECTION 3303
      DEMOLITION
      3303.1 Construction documents. Construction documents and a schedule for
demolition must be submitted when required by the building official. Where such
information is required, no work shall be done until such construction
documents or schedule, or both, are approved.
         3303.1.1  Permit and fees. When plans and specifications are filed
with the building official and there are existing buildings or parts of
buildings to be wrecked, it shall also be so stated in the application for
permit. A permit shall be issued for all wrecking. There shall be no fee
required for buildings condemned by order of the City Council or by the housing
code enforcement authority, but a permit shall be necessary.
         3303.1.2 Contractor Registration. Unless already registered as a
general contractor with the City, before said permit is granted by the building
official, the party applying therefor shall file with the building official on
a Moline bond form, a license/permit bond in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned on the faithful performance of all the
provisions of this code and for all work performed under the permit sought. The
surety shall be a company authorized to transact business in the State of
Illinois. Further, any person, firm or corporation engaged in wrecking a
building shall provide the building official with a certificate of insurance
naming said city co-insured of said insurance for public liability insurance in
the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per occurrence for damage to
property and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per person and five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for injury to persons.
Further, any person, firm or corporation engaged in wrecking a building shall
pay a contractor registration fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) to the
building official. The annual fee shall be for a period commencing on May 1 to
April 30 of the following year, and shall remain in force and effect for that
period of time, unless revoked for cause.
      3303.2   Protection of pedestrians.
         3303.2.1   Lights on sidewalks. The walkways shall be kept well
lighted between sunset and sunrise and the outer edge of the occupied space of
the street or sidewalk shall have red lights placed thereon, which shall be
kept burning continuously between sunset and sunrise. Any or all of the
required lights shall be electric lights if required by the building official
or municipal services general manager.
         3303.2.2  Right to stop wrecking. The building official shall have the
right to stop the wrecking or tearing down of any building or structure within
the City when same is being done in a reckless or careless manner, or in
violation of any ordinance or in such a manner as to endanger life and
property, and to order any and all persons engaged in said work to stop and
desist therefrom. When such work has been stopped by the order of said building
official, it shall not be resumed until said building official shall be
satisfied that adequate precautions have been or will be taken for the
protection of life and property, and that said work will be proceeded with
carefully and in conformity with the ordinances of the City.
      3303.3 Means of egress. A party wall balcony or horizontal exit shall not
be destroyed unless and until a substitute means of egress has been provided
and approved.
      3303.4 Vacant Lot. Where a structure has been demolished or removed, the
vacant lot shall be filled and maintained to the existing grade or in
accordance with the ordinances of the City of Moline.
      3303.5 Water accumulation. Provision shall be made to prevent the
accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on the premises or the
adjoining property.
      3303.6 Utility connections. Service utility connections shall be
discontinued and capped in accordance with the approved rules and the
requirements of the City of Moline.
      3303.7 Method of procedure. In wrecking any building, story after story,
commencing with the top story, each story shall be completely removed. No
material shall be placed upon the floor of any such building in the course of
demolition, but the bricks, timbers and other structural parts of each story
shall be lowered to the ground immediately upon displacement.
      3303.8 Cleaning up of premises. Every part of a building or structure
shall be wrecked, including the foundation walls, and all accumulated rubbish
and material shall be removed from the site. In all cases, the excavation walls
shall so slope as to make same safe to the public."
   (z)   Section 3410. Moved Structures.
      Add the following sections:
      “3410.2  Permit and fees. No person or persons shall hereafter remove any
building within the City limits of the City of Moline, where the same shall be
moved in, through or upon any streets, alleys, avenues, or public grounds,
unless said persons shall, before engaging in removing said house or building,
secure a permit to do so from the building official. The building official may
or may not in said official's discretion grant any application for a permit to
remove any building and may, in the event it is deemed advisable to permit the
removal of a building, impose any conditions which in said official's
discretion will ensure due observance of the public safety, welfare or
convenience. The fee for said permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
each building to be moved.
      3410.3 Contractor Registration. Before said permit is granted by the
building official, the party applying therefor shall give a license/permit bond
in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) with good and
sufficient sureties, conditioned among other things that said party will save
and indemnify and keep harmless the City of Moline, against all liabilities,
judgment, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against said City in
consequence of the granting of said permit, and upon the expiration of the time
named in the permit, or sooner, if the use of the streets, avenues, alleys or
public grounds is no longer necessary, shall clear the streets, avenues, alleys
or public grounds of all obstruction. The applicant shall give evidence to the
City of public liability insurance in the amounts of three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) per person and five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per occurrence insuring said applicant and City for accidents to
any person or property while moving said building, and file a certified check
with the finance director, payable to the City in an amount determined by the
finance director to cover the estimate of costs listed hereinbelow, and which
shall be cashed and retained by the City to cover and offset all costs expended
by the City and City personnel in assisting with said applicant in the moving
operation, for police, electricians, street maintenance, and other City
personnel labor and expense. Any trees required to be trimmed or removed due to
said building moving shall first be approved by the director of parks and the
work performed in connection therewith shall be performed by reliable, bonded
and insured tree trimmers, approved by the director of parks and as by
ordinances of the City of Moline, Illinois.
      3410.4 Consent of public utilities. No permit shall be issued until said
party applying therefor shall have secured the written consent for the proposed
routing from any public utility maintaining telephone, telegraph, electric
light, power lines, cable television, or data lines which will have to be
disturbed, removed or interfered within consequence of any such removal.
      3410.5 Routing approved by municipal services general manager. The
municipal services general manager shall designate the route to be followed and
limit the time for moving on the streets and shall issue these instructions in
writing to mover, who shall present same to building official.
      3410.6 Continuous moving if necessary.  The moving of a building under a
permit, when commenced, shall be continuous during all hours of the day and day
by day, and at night if the municipal services general manager so orders until
completed, with the least possible obstruction to the thoroughfare occupied.
      3410.7 Buildings prohibited to remain at street intersections. No
buildings shall be allowed to remain overnight upon any street intersection or
crossing, or so near thereto as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant.
      3410.8   Lighted lanterns at night. Lighted lanterns shall be kept in
conspicuous places at each end of said building during the night.
      3410.9 Structural condition of buildings to be moved. No building shall
be moved until same has been inspected by the building official, and any
building that has depreciated fifty percent (50%) or more, shall not be moved
but shall be torn down, and comply with requirements for “Demolition,” Section
3303.
      3410.10 Report to the fire department. Every house mover shall report to
the fire chief or assistants at the central station each night, the exact
location where the house is to stand on streets for the night, if permission
has been obtained from the municipal services general manager for leaving the
building on the street. Failure to report shall be an ordinance violation and
shall hold parties liable to fine.
      3410.11 Careful procedure on streets. All house movers shall proceed in a
careful manner in the removal of a building over the public streets, alleys,
avenues, and public grounds and shall not in any manner injure or destroy
trees, grass plot, curbing or sidewalk, nor in any manner interfere with the
private property of individuals. The building official shall have the power to
revoke any permit whenever in said official's judgment any house mover is
proceeding in a reckless and careless manner in the removal of a building.
      3410.12 Report to Building Official and Municipal Services General
Manager. Every person or persons receiving a permit from the building official
to move a building shall, within one (1) day after said building reaches its
destination, report that fact to the building official who shall report same to
the municipal services general manager. The municipal services general manager
shall thereupon inspect the streets, alleys, avenues or public grounds over
which said house or building has been moved and ascertain the condition of
same. If the removal of said house or building has caused any damages to the
streets, alleys, avenues, or public grounds, the said house mover shall
forthwith place the same in good repair as they were before the permit was
granted. Upon failure of the house mover to do so within ten (10) days
thereafter, to the satisfaction of the municipal services general manager, the
City shall repair the damage done to the streets, alleys, avenues or public
grounds and hold sureties of bond given by house mover or house movers
responsible for payment of same.”
DIVISION 2. MOLINE RESIDENTIAL CODE.
SEC. 8-2200.   INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, and all appendices, unless
deleted, published therewith, as published by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted by reference as the “Moline Residential Code,” and is
incorporated herein by reference thereto as if it were set out in haec verba.
Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s office
for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such purposes.
SEC. 8-2201.   AMENDMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The Moline Residential Code adopted in this article by reference is hereby
specifically amended as follows:
   (a)   Section R101.1 Title.  
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [name of jurisdiction].
   (b)   Section R102.5 Appendices.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section R102.5 Appendices.
      The following appendices are hereby adopted: AB, AC, AD, AE, AF, AH, AI,
AJ and AM. Appendices not named herein do not apply."
   (c)     Section R103 Department of Building Safety.  
      Change “Department of Building Safety” to “building division”
   (d)   Section R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “R103.1 Enforcement agency. The building division is responsible for
enforcing the provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building
division shall be known as the building official.”
   (e)   Section R104.8 Liability.
      Add to the beginning of the paragraph:
      “Subject to Section
2-1109 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, . . . .”
   (f)   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit.
      Amend Exemption 1 under “Building” by changing “200 square feet (18.58
m2)” to “120 square feet.”
   (g)   Section 105.3.2 Time Limitation of application.
      Change: 180 days
      To: 30 days.
   (h)   Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees.
      Replace entire section with:
      "Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fee for each building permit
shall be as set forth in the Moline Code of Ordinances, Sec.
8-2101(j), Table 109.2(1). All fees will be rounded to the nearest increment.
Where a technical code has been adopted by the City of Moline for which no fee
schedule is shown in this Code, the fee required shall be in accordance with
the schedule established by the City Council."
   (i)   Section R112 Board of Appeals.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section R112 Board of Appeals.
      Refer to the Moline Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Article I, Division 3,
Appeals Boards, Section 8-1300, Building Board of Appeals."
   (j)     Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  
      Delete entire table and replace with:
“Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
 
          Wind Design                       Seismic      Subject to Damage FromWinter Ice Carrier            Air      Mean
Ground    Speedd Topogra  Special Windborne Design                Frost           Design Underlayment Flood     Freezing Annual
Snow Load (mph)  phic     Wind    Debris    Categoryf Weatheringa line   Termitec Tempe  Requiredh    Hazardsg  Indexi   Temp j
                 Effectsk Regionl Zonem                           depthb
ps = 30
psf,                                                                                                  a.
calculati                                                                                             Initial
ons for                                                                                               NFIP 06/
additiona                                                                Moder                        01/1977
l drift   107    NO       NO      NO        A         SEVERE      42"    ate to   -4 F   YES          b.        2000     50.5°
loads                                                                    Heavy                        Community          F
shall use                                                                                             #190239
a ground                                                                                              c. Panel
snow load                                                                                             Date 03/
ps = 25                                                                                               23/2021
psf
 
   (k)   Section R302.13 Fire Protection of floors.
      Delete entire section.
   (l)   Section R305.1.1 Basements.    
      Add:
      "Exceptions:
      Conversions of attics and basements of a group R-3 occupancy utilized as
a single family dwelling unit shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6
feet 8 inches (2032 mm). Ductwork projections may be lower than this if located
against partition walls. Doorway heights must be at least 6 feet 4 inches (1931
mm)."
   (m)   Section R309.5 Fire sprinklers.
      Delete entire "Section R309.5 Fire sprinklers" and all references thereto
and replace with one new Section R309.5:
      "R309.5 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into
a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and residence shall be equipped with self closing, tight
fitting solid wood doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35mm) in thickness, solid
or honeycomb steel doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, or 20
minute fire rated doors."
   (n)   Section R311.7 Stairways.
      Delete: All Exceptions.
   (o)   Section R311.7.8.4 Continuity.
      Add:
      Exception 3. Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving an individual
dwelling unit may have one (1) offset or interruption per flight of stairs, not
both, of six (6) inches maximum in total length and shall be considered for the
purpose of this code to be continuous.
   (p)   Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
      Delete entire section.
   (q)   Section R314.3 Location. 
      Add one new subsection:
      "R314.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions. When interior alterations,
repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping
rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit
shall be provided with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings; the
smoke alarms shall be interconnected and hard wired.
      Exceptions:
      3.   Smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required to be
interconnected and hard wired where the alterations or repairs do not result in
the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure.
   (r)    Sections R403 Footings and R404 Foundation and RetainingWalls.  
      Delete Tables R403.1(1)–R403.1(3), R403.4, R404.1.1(1), R404.1.1(2),
R404.1.1(3), R404.1.1(4), R404.1.2(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), R404.1.2(5),
R404.1.1.2(6), R404.1.2(7), R404.1.2(8) and R404.1.2(9) and all references
thereto and replace with the following Table R403.1 and notes:
      “Table 403.1
 
           Minimum Thickness of
           Foundation Wall                            Footings    Footings not
Number of                       Minimum  Minimum      subject to  subject to
Floors                          Width of Thickness of frost Min.  frost Min.
Supported  Concrete  Unit       Footing  Footing      Depth below Depth below
by the     (inches)  Masonry    (inches) (inches)     undisturbed undisturbed
Foundation           (inches)                         ground      ground
                                                      (inches)    (inches)

1          8         8          16       8            42          12
2          8         8          16       8            42          18
3          10        12         18       12           42          24
 
      Notes:
      (1)   Foundations may support a roof in addition to the stipulated number
of floors. Foundations' supporting roofs only shall be as required for
supporting one floor. Footings shall contain a minimum of two number 4
reinforcement bars, and have a minimum compressive strength of 2,500 pounds per
square inch at 28 days.
      (2)    A one-story detached wood frame building used for a private garage
and accessory to a single family residential use and not exceeding 720 square
feet in floor area, with no side dimension longer than 30 feet, and no wall
height taller than 10 feet, and no more than 3 courses of masonry block,
located on undisturbed soil, may be constructed with a floating slab. This slab
shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick, air-entrained concrete having a minimum
compressive strength at 28 days of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch,
reinforced with a 21-pound wire mesh, and having a 12-inch thick by 12-inch
wide perimeter reinforced with no less than two number 4 reinforcement bars
shall be installed within the perimeter beam. This slab shall be continuously
poured with no cold joints.
      (3)   Buildings and portions of buildings containing mechanical
installations and connected to underground utilities shall be supported on a
continuous, frost-free foundation capable of resisting the movement of the
slab-on-grade.
      (4)   Cast-in-place concrete foundation walls shall be air-entrained
concrete having a minimum compressive strength at 28 days of not less than
3,000 pounds per square inch.
      (5)   Foundation walls shall be a minimum of 7½ inches thick with no less
than three number 4 reinforcement bars placed horizontally at the center of the
wall, with one bar located near the top, one bar located near the mid-height,
and one bar located near the bottom.”
   (s)   New Section R403.1.1.1 Footing requirements for uncovered decks. All
decks shall have a minimum footing size of 12 inches in diameter with 42 inches
in depth.
   (t)   New Section R403.1.1.2 Footing requirements for covered decks and room
additions. All elevated and covered decks, screened rooms, three and four-
season rooms, and room additions shall comply with one of the following footing
types:
      •   1.   Pier footings were designed by a licensed design professional
and submitted with stamped and signed plans or 24-inch diameter or 42-inches
deep pier footing as approved by Building Official.
      •   2.   12-inch wide by 42-inch deep trench footing with 2 number 4
rebar horizontally, one top and one bottom with minimum 3 inches of concrete
coverage.
      •   3.   Spread footing sized with reinformcement per Table R403.1 with a
minimum 8-inch masonry or concrete foundation wall.
   (u)   Section R303.1.4.1 Frost protection.
      Exception 1. Detached garages - remove 600 square feet and change to 720
square feet.
   (v)   Section R402.1.6 Foundation anchorage.
      Add: Wood sill plates and wood walls supported directly on continuous
foundations shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this
section. Wood sole plates shall not be encased or embedded in concrete.
   (w)   Section R404.1.3 Concrete foundation walls.
      Change: Concreted foundation walls that support light-frame walls shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
ACI318, ACI 332, or PCA 100, or a method that meets standard practice for the
jurisdiction pre- approved by the current Building Official.
   (x)   Section R407.1 Wood column protection.
      Change: Wood columns shall be protected against decay as set forth in
Section R317, and shall not be encased or embedded in concrete.
   (y)   Table R503.2.1.1(1).
      Delete the first three rows in the table and remove all references for
the use of 3/8" sheathing for floor or roof construction.
   (z)   Section R507.1.
      Add:
      or a method that meets standard practice for the jurisdiction pre-
approved by the current Building Official.
   (aa)   Section R507.3.1 Minimum Size.
      Add at the end of the sentence: But not less than 12 inches in diameter.
   (bb)   Section F507.3.2 Minimum Depth.
      Change:
      Deck footing shall be placed not less than 42 inchsed and 12 inches in
diameter (1067 305mm) below the undisturbed ground surface.
      Delete Table 507.4 and replace with:
 
Deck Wood Post Height
Deck Post Size 4 X 4 4 X 6 6 X 6 8 X 8
Maximum height 6'    8'    12'   14'
 
      1.   Measured from the underside of the beam to the top of the footing or
pier.
      2.   No. 2 grade, wet service factor included.
      3.   All other alternatives are to be designed by an Illinois-licensed
design professional.    
   (cc)   Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency.  
      At the beginning of the chapter, after "ENERGY EFFICIENCY" and before
"SECTION N1101", add:
      "For Information only. Compliance with provisions of this chapter is not
required by the City of Moline. Compliance with the current edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) adopted by the State of Illinois
is required."
   (dd)   Part VII Plumbing.  
      Delete all contents of Part VII "Plumbing" (Chapters 25-33) and replace
with:
      "Refer to the Moline Plumbing Code, as amended."
   (ee)   Section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems.
      Delete entire section.
   (ff)   Part VIII Electrical, Chapters 34-43.
      Delete all contents of Part VIII “Electrical” (Chapters 34-43) and
replace with “Refer to the Moline Electrical Code, as amended.”
ARTICLE III. MECHANICAL CODE
DIVISION 1. MOLINE MECHANICAL CODE.
SEC. 8-3100.   INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the “Moline Mechanical Code,”
and is incorporated herein by reference thereto as if it were set out in haec
verba. Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s
office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such purposes.
SEC. 8-3101.   AMENDMENTS TO MOLINE MECHANICAL CODE.
   The Moline Mechanical Code adopted in this article by reference is
specifically amended as follows:
   (a)    Section 101.1 Title. 
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [name of jurisdiction].
   (b)     Section 101.2.1 Appendices.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 101.2.1 Appendices.  
      The following appendix is hereby adopted: “Appendix A – Combustion Air
Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-throughs.” Appendices not named herein do
not apply.”
   (c)    Section 103.1 Creation of agency.  
      Replace entire section with:
      "The building division is responsible for enforcing the provisions of
this code. The official in charge of the building division shall be known as
the building official. References to 'code official' throughout this code shall
be construed to mean 'building official or building official's designee."
   (d)   Section 104.8 Liability.   
      Add to the beginning of the paragraph:
      "Subject to Section 2-1109 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, . . ."
   (e)   Section 109.7 Fee Schedule.
      Insert the following in place of "[Jurisdiction to insert appropriate
schedule]".
      "Table 109.7  
      MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
ESTIMATED VALUATION FEE
0 to 700            $25.00
701 to 1,000        27.00
1,001 to 2,000      35.00
2,001 to 3,000      44.00
3,001 to 4,000      52.00
4,001 to 5,000      61.00
5,001 to 6,000      69.00
6,001 to 7,000      78.00
7,001 to 8,000      86.00
8,001 to 9,000      95.00
9,001 to 10,000     104.00
10,001 to 11,000    113.00
11,001 to 12,000    121.00
12,001 to 13,000    130.00
13,001 to 14,000    138.00
14,001 to 15,000    147.00
 
   Continue with $2.00 for each additional $1000.00 or fraction thereof
   OTHER INSPECTIONS & FEES
   Gas Piping   $25.00
   PSI test to reconnect gas for services abandoned six month or
longer   $50.00 per test
   Inspections outside of normal business hours (2 hours minimum
charge)   ….$50.00 per hour*
   Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 109   $50.00 per
hour*
   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge - ½
hour)   $50.00 per hour*
   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
plans   $50.00 per hour*
   For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both………………………...Actual costs**
* Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This
cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.”
   (f)    Section 109.6 Refunds.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "[A] Section 109.6 Refunds. The code official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid
or collected.
      2.   Not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      3.   Not more than 80% of the plan review fee paid when an application
for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled
before any plan review effort has been expended.
      The code official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except
upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one-
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment."
   (g)    Section 114 Means of appeal.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section 114 Means of appeal.
      Refer to the Moline Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Article I, Division 3,
Appeals Boards, Section 8-1302, Mechanical Appeals Board."
DIVISION 2. MOLINE FUEL GAS CODE.
SEC. 8-3200.   INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, and the International Code Council 2002
Accumulative Supplement to the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby adopted
as the “Moline Fuel Gas Code,” and are incorporated herein by reference thereto
as if they were set out in haec verba. Three (3) copies of such Code shall be
kept on file in the city clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file
therein for such purposes.
SEC. 8-3201.   AMENDMENTS TO MOLINE FUEL GAS CODE.
   The Moline Fuel Gas Code adopted in this article by reference is
specifically amended as follows:
   (a)   Section 101.1 Title. 
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [name of jurisdiction].
   (b)     Section 101.3 Appendices.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “Section 101.3 Appendices.
      The following appendices are hereby adopted: A, B, C and D. Appendices
not named herein do not apply.”
   (c)     Section 103 (IFGC) Department of Inspection.
      Change “Department of Inspection” to “building division”
   (d)     Section 103.1 General.  
      Replace entire section with:
      “103.1 General. The building division is responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this code. The official in charge of the building division shall
be known as the building official. References to ‘code official’ throughout
this code shall be construed to mean ‘building official or building official’s
designee’.”
   (e)   Section 104.8 Liability.
      Add to the beginning of the paragraph:
      “Subject to Section
2-1109 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, . . .”
   (e)   Section 104.8 Liability.
      Add to the beginning of the paragraph:
      "Subject to Section 2-1109 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, . . ."
      Section 106.6.2 Fee schedule.
      Insert the following in place of "(Jurisdiction to insert appropriate
schedule)":
      "The fee for each mechanical permit shall be as set forth in the Moline
Code of Ordinances, Sec. 8-3101(f), Table 106.5.2(1)."
   (f)    Section 109.6 Fee refunds.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "[A] Section 109.6 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the
refunding of fees as follows:
      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid
or collected.
      2.   Not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done
under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      3.   Not more than 80% of the plan review fee paid when an application
for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled
before any plan review effort has been expended.
      The code official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except
upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180
days after the date of fee payment."
   (g)    Section 113 (IFGC) Means of appeal.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section 113 (IFGC) Means of appeal.
      Refer to the Moline Code of Ordinances, Chapter 8, Article I, Division 3,
Appeals Boards, Section 8-1302, Mechanical Appeals Board."
   (h)    Section 301 (IFGC) General.
      Add one new section:
      "301.1.1.2 L-P Gas Systems. Liquefied Petroleum Gas systems shall not be
used unless jointly approved by the fire marshal and the building official."
   (i)    Section 403.3.3 Copper and copper alloy.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section 403.3.3 Copper and copper alloy. Copper and copper alloy pipe
shall not be used."
   (j)    Section 403.4.3 Copper tubing.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section 403.4.3 Copper and copper alloy tubing. Copper and copper alloy
tubing shall not be used."
   (k)   Section 403.10 Metallic piping joints and fittings.
      Insert:
      5.   The type of piping joint used shall be suitable for the pressure-
temperature conditions and shall be selected giving consideration to joint
tightness and mechanical strength under the service conditions. The joint shall
be able to sustain the maximum end force caused by the internal pressure and
any additional forces caused by temperature expansion or contraction,
vibration, fatigue or the weight of the pipe and its contents.
   (l)   Section 406 (IFGS) Inspection, Testing and Purging.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "Section 406.4.1 Test Pressure.
      All tests are to be witnessed by the building official or his designee. A
pressure gauge and bleeder valve must be on the system during this test in a
location readily available to the person conducting the inspection."
ARTICLE IV. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SEC. 8-4100.   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition, and all
appendices, unless deleted, published therewith, as published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as the “Moline
Property Maintenance Code.” Three copies of such Code shall be kept on file in
the city clerk's office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for
such purpose.
SEC. 8-4101.   AMENDMENTS TO MOLINE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The Moline Property Maintenance Code adopted in this article by reference is
hereby specifically amended as follows:
   (a)   101.1   Title.
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   (b)   102.3   Application of other codes.  
      Delete International Zoning Code and replace with “Moline Code of
Ordinances.”
   (c)   102.7   Referenced codes and standards.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “102.7 Referenced codes and standards.
      The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are
listed in the Moline Code of Ordinances. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced code or standards, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply.”
   (d)   103.1   Creation of agency.  
      Delete entire section.
   (e)   105.6 Department records. 
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "105.6 Department records.
      Records and copies of inspections shall be retained per State of Illinois
record retention minimum standards."
   (f)   109.4 Violation penalties.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "109.4 Violation penalties.
      Any person, firm or corporation deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any
provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon
conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $750.00 per day per violation."
   (g)   112.6 Hearing.
                  Change "appeals board" to "property maintenance appeals
board" where applicable throughout this chapter.
   (h)   108.1 Membership of board.  
      Delete contents and replace with:
      "Refer to Sec. 8-1301 of this Code."
   (i)   112.1.1 Imminent danger.
      Emergency action. Whenever a condition exists in a principal or accessory
building that places occupants, property or the public in imminent peril, the
code official or designee along with the concurrence of corporation counsel and
city administrator or their designees may take such action to abate any such
conditions forthwith, without prior notification to the person or persons
responsible, when reasonable notice cannot be achieved or would necessarily
perpetuate a dangerous condition. Further, the City shall at all times have the
right to enter upon property to remove any condition that is a danger to the
property and/or the surrounding neighborhood.
   (j)   202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.  
      1.   Add the following definitions:
         “BUILDING CODE. The International Building Code and International
Residential Code as adopted by the City of Moline.
         DANGEROUS. An unfit building where conditions or defects exist within
the structure to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the
public or its occupants are imminently endangered and immediate corrective
action is necessary.
         HOT WATER. Water supplied to plumbing fixtures at 115°F (45°C).
         SUBSTANDARD. A structure that fails in any respect to comply with the
Moline Code of Ordinances. Failure to correct such non-compliance may result in
such building becoming an unfit building.
         UNFIT. A substandard building where conditions or defects exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants
may be endangered and action within a certain time period is required. Failure
to correct such conditions or defects within the time period may cause an unfit
building to become a dangerous building.”
      2.   IMMINENT DANGER. Add the following sentence to the end of the
definition:
      “A severe condition(s) that could endanger the life, limb, health,
property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants.”
   (k)   302.4 Weeds. 
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "302.4 Weeds.     Refer to the Moline Code of Ordinances, Chapter 32,
Vegetation."
   (l)   302.7 Accessory Structures.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "302.7 Accessory Structures. 
      All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, walls and
temporary structures, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
         302.7.2 Temporary Accessory Structures. Temporary canopies, carports
and similar portable and premanufactured structures made of a support structure
and enclosed or covered by fabric, canvas, nylon, vinyl, plastic, or other non-
rigid material and greater than 120 square feet may be placed, maintained, and
installed in the City as long as said structure complies with all building and
zoning codes that would apply as if it were a permanent accessory structure."
   (m)   302.10 Furniture.
      Add one new section to read as follows:
      "302.10 Furniture. Only furniture and equipment designed and intended for
outdoor use and able to withstand outdoor elements and weather conditions shall
be permitted to be kept in exterior property areas, including unenclosed
porches, patios and decks."
   (n)   304.14 Insect Screens.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "304.14 Insect Screens. During the period from April 15 to November 15."
   (o)   307.1 Handrails and Guardrails.  
      Delete the "Exception" and replace with:
      "Exception: Every interior and exterior handrail and guardrail shall be
firmly fastened and capable of resisting an imposed load of fifty (50) pounds
in any one direction. Replacement of either shall be in compliance with the
current adopted building code. The code official shall have the authority to
allow non-compliance replacement based upon historical or other integral
considerations."
   (p)   503.4 Floor surface.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "503.4 Floor surface. Every bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be impervious to water. All floor surfaces
shall be easily cleanable."
   (q)   505.4 Water heating facilities.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be
properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry
facility at a temperature of not less than 115 F (45 C). A gas-burning water
heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other
occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided.
An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
      (a)   All single-family dwellings shall be supplied with a water heater
having a minimum capacity of 30 gallons.
      (b)   A duplex with shared hot water service shall have a minimum of one
(1) 40-gallon water heater.
      (c)   A triplex with shared hot water service shall have a minimum of one
(1) 50-gallon water heater."
   (r)   602.3 Heat supply.  
      Insert "October 1 to May 15" for [DATE] to [DATE].
   (s)   602.4 Occupiable work spaces.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
      Exceptions:
      1.    Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
      2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities."
   (t)   603.1 Mechanical appliances.  
      Amend by adding a second paragraph:
      "When a safety test of a furnace for carbon monoxide emissions is
required, the owner shall pay for the test. Smoke tests or other approved
testing methods are required on furnaces over ten (10) years of age. At the
discretion of the mechanical inspector, tests may be required for furnaces shut
off in excess of one (1) year or more or if conditions warrant. Tests are to be
performed by a licensed mechanical contractor in the presence of the mechanical
inspector and the results shall be sent to the Moline building division."
   (u)   SECTION 606. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.  
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      "SECTION 606. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS. Refer to applicable
State of Illinois laws."
   (v)   703.4 Opening protectives.  
      Amend by adding a second paragraph:
      “All apartments, rooming houses or rooming units exiting into a common
hallway shall have a minimum 1-3/8” solid core or equivalent self-closing doors
equipped with latches and having a minimum fire resistance rating of twenty
(20) minutes.”
SEC. 8-4102.   CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
      (1)   Approved Carbon Monoxide Alarm or Alarm means a carbon monoxide
alarm that complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of
the Illinois State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian Standard Association.
      (2)   Dwelling Unit means a room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single family residence as well as each living unit
of a multi-family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building.
   (b)   Carbon Monoxide Detector.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen (15) feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit complies
with the respective provisions of state rules and regulations relating to both
smoke detecting devices and carbon monoxide alarms and provided that the
combined unit emits an alarm in a manner that clearly differentiates the
hazard.
      (2)   Every structure that contains more than one (1) dwelling unit shall
contain at least one (1) approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within fifteen (15) feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
      (3)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required alarms with self-contained, non-removable, long-arm
batteries. It is the responsibility of a tenant to test and to provide general
maintenance for the alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit,
and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any
deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for
providing one (1) tenant per dwelling unit with written information regarding
alarm testing and maintenance.
         The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
      (4)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this Act may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into the structure’s AC
power line with secondary battery back-up.
   (c)   Violation.
      (1)   Willful failure to install or maintain in operating condition any
carbon monoxide alarm required by this section is considered a violation.
      (2)   Tampering with, removing, destroying, disconnecting, or removing
the batteries from any installed carbon monoxide alarm, except in the course of
inspection, maintenance, or replacement of the alarm, is considered a
violation.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Moline Code of Ordinances as set forth in Section
1-1107 of said Code.
   (d)   Exemptions.  The following residential units shall not require carbon
monoxide detectors:
      (1)   A residential unit in a building that: (i) does not rely on
combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; (ii) is not
connected in any way to a garage; and (iii) is not sufficiently close to any
ventilated source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the City’s building
official, to receive carbon monoxide from that source.
      (2)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide from that source, as determined by the City’s building
official.
ARTICLE V. PLUMBING CODE
SEC. 8-5100.   ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Illinois State Plumbing Code, 2014 Edition as promulgated and adopted by
the Director of Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois, at 77
Illinois Administrative Code, Part 890, Chapter I, Subchapter r, is hereby
adopted by reference as the "Moline Plumbing Code." Copies of such Code shall
be kept on file for public inspection and shall remain on file therein for such
purpose.
SEC. 8-5101.   PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.
PLUMBING PERMIT FEES
   Minimum $25.00 plumbing permit fee. This includes up to two fixture
openings. There will be an additional fee of $12.00 for each opening over the
original two.
   Drainage and inspection permits for every opening or fixture, whether for
immediate or future use, in dwelling structures or portions of structures used
exclusively for dwelling purposes   $12.00
   Installation, replacement, or moving of all domestic water heaters, domestic
hot water storage tanks, range boilers, and all domestic water heating
appliances pertaining to plumbing   $25.00
   All repair or remodeling jobs, changing, or replacing of each individual
plumbing fixtures    $12.00
   Sewer cleaning and/or performance of service and maintenance work   $5.00
   In commercial, industrial, and institutional structures, the permit fee
shall be based on the valuation of the entire plumbing installation, which is
to be declared on the permit application. Following is the fee schedule:
$ 0 - 1,000      $25.00
$ 1,001 - 2,000  $29.00
$ 2,001 - 3,000  $40.00
$ 3,001 - 4,000  $52.00
$ 4,001 - 5,000  $63.00
$ 5,001 - 6,000  $75.00
$ 6,001 - 7,000  $86.00
$ 7,001 - 8,000  $98.00
$ 8,001 - 9,000  $104.00
$ 9,001 - 10,000 $120.00
$10,001 - 11,000 $132.00
$11,001 - 12,000 $144.00
$12,001 - 13,000 $155.00
$13,001 - 14,000 $167.00
$14,001 - 15,000 $178.00
$15,001 & over, add $10/100 or fraction thereof
 
   PLUS, sewer & water at $25.00 for each connection and/or tap.
SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS
(all structures at time of extension to building)
   Each tap-in to the City sanitary sewer mains, or for each connection to an
existing stub extension from the main, to serve the building sewer   $25.00
CONNECTIONS TO CITY WATER MAINS
(all structures, building lots, subdivisions, etc.)
   Each individual tap in the city water mains, whether for immediate or future
use   $25.00
   Gas piping   $25.00
   PSI test to reconnect to gas for services abandoned six months or
greater   $50.00
   NOTE: When taps for water extension to serve individual lots at the time of
installation of the water main system, such taps shall be made by Illinois
licensed plumbers who are bonded to act as contractors by the City of Moline,
Illinois, and proper permits shall be procured and paid for at that time.
   Residential RPZ, commercial RPZ, additional meter, cross-connection
repair   ea $25.00
   OTHER INSPECTIONS & FEES
   Inspections outside of normal business hours (2 hours minimum
charge)   $50.00 per hour*
   Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 109   $50.00 per
hour*
   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge - ½
hour)   $50.00 per hour*
   Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
plans   $50.00 per hour*
   For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both……………………………Actual costs**
* Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This
cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.”
ARTICLE VI. ELECTRICAL CODE
SEC. 8-6100.   ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The National Electrical Code (NEC), 2020 Edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted as the Moline Electrical
Code and is incorporated herein by this reference thereto as if set out in haec
verba. Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the city clerk's
office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such purposes.
SEC. 8-6101.   AMENDMENTS TO MOLINE ELECTRICAL CODE - GENERAL.
   The National Electrical Code portion of the Moline Electrical Code adopted
in this article by reference is specifically amended as follows:
   1.   Section 210.8(A) Dwelling Units. Delete working “through 250-volt”
   2.   Section 210.8(A)(5) Add two additional exceptions:
      All 125-volt receptacles in a finish basement shall not be required to
have Ground-Fault Circuit-Interruptor Protection for Personnel.
      Sump pumps shall not be required to have Ground-Fault Circuit-Interruptor
protection installed for the receptacle as long as this receptacle in a Simplex
Style (Single) receptacle.
   3.   Section (B) Other Than Dwelling Units. Delete entire Section 210.8(B)
2020 NEC and replace Section 210.8(B) Other than Dwelling Units with 2011 NEC.
      Add one additional exception before the current exceptions:
      "Exception No. 1 to (2): Commercial (non-residential) refrigerators and
freezers will not be required to have ground-fault-circuit-interrupter
protection if the receptacle is a Simplex Style (Single) receptacle."
   4.   Delete Section 210.8(F).
   (a)   Section 210.52(C)(2) Island and Peninsular Countertops and Work
Surface. Delete Section 210.52(C)(2) of the 2020 NEC.
   (b)   Article 230 Services.
      1.   Add one new section:
      "Section 230.45 Service-Entrance Conductors Inside Structures.
      When located inside a structure, non-fused service entrance conductors
shall not extend more than ten (10) feet inside the structure unless the code
official permits the ten (10) feet to be increased."
      2.   Section 230.67 Surge Protection. Delete Section 230.67.
      3.   Section 230.85 Emergency Disconnects. Delete Section 230.85.
   (c)   Article 310 Conductors for General Wiring.
      Section 310.3(A) Change 14 AWG copper to 12 AWG copper. Change 12 AWG
aluminum to 10 AWG aluminum.
   (d)   Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Type NM and NMC.
      1.   Section 334.10 Delete 334.10(3), (4), and (5).
      2.   Section 334.10(3) Add - Type NM and NMC Cable can be used for the
wiring of motels, hotels and assisted care facilities of type III, IV and V
construction where the cable is concealed within walls, floors, and ceilings
that provide a thermal barrier of material that has at least a 15-minute finish
rating as identified in listings of fire-rated assemblies.
   (e)   Section 404.2 Schedule of permit fees.
   Insert the following in place of "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE
SCHEDULE]":
"TABLE 404.2(1)
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES
New single-family residences…………………………………………………………Application Fee $25.00 per
unit
……………………………………………………….plus $0.05 per square foot of gross habitable floor area
per unit
New multi-family residences or apartments (for rental purposes
only)......................................$50.00 for the first unit
…………………………………………………………………………………….plus $25.00 for each additional unit
Incidental units (wiring, air conditioner units, furnaces, single outlets,
etc.)   $17.00
Entrance services and temporary services   $17.00
Rewire multi-family residences or
apartments……………….........................………………...$30.00 for the first unit
…………………………………………………………..........................................plus $10.00 for
each additional unit
Wiring of additions, rewires, finishing basements, garages (attached or
detached)   $25.00
Commercial or industrial
wiring…….......................………………….................…………….Application Fee
$50.00
……………………………………………………………..................………plus 1% of total cost of material &
labor
Wiring of electrical
signs……….............................……………………………………………………$25.00 per sign
…………………………………………………………........................................(plus applicable
building permit fee)
OTHER INSPECTIONS & FEES
Meter set for services abandoned six months or longer………………………………………………….$50.00
per set
Inspections outside of normal business
hours.......................................................................................$50.00
per hour*
(2 hours minimum charge)
Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section
109...........................................................$50.00 per hour*
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge - ½
hour)……....................$50.00 per hour*
Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to
plans.....................................$50.00 per hour*
For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or
both.............................................Actual costs**
*   Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest.
This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs."
ARTICLE VII. INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SEC. 8-7100.   INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the “Moline International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code,” and is incorporated herein by reference as if it
were set out in haec verba. Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file
in the city clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for
such purposes.
SEC. 8-7101.   AMENDMENTS TO THE MOLINE INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA
CODE.
   The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code portion of the Moline
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted in this article by reference
is specifically amended as follows:
   (a)   Section 305 Barrier Requirements.
      Subsection 305.1 General. Change to read: “The provisions of this section
shall apply to the design on barriers for restricting entry into areas having
pools and spas.”
ARTICLE VIII. MISCELLANEOUS
DIVISION 1.   RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTION PROGRAM
SEC. 8-8100.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this division is to promote and protect the health, safety
and welfare of the City's residents by providing for the licensing of rental
units, buildings, and properties and the periodic inspection of such properties
to ensure such properties meet the minimum standards established by the City's
housing, electric, mechanical, plumbing and other property maintenance-related
codes.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8100 amended; 9/26/23)
SEC. 8-8101.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:   
   (a)   Building Division means the building division of the City of Moline.
   (b)   Building Official shall mean the duly appointed and acting building
official for the City of Moline, or his or her designee.
   (c)   City Administrator means the city administrator for the City of
Moline, or his or her designee.
   (d)   City Council means the City Council of the City of Moline.
   (e)   Code means any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect, or
any code or ordinance hereinafter adopted, in and for the City, concerning
fitness of premises for habitation or the construction, maintenance, operation,
occupancy, use or appearance of any premises or any dwelling unit, including,
without limitation, Chapter 8 of this Code of Ordinances, existing
Administrative Codes, Building Codes, Mechanical Codes, Property Maintenance
Codes, Illinois State Plumbing Code, and Chapters 21 and 35 of this Code of
Ordinances.
   (f)   Common Area means any space, place or location within or on the
exterior of a multi-family building, which is not a part of a dwelling unit
rented or leased to a person or persons for exclusive use.    
   (g)   Community Development Division means the community development
division of the City of Moline, a division of the City's department of
community and economic development.
   (h)   Dwelling Unit means a single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   (i)    Fire Department means the fire department of the City of Moline.
   (j)   Legal Department means the legal department or corporation counsel for
the City of Moline.
   (k)   Local Agent means a person who resides within a 30-mile radius of
Moline City Hall, who is appointed by a property owner to accept service of
notice on behalf of the property owner when said owner does not reside within
30 miles of Moline City Hall.
   (l)   Owner means any person holding legal title to a property, a contract
purchaser of same, including the guardian of the estate of any person, power of
attorney, or executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered
to take possession of real property by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (m)   Premises or Property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land easement or
public way, including any structures thereon.
   (n)   Rent means consideration, including any deposit, bonus, benefit or
gratuity, demanded or received for or in connection with the use or occupancy
of a residential rental unit.
    (o)   Residential Rental Property means vacant or occupied property
containing any dwelling unit that is rented or available for rent for 30 days
or more at a time to be used for residential purposes located in the City of
Moline. Property is considered rental property if occupied by someone other
than the legal owner of record or the owner's immediate family. For purposes of
this division, immediate family shall mean spouse or direct lineal relative and
includes great grandparents, parents, children and grandchildren but excludes
cousins, aunts, and uncles.
   (p)   Vacation Rental Unit means any dwelling unit that is used as a primary
residence by owners or renters, or a portion of such unit, that is rented or
offered for rent for transient occupancy by guests for less than 30 days at a
time for which an owner or operator receives consideration from a person and
that person has the right to use, occupy or possess the dwelling unit for said
period. For purposes of the City Code, the terms “Vacation Rental Unit” and
“Short Term Rental” shall have the same meaning and be used interchangeably.
   (q)   Temporary License. A license issued subsequent to the submission of an
application for a residential rental property but prior to an initial
inspection.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8101 amended; 9/26/23)
SEC. 8-8102   LICENSING OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (a)   Program participation required. No owner shall operate, maintain,
offer for rent, or allow any person to occupy any residential rental property
in the City without a license issued by the City, which may be obtained by
submitting a rental housing inspection program application. The owner of two
(2) or more buildings containing rental dwelling units located on contiguous
lots or parcels must obtain one (1) license for each building. Once licensed, a
copy of the license certificate with the owner and agent’s contact information
must be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises. Every rental property
must be inspected by the City to ensure that the property meets the minimum
standards set pursuant to the Moline Code of Ordinances, as provided in this
division.
   (b)   Program application and fee. Application for the Rental Housing
Inspection Program must be made on a form provided by the City. The original
application must be accompanied by an application fee as provided in Sec.
8-8107 .
The owner shall supply the following information:
   (1)   The owner's full legal name, residence address, and telephone number.
If owner is a corporation, provide full legal name, address, and telephone
number of registered agent;
   (2)   The building manager/property agent's full legal name, residence
address, and telephone number(s);
   (3)   The name of any person holding any other legal or equitable interest
in the ownership of the property;
   (4)   If the owner resides outside of Rock Island County, Illinois, the full
name, residence address and telephone number of the owner's local agent for
service of process, as required in this division;
   (5)   The street address of the property to be licensed, type of building
and number of dwelling units, and addresses for each unit; and
   (6)   The name of any buyer on contract for deed and a copy of the contract.
      The property owner shall verify by oath or affidavit the veracity of all
information provided on the application. Pursuant to this division, if at any
time after the submission of the application information provided on the
application changes, the owner shall notify the City of such change within
fifteen (15) days of the date of such change by way of a verified written
affidavit. It shall be unlawful for an owner to provide false information, or
otherwise make any misrepresentation, on a license application or subsequent
document notifying the City of a change in information. Willfully providing
false information on the license application will result in penalties as
prescribed under Sec.
8-8107.
   (c)   Exemptions. The following property is exempt from the license
requirement of this division:
   (1)   Property declared as condominium property under the Illinois
Condominium Property Act, 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq., and amendments thereto;
   (2)   Property owned and managed by the Moline Housing Authority, a
municipal corporation;
   (3)   Property containing facilities licensed under state or local law for
operation as an assisted or shared living, nursing home or long-term care
facility, a convalescent home, or any other facility providing residential care
to persons with mental health and/or developmental disabilities; and
   (4)   Hotels and motels, vacation rental units, bed and breakfast
establishments, community reception establishments.
   (d)   Temporary License. Upon receipt of a completed application form and
payment of the fee for a residential rental property license, the building
official shall issue a temporary license and schedule an initial inspection of
the property as soon as is practicable after submittal of the license
application. A final license for the initial term will be approved if the
residential rental property is in conformance with the City’s ordinances and
all other applicable provisions of this division and other applicable codes.
   (e)   Term. Residential Rental Property licenses shall be valid for a term
of one (1) year, commencing on January 1 of each calendar year.
   (f)   Renewal. The license must be renewed annually by submitting the
renewal application and renewal fee to the City no less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the license expiration date. Any fees due and owing must be paid in
full at the time of the renewal. The renewal fee shall be as provided in Sec.
8-8107 .
When rental license fees are not paid on or before the due date, a penalty will
be assessed as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107. Failure to receive an annual renewal notice does not relieve the owner
of possible penalties.
   (g)   Transferability of Application. Property licenses pursuant to this
division are nontransferable. If the property ownership changes during a
license term, the owner shall notify the City in writing of the property
transfer and provide the City with the name and address of the transferee. The
new property owner, shall, within fifteen (15) days of the transfer, submit an
application to the City along with the applicable application fee required
herein.
   (h)   Vacant Rental Units. Vacant and unoccupied rental dwelling units shall
be inspected during all safety inspections. If the power is off for more than
six (6) months, it is required that mechanical and electrical equipment be
inspected before the gas and electricity are turned on.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8102 renamed and amended; 9/26/23)
SEC. 8-8103   LOCAL AGENT REQUIRED.
   Whenever the owner of property required to be licensed under this division
is not a natural person residing within a 30-mile radius of Moline’s City Hall,
the owner shall appoint a natural person who resides within a 30-mile radius of
Moline City Hall, or shall appoint the Moline city clerk to serve as his or her
local agent for the service of such notices that may be required under this
division or other provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Should the owner
appoint a person other than the city clerk to act as his or her local agent,
notices shall be served upon the local agent personally or by certified or
regular mail and such service shall be sufficient to satisfy any requirement of
notice to the owner. Should the owner appoint the city clerk to act as his or
her local agent, notices shall be personally served upon the city clerk at said
clerk's office in city hall in Moline, and the city clerk shall send the
notices to the owner, via certified mail, return receipt requested, at his or
her address provided on the licensing application. Such service by the city
clerk shall be sufficient to satisfy any requirement of notice to the owner. If
the owner designates a new local agent, the owner shall notify the City's
rental housing inspections office no later than fifteen (15) days after the
change.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8103 amended; 9/26/23)
SEC. 8-8104   SAFETY INSPECTION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY.
   (a)   Safety inspection. All rental property subject to this division shall
be subject to a periodic safety inspection by the City as set forth herein and
to the extent determined by the building official.
   (1)   All rental property covered by this ordinance shall be subject to
inspection in accordance with this section. After inspection, the property will
be classified as follows:
      a.   CLASS A - The property is in excellent condition and has minor or no
violations of applicable City codes requiring re-inspection. The property shall
be re-inspected in four (4) years or at any time there is probable cause a
violation exists. If violations are found, it is the owner's responsibility to
notify the City when repairs have been completed and request a re-inspection to
verify compliance. The City shall presume that repairs have not been completed
if an owner does not notify the City, and the City shall issue a notice to
appear for a hearing either in the Municipal Code Enforcement System or circuit
court.
      b.   CLASS B - The property is in good condition and has minor violations
of applicable City codes requiring re-inspection and the violations do not pose
an immediate threat of danger to the life, health and safety of the occupants
of the property. The property shall be re-inspected in two (2) years or at any
time there is probable cause a violation exists. It is the owner's
responsibility to notify the City when repairs have been completed and request
a re-inspection to verify compliance. The City shall presume that repairs have
not been completed if an owner does not notify the City, and the City shall
issue a notice to appear for a hearing either in the Municipal Code Enforcement
System or circuit court.
      c.   CLASS C - The property is in sound condition but has violations of
applicable City codes requiring re-inspection but that do not pose an immediate
threat of danger to the life, health or safety of the occupants of the
building. The property shall be re-inspected in one (1) year or at any time
there is probable cause a violation exists. It is the owner's responsibility to
notify the City when repairs have been completed and request a re-inspection to
verify compliance. The City shall presume that repairs have not been completed
if an owner does not notify the City, and the City shall issue a notice to
appear for a hearing either in the Municipal Code Enforcement System or circuit
court.
      d.   CLASS N - New construction. First inspection four (4) years from
date of the occupancy permit or at any time there is probable cause a violation
exists.
   (b)    Owner or local agent to provide access to property.  
   (1)   If the owner appoints a person other than the city clerk to act as his
or her local agent, the owner or the owner's local agent shall, upon reasonable
notice, provide the City access to inspection areas and may be present during
any such safety inspection. If the owner or owner's local agent fails to
provide access to all areas subject to inspection herein on a date and time
agreed to between the City and owner or owner's local agent, the City may
impose an additional fee as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107. If the owner or owner's local agent refuses access to conduct a safety
inspection, the City may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
administrative search warrant to search the premises as provided by this code
and the common law of the State of Illinois.
   (2)   If the owner appoints the city clerk to act as his or her local agent,
upon reasonable notice to the owner, it shall be the owner's exclusive
responsibility to provide the City access to inspection areas or to arrange for
such access. The owner or owner’s agent may be present during any such safety
inspection. If the owner fails to provide access to all areas subject to
inspection herein on a date and time agreed to between the City and owner, the
City may impose an additional fee as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107. If the owner refuses access to conduct a safety inspection, the City
may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative search
warrant to search the premises as provided by this Code and the common law of
the State of Illinois.
   (3)   Owners/Agents shall contact the City at least seven (7) business days
prior to the scheduled inspection if they are unable to obtain their tenants'
consent to the inspection, if a planned inspection includes the interior space
under that tenant's exclusive possession. Failure to do so will be considered a
missed inspection and subject to penalties as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107.
   (4)   Probable cause to inspect dwelling units. If the City encounters any
condition, fact, evidence or other indicia establishing probable cause that a
code violation has occurred or exists upon the premises in a dwelling unit or
property, the City may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
administrative search warrant to inspect the premises as provided by this Code
and the common law of the State of Illinois.
   (c)   Tenant, occupant or other person in control of residential rental
property or dwelling unit to provide access to property. If any tenant,
occupant, or other person in control of a residential rental property or a
dwelling unit contained therein fails or refused to consent to free access and
entry to the property or dwelling unit under his or her control for any
inspection pursuant to this division, the building official may apply the
Circuit Court for an administrative warrant or other appropriate court order,
authorizing such inspections.
   (d)   Property failing a safety inspection. Any and all code violations
identified during a City safety inspection will be brought to the owner's
attention by means of serving a copy of a safety inspection checklist to the
owner or the owner's local agent, and the owner will be given a reasonable time
to correct such code violations. If the property fails to pass re-inspection,
and more than one (1) re-inspection is required, the owner shall be subject to
fees and penalties as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107 . If the code violations remain uncorrected, the code violations will be
referred to the building division, which will pursue compliance with applicable
code provisions. Upon receipt of a notice and order to correct any and all code
violations, the owner may appeal the notice. Any person having record title or
legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any
action of the building official, provided the appeal is made in writing as
provided in the current housing code, and filed with the building official
within fourteen (14) days from the date of service of such notice and order.
   (e)   Property passing a safety inspection. If, following any City initial
or follow up safety inspection, a property is found to have passed such
inspection with an approval of Class A, Class B or Class C, and the appropriate
licensing and inspection fees have been paid to the City, then this
classification rating will remain valid until such time as any subsequent City
inspection determines otherwise. Property owners are still responsible for
correcting any Code violations that are not part of the safety inspection and
any Code violations that occur on a property during the interim period between
inspections and will be subject to penalties as provided by City codes for
failure to do so. The City may randomly or upon probable cause conduct a safety
inspection of any residential rental property during the interim period in
order to determine if the property continues to meet City codes. Should any
property fail such a City inspection, then the classification rating may be
revoked or reassigned. In the interim, the City shall proceed according to this
division and nothing herein shall prevent or otherwise limit the City from
enforcing this division or any other City code. A City safety inspection does
not represent, ensure, warrant, or guarantee to any owner, purchaser, lessor,
agent, attorney, lender, title, or property insurer or to any of their
respective heirs, successors, or assigns, the condition of all of the code
violations existing at the property at the time of the safety inspection. The
City’s failure to list a code violation on an inspection report is not a
warranty or guarantee that the violation does not or did not exist on the
property.
   (f)   Inspection Fees. After the initial inspection has been completed, the
property owner will be notified of any code violations. If a compliance
inspection is not needed, a classification rating will be assigned. If a
compliance inspection is needed, the compliance inspection will be scheduled.
There is not a fee for the first compliance inspection. However, if additional
compliance inspections are needed, fees will be charged as prescribed in Sec.
8-8107 . A missed inspection fee will also be assessed as prescribed under Sec.
8-8107 .
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8104 amended; 9/26/23)
SEC. 8-8105.   SALE OR LEASE OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY; DISCLOSURE
REQUIREMENT.
   An owner entering into any contract for the sale, transfer or lease of a
residential rental property subject to this division shall provide the
prospective purchaser, purchasers, lessee or lessees with copies of any and all
City safety inspection checklists generated during the previous two (2) years
on or before entering into the contract. In issuing a City safety inspection
checklist, the City does not represent, insure, warrant, or guarantee to any
owner, purchaser, lessor, agent, attorney, lender, title or property insurer or
to any of their respective heirs, successors or assigns, that such safety
inspection checklist includes all of the code violations existing at the
property at the time of the safety inspection. The City’s failure to list a
code violation on an inspection report is not a warranty or guarantee that the
violation does not or did not exist on the property. At an owner or local
agent’s request, the City may issue a letter or other written document stating
that the code violations listed on a City safety inspection checklist have been
corrected to the City’s satisfaction, when, in fact, such violations have been
corrected.
SEC. 8-8106.   AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE DIVISION.
   The city administrator shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this division, and shall assign responsibility for administration and
enforcement of this division to such department or departments of the City as
may be appropriate, including, without limitation, the legal department, the
building division, the community and economic development division, and the
fire department. The city administrator is authorized to recommend reasonable
and necessary policies, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this division, which shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. This
division is not intended to, nor shall its effect be, to limit any other
enforcement remedies which may be available to the City under any other code,
law, rule or regulation.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8106 amended; 9/26/23; Ord. No. 3052-2023; Sec. 8-
8106 amended; 11/21/23)
SEC. 8-8107.   FEES AND PENALTIES.
In addition to any other remedies provided for herein, any person who commits
an offense, violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or the
requirements of this division shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
violation. Each day such a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Fees applicable to this division are as follows:
 
Fees                                         Cost
Application fee for first dwelling unit      $100.00
Application fee per additional dwelling unit $15.00
Late application                             $50.00
Missed inspection                            $50.00
Re-inspection                                 
   Minor infraction                       $100.00
   Major infraction                       $200.00
Re-inspection                                 
   Missed inspection                      $50.00
 
The late application fees will not be assessed before July 1, 2024.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8107 renamed; fee table added; 9/26/23; Ord. No.
3052-2023; Sec. 8-8107 amended; 11/21/23)
SEC. 8-8108   LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   A license may be suspended when violations of applicable codes have
been identified by the building official and the property owner has been
properly notified of the violations and given a reasonable period of time in
which to correct violations, but failed to do so. A license may also be
suspended when any information provided in the license application is
determined by the building official to be false.
   (b)   When a license is suspended, the building official shall send notice
as provided by Section 107 of the Moline Property Maintenance Code to the
property owner or the owner’s local agent.
   (c)   The city finds that notice sent by certified mail to the owner or the
local agent’s last address provided on the most recent license application is
reasonably calculated to apprise the owner of the license suspension.
   (d)   The owner is subject to all fines, fees, and penalties while the
license is suspended. In addition, while the license is suspended, the owner is
prohibited from renting dwelling units subject to the license until the license
is reinstated.
   (e)   A property owner that has a suspended license may request a compliance
inspection prior to revocation of the license. If, upon completion of the
compliance inspection, the building official finds that the residential rental
property in connection with the suspended license is now in compliance with
this division, the building official may reinstate the license. The request for
compliance inspection shall not stay the revocation of the license unless the
property owner shows good cause and the building official grants a stay.
   (f)   Any property owner than has a suspended license is entitled to appeal
the suspension by filing a petition as set forth in Section 111 of the Moline
Property Maintenance Code, which shall operate as a stay of the revocation
until such time as the property maintenance appeals board renders a decision on
the appeal.
   (g)   A license will be revoked when a petition for appeal has not been
filed within 14 days following the date of issuance of an order of suspension,
or when the suspension is sustained after appeal. A license will also be
revoked when in the opinion of the building official emergency conditions exist
in a residential rental property that require the immediate vacating of a
structure as specified in the Moline Property Maintenance Code.
   (h)   Whenever a license is revoked, the building official shall send notice
as provided by Section 107 of the Moline Property Maintenance Code to the
property owner or the owner’s local agent.
   (i)   The owner is subject to all fines, fees, and penalties after the
license is revoked. In addition, the owner is prohibited from renting the
dwelling units that were subject to the license.
   (j)   A revoked license shall not be reinstated; however, the property owner
may obtain a new license after all violations have been corrected and by
following the procedures for obtaining a new license as set forth in this
division, including the payment of all applicable fees.
(Ord. No. 3038-2023; Sec. 8-8108 repealed; new Sec. 8-8108 enacted; 9/26/23;
Ord. No. 3052-2023; Sec. 8-8108 amended; 11/21/23)
DIVISION 2. EMERGENCY RADIO SYSTEM COVERAGE
SEC. 8-8200   PURPOSE.
    The stated purpose and intent of this ordinance is to benefit and protect
the health, safety and welfare of the City’s residents and the City’s police
and fire personnel by ensuring the uninterrupted operation of the City’s public
safety, law enforcement, and other emergency-related and operational or planned
wireless communications networks. The City’s wireless communications networks
are essential to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Moline by providing communications for law enforcement activities, for
emergency medical treatment, for fire suppression, for carrying on the business
of government, and for providing communications in time of disasters. The
construction or erection of tall, high-density structures in other areas of the
United States have in the past resulted in the need for agencies to relocate
their communications facilities or to provide additional facilities at a
substantial cost to the public. This ordinance is intended to require that
persons or entities constructing or erecting structures in the City of Moline
do so in a manner that does not interfere with the City’s communication
networks or to alternatively provide the appropriate facilities necessary to
eliminate that interference.
SEC. 8-8201   REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall erect,
construct, change the use of, remodel or provide an addition in area greater
than twenty percent (20%) of the footprint of the original building to, any
building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done, which
fails to support adequate radio coverage for the city's 911 communications
system. Additionally, new or modified buildings or structures exceeding five
(5) stories in height may not interrupt the microwave paths connecting the
facilities that make up the 911 communications infrastructure. Prior to
obtaining a building permit for such construction or modifications, the
property owner must provide proof by a registered engineer's certification that
the structure will not interfere with the present or planned microwave path.
This certification must be provided to both the city's building official as
well as to the city's chief of police and fire chief.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall mean that
the radio coverage is sufficient to pass the testing procedures set forth in
this division.
(Ord. No. 3033-2022; Sec. 8-3701(a) amended; 10/18/22)
SEC. 8-8202   AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS ALLOWED.
   (a)   Buildings and structures that do not support adequate radio coverage
as identified herein shall be equipped with an approved FCC amplifier. The P25
Advisory Group and the contracted radio provider is the consultant who must
approve the equipment..
   (b)   If any part of the installed system or systems contains an
electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of operating on an
independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least twelve
(12) hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically
charge in the presence of an external AC power input.
(Ord. No. 3033-2022; Sec. 8-3702 amended; 10/18/22)
SEC. 8-8203   RESERVED.
SEC. 8-8204   CABLE RACEWAYS REQUIRED.
   Any person who constructs or develops a commercial or industrial building or
structure of any size shall install two (2) inch non-metallic raceways in the
walls into which radiating cable or coaxial cable may be laid. Such raceways
shall include an easily accessible opening to the structure’s roof surface that
allows for placement of an exterior antenna and access to each floor within the
structure.
SEC. 8-8205   TESTING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Whenever a building is required to comply with this division, the
building owner must contact the City's fire chief who shall cause personnel to
test the radio system to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the
building, including underground floors, meets a minimum of ninety percent (90%)
coverage. Critical areas providing a means of egress or life safety equipment
such as a fire pump room, Fire Command Center, or Fire Service Access Elevator
Lobbies must have 99% floor area radio coverage per NFPA 72 (2013) §
24.5.2.2.1. In all measured areas, inbound and outbound signal strength must be
a minimum of -95dBm. Radio coverage is greatly impacted by building
construction such as floor assemblies and wall assemblies and should be taken
into consideration when a radio signal survey is conducted.
   (b)   Two-way radio communications enhancement systems generally need to
accommodate several different radio frequencies in order to address the
responding fire department’s needs (fire and police dispatch channels,
fireground/tactical channels, mutual aid channels, etc.) as well as any
frequencies required by other emergency responders that require radio coverage.
Ultimately, the fire code official is charged with maintaining the list of P25
frequencies currently required to be supported. However, if at any point in the
future municipal frequencies are changed or added by the FCC or an AHJ, the
system is expected to be modified or expanded to accommodate these changes at
ownership’s expense per NFPA 72 § 24.5.2.4.2.
Whenever a building without a radio system fails to pass such test, then a
radio system must be installed, and the building re-tested upon completion of
installation. For purposes of testing, each floor of the building shall be
divided into a grid of approximately twenty (20) equal areas. A maximum of two
(2) nonadjacent areas may fail the test. In the event that three (3) of the
areas fail the test, in order to be more statistically accurate, the floor may
be divided into forty (40) equal areas. In such event, a maximum of four (4)
nonadjacent areas may fail the test. If the system fails to pass the forty (40)
area test, the building owner shall have the system altered to meet the ninety
percent (90%) coverage requirement.
      The test required by this section shall be conducted using a portable
radio of the type the City then currently utilize. A spot located approximately
in the center of a grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will
be keyed to verify two-way communications to and from the outside of the
building through the 911 Centre System. Once the center spot has been selected,
prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted.
   (c)   The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the test
measurement results shall be provided to the building owner, and shall be kept
on file with the building owner in the building. The measurements can be
compared and verified each year during the owner's annual tests, as provided
herein. In the event that the measurement results became lost, the building
owner shall notify the city, who will cause personnel to rerun the acceptance
test to re-establish the gain values.
   (d)   When a radio system is required, the building owner shall cause a
technician in possession of a current FCC license, or a technician certified by
the Associated Public-Safety Communications Officials International (APCO) or
the Personal Communications Industry Association (PCIA), to test all active
components of the system, including but not limited to amplifiers, power
supplies and backup batteries, a minimum of once every twelve (12) months.
Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain remains the same as that
found upon initial upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries
and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one (1) hour to
verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within
the one (1) hour test period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the
battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional
one (1) hour periods until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the
battery. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they
are operating within the manufacturer's specifications for the intended
purpose. The technician shall prepare a written report documenting the test
findings, and the building owner shall provide the chief of police with a copy
within ten (10) days of the completing of testing.
   (e)   In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall contact the
city to perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every five (5) years to
ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original
acceptance test. The procedures set forth above shall apply to such tests.
   (f)   Police and fire personnel, at any time after providing reasonable
notice to the building owner or his or her representative, shall have the right
to enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain that the
required level of radio coverage is present. Upon completion of each inspection
in which the building does not meet the testing requirements set forth herein,
the building owner shall pay the City an inspection fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
(Ord. No. 3033-2022; Sec. 8-3705 amended; 10/18/22)
SEC. 8-8206   EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   This ordinance shall not apply to the following buildings provided
they do not make use of any metal construction or any underground storage or
parking areas:
   (1)   Buildings less than five thousand (5,000) gross area square feet;
   (2)   Any building constructed of wood frame;
   (3)   Any building thirty-five (35) feet high or less.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, parking structures and stairwells are
included in the definition of “building” and stair shafts and elevators are
included in the definition of “all parts of a building.”
SEC. 8-8207   PENALTIES.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the
Moline Code of Ordinances as set forth in Section
1-1107 of said code. In addition, any building or structure which does not meet
the requirements set forth in this ordinance is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and the City may, in addition to seeking any other appropriate legal
remedy, pursue equitable remedies to abate said nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 21 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 8-8208   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
SEC. 8-8209   CONFLICT.
   This ordinance supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior
hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
DIVISION 3.   FILLING AND GRADING REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 8-8300   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   For all filling and grading to be done within the City, a fill permit must
be obtained and a permit fee must be paid. The permit fee is based on cubic
yards as set forth in Table 109.2(1) of Section
8-2101 of this Code. The permit application shall be accompanied by a plan in
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plan
shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the
person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information:
the general vicinity of the proposed fill site, limiting dimensions and depth
of fill, amount of fill to be placed, the location of any buildings or
structures where filling is to be performed, the location of any buildings or
structures within fifteen (15) feet of the proposed filling, the location of
silt fence and erosion control measures, and the location of all right-of-way
or easements in the general vicinity. The permit is valid for one-hundred
eighty (180) days unless an extension is granted by the code manager.
   For all filling and grading affecting an area greater than or equal to five
hundred (500) square feet, a drainage permit must be obtained from the City’s
Engineering Division as set forth in Section
34-4201 of this Code.
SEC. 8-8301   EROSION CONTROL AND DRAINAGE.
   Erosion control must be implemented in accordance with Section
34-4200 of the Moline Code of Ordinances. The faces of cut and fill slopes
shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion, which may consist
of effective planting. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon
as practical. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap, or other devices
or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. Silt fences
will be required. Ground cover must be established promptly.
   Fill shall be placed in such a way as to not impede flow/drainage patterns
and shall be done in accordance with the City’s stormwater utility ordinance,
Sections
34-4100 through
34-4503, and all other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
SEC. 8-8302   TYPE AND SIZE OF FILL.
   Only dirt, sand, gravel, stone, rock, broken concrete without any
reinforcement and clean brick and concrete may be used for fill material.
Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. No
rock, broken concrete or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension
greater than twelve (12) inches shall be buried or placed in fills.
SEC. 8-8303   OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Fill site shall be fenced to discourage dumping.
   Fill should extend completely across a ravine and intersect each side at
approximately equal elevations.
   City right-of-way shall be cleaned of all mud and debris by owner of fill
site.
   Filling of sites which adjoin unimproved streets will not be permitted from
March 1 to June 1.
   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical.
   Fill sites are subject to inspection by the building or engineering
divisions at any time to ensure continuing compliance.
_________________________________________
Chapter Amendments / Reference Notes:
   Chapter 8 repealed and enacted new:
   Ord. No. 3062-2013; repealed Chapter 8 in its entirety; new Chapter 8
enacted; 12/17/13
   Ord. No. 3051-2005; repealed Chapter 8 in its entirety; new Chapter 8
enacted; 09/13/05
   Ord. No. 3031-2023; repealed Chapter 8 in its entirety; new Chapter 8
enacted; 08/08/23
   See below: prior and subsequent ordinance amendments are referenced by their
section numbers, ordinance numbers and adoption dates.
Code Section No. and Action Ordinance No. Adoption Date
Code Section No. and Action                         Ordinance No. Adoption Date
Chapter 8 repealed; new Chapter 8 enacted           3051-2005     09/13/05
Chapter 8 repealed; new Chapter 8 enacted           3062-2013     12/17/13
Art. I Div. 5 enacted, CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY    3028-2008     03/25/08
Art. II BUILDING CODE repealed; new Article II      2003-03-01    03/04/03
BUILDING CODE enacted
Art. IV MECHANICAL CODE repealed; new Art. IV       2003-03-01    03/04/03
MECHANICAL CODE enacted
Art. VII Div. 4 Filling and Grading Requirements    3028-2008     03/25/08
enacted
Art. VIII ELECTRICAL CODE repealed; new Art. VIII   2003-03-01    03/04/03
ELECTRICAL CODE enacted
Art. VIII Div. 4 Crime Free Residential Rental      3028-2025     7/22/25
Program repealed
Art. IX Div. 2 MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY enacted 2002-12-04    12/17/02
Art. IX Div. 2 repealed; new Div. 2 enacted         3019-2007     05/08/07
Art. IX Div. 3 IN-BUILDING EMERGENCY RADIO SYSTEM   2002-11-04    11/19/02
COVERAGE enacted
Sec. 8-1101 amended by adding one additional        3028-2008     03/25/08
sentence to the end of Sec. 81-1101
Sec. 8-1101 repealed; new Sec. 8-1101 enacted       4003-2019     01/29/19
Sec. 8-1103 enacted                                 2003-03-01    03/04/03
Sec. 8-1104 enacted                                 2003-03-01    03/04/03
Sec. 8-1105 enacted                                 2003-03-01    03/04/03
Sec. 8-1300 repealed; new Sec. 8-1300 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-1301 repealed; new Sec. 8-1301 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-1401 repealed; new Sec. 8-1401, ELECTRICAL   2001-02-03    02/20/01
CONTRACTOR LICENSE, enacted
Sec. 8-1400(c) repealed; new Sec. 8-1400(c) enacted 3010-2019     04/09/19
Sec. 8-1401 repealed; new Sec. 8-1401 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-1401 repealed; new Sec. 8-1401 enacted       3040-2015     11/10/15
Sec. 8-1401(b)(2)(a) repealed; new Sec.8-1401(b)(2) 3022-2016     02/02/16
(a) enacted
Sec. 8-1401(b)(5) and (b)(8) repealed; new Sec. 8-  3010-2019     04/09/19
1401(b)(5) and (b)(8) enacted
Sec. 8-1402 repealed; new Sec. 8-1402 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-1402(b) repealed; new Sec. 8-1402(b) enacted 3040-2015     11/10/15
Sec. 8-1402(e) and (i) repealed; new Sec. 8-1402(e) 3010-2019     04/09/19
and (i) enacted
Sec. 8-1403 repealed; new Sec. 8-1403 enacted       3014-2013     06/11/13
Sec. 8-1405(d) repealed; new Sec. 8-1405(d) enacted 3010-2019     04/09/19
Sec. 8-1501 enacted                                 3012-2015     04/28/15
Sec. 8-1500(c)(1), (2) repealed; new Sec. 8-1500(c) 3043-2018     11/27/18
(1),(2) enacted
Sec. 8-1800(c) repealed; new Sec. 8-1800(c) enacted 2002-06-13    06/25/02
Sec. 8-1801 repealed; new Sec. 8-1801 enacted       97-6-1        06/10/97
Sec. 8-2101(l) repealed; new Sec. 8-2101(l) enacted 3039-2011     11/01/11
Sec. 8-2101(b) and (o) enacted and the remaining    3028-2008     03/25/08
subsections consecutively renamed
Sec. 8-2201 repealed; new Sec. 8-2201 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-3101 repealed; new Sec. 8-3101 enacted; 11/  3039-2011     11/01/11
01/11
Sec. 8-3101(k) repealed; new Sec. 8-3101(k) enacted 3003-2016     02/23/16
Sec. 8-4101 repealed; new Sec. 8-4101 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-4101(p) enacted – re: method of service    3053-2017     12/19/17
Sec. 8-4102 enacted                                 3061-2006     12/19/06
Sec. 8-5101 subsections (g), (h), (i), (j) and (k)
repealed; new subsections (g), (h), (i), (j), (k),  2003-03-01    03/04/03
(l) and (m) enacted
Sec. 8-5101 repealed; new Sec. 8-5101 enacted       3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-5101 repealed; new Sec. 8-5101 enacted       3009-2009     04/14/09
Sec. 8-5101(b) repealed; new Sec. 8-5101(b)
enacted; original subsection (b) becomes (c) and
the remaining subsections consecutively renamed;    3016-2013     07/23/13
original subsection (f) repealed; new subsection
(g) enacted
Sec. 8-6101(e) repealed; new Sec. 8-6101(e) enacted 3040-2015     11/10/15
Sec. 8-6102 repealed; new Sec. 8-6102 enacted       3039-2011     11/01/11
Sec. 8-7102 PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE enacted             2003-03-01    03/04/03
Sec. 8-7102 repealed; new Sec. 8-7101 enacted       3039-2011     11/01/11
Sec. 8-7202(b) repealed; new Sec. 7202(b) enacted   3028-3013     10/01/13
Sec. 8-7202(d) repealed; new Sec. 7202(d) enacted   3028-3013     10/01/13
Sec. 8-7202(e) repealed; new Sec. 7202(e) enacted   3028-3013     10/01/13
Sec. 8-7204(c) repealed; new Sec. 8-7204(c) enacted 3028-2008     03/25/08
Sec. 8-7204(c) repealed; new Sec. 8-7204(c) enacted 3028-2013     10/01/13
Sec. 8-7204(d) repealed; new Sec. 8-7204(d) enacted 3005-2012     02/21/12
Sec. 8-7204(e) repealed; new Sec. 8-7204(e) enacted 3028-2013     10/01/13
Sec. 8-7204(e) repealed; new Sec. 8-7204(e) enacted 3005-2012     02/21/12
Sec. 8-7205 repealed; new Sec. 8-7205 enacted       3005-2012     02/21/12
 
CHAPTER 9
BODY ART AND MASSAGE CODE
Note: See end of chapter for list of chapter amendments
   Art. I.   Adoption by Reference: Body Art, §9-1100
   Art. II.   In General, §9-2100 - §9-2112
   Art. III.   Temporary Body Art Establishments, §9-3100 - §9-3102
   Art. IV.   Administration and Enforcement
      Div. 1. In General, §9-4100 - §9-4108
      Div. 2. Inspections, §9-4200 - §9-4203
   Art. V.    Penalties, §9-5100
   Art. VI.   Massage Establishments, §9-6100 - §9-6119
ARTICLE I. ADOPTION BY REFERENCE: BODY ART
SEC. 9-1100.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City of Moline shall adopt by reference the State of Illinois’ “Tattoo
and Body Piercing Establishment Registration Act,” 410 ILCS 54/1 et seq.
(“Act”), effective July 1, 2007, and any future revisions or addenda thereto as
amended or revised from time to time by said State of Illinois as the Moline
“Body Art Code,” of which not less than three (3) copies have been and are now
filed in the office of the Clerk/Legal Records’ Office of the City of Moline,
and which is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set out at length herein.
ARTICLE II. IN GENERAL
SEC. 9-2100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have, unless the context
indicates otherwise, the meaning ascribed to them:
   (1)   Antiseptic means an agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms
on human skin or mucosa.
   (2)   Biochemical waste means any solid or liquid waste which may present a
threat of infection to humans, including nonliquid tissue, body parts, blood,
blood products, and body fluids from humans and other primates; laboratory and
veterinary wastes which contain human disease-causing agents; and discarded
sharps. The following are also included: (a) used, absorbent materials
saturated with blood, blood products, body fluids or excretions or secretions
contaminated with visible blood and absorbent materials saturated with blood or
blood products that have dried; and (b) non-absorbent, disposable devices that
have been contaminated with blood, but have not been treated by an approved
method.
   (3)   Body art, body art procedure or procedure means the practice of
applying physical body adornment to an individual using such invasive methods
as body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, scarification, or
similar procedures. This term does not include ear piercing or any procedures
performed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, dentist, dental
hygienist, funeral director, embalmer, nurse, optometrist, physician assistant,
or podiatrist licensed pursuant to Chapter 225, Illinois Compiled Statutes, and
amendments thereto.
   (4)   Body art establishment or establishment means any temporary or
permanent place or premises where body art procedures are performed.
   (5)   Body piercing means puncturing or penetrating the skin of an
individual using a pre-sterilized single use needle, and inserting pre-
sterilized jewelry or other adornment into the opening, excluding ear piercing
as defined herein.
   (6)   Disinfection means the destruction of disease-causing microorganisms
on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
   (7)   Ear piercing means puncturing the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear
using a pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear-piercing system following
manufacturer’s instructions.
   (8)   Equipment means all machinery, including fixtures, containers,
vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture display and storage areas, sinks
and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
   (9)   Handsink means a lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water
under pressure used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the
body.
   (10)   Health officer means the health officer of the City of Moline, as set
forth in
Chapter 8, Division 2, of the Moline Code of Ordinances, and his or her
designee.
   (11)   Hot water means water which attains and maintains a minimum
temperature of at least seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit and a maximum
temperature of one hundred fifteen (115) degrees Fahrenheit.
   (12)   Instruments used for body art means hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that can come into contact with an individual’s
body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
   (13)   Invasive means entry into the body either by incision or insertion of
an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
   (14)   Jewelry means any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced
area, which has been properly sterilized prior to use.
   (15)   Liquid chemical germicide means a disinfectant or sanitizer
registered with the Environmental Protection Agency, or an approximate 1:100
dilution of household chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a
spray bottle (500 ppm; ¼ cup per gallon or two (2) tablespoons per quart of tap
water).
   (16)   License means a written document issued by the health officer
approving the operation of a body art establishment or the performance of body
art procedures. Licenses are issued in accordance with this chapter and are
separate and distinct from any other licensing or license requirements of the
City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (17)   Person means an individual, any form of business or social
organization, or any other non-governmental legal entity including but not
limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association,
trust, or unincorporated organization.
   (18)   Physician means a person licensed by the State of Illinois to
practice medicine under Chapter 225, Illinois Compiled Statutes, and amendments
thereto.
   (19)   Procedure surface means the skin area adjacent to and including the
area where a body art procedure is applied, any surface of an inanimate object
that contacts the client’s unclothed body during a body art procedure, or any
associated work area which may require sanitizing.
   (20)   Sanitize or sanitization procedure means a process of reducing the
number of microorganisms on cleansed surfaces and equipment to a safe level in
accordance with public health standards by a method approved by the health
officer.
   (21)   Sharps means objects capable of puncturing, lacerating, or otherwise
penetrating the skin.
   (22)   Sharps container means a rigid, leak and puncture resistant
container, designed primarily for the containment of sharps, clearly labeled
with the phrase and international biological hazard symbol.
   (23)   Single use products or items are those intended by the manufacturer
for onetime, one-person use and disposal after use. Items include but are not
limited to cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic
cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades,
stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
   (24)   Sterilization means a very powerful process resulting in the
destruction of all forms of microbial life, including highly resistant
bacterial spores.
   (25)   Tattooing means any method of placing ink or other pigment into or
under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to
puncture the skin which results in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa,
including all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
   (26)   Technician or body art technician means a person who performs body
art procedures.
   (27)   Universal precautions means a set of guidelines and controls,
published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as
“guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and
hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers” in Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. 5-6, and as
“recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures,”
in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection control
requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and
specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood
pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving, personal protective
equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles,
other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products.
SEC. 9-2101.   LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art procedures
without first obtaining a body art technician license as provided in this
chapter. A body art technician license shall not be transferable.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a body art
establishment or temporary body art establishment without first obtaining a
body art establishment and temporary body art establishment as provided in this
chapter. Such licenses shall not be transferable.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art procedures
except within a body art establishment or temporary body art establishment for
which the health officer has issued a current valid license.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a body art establishment
to permit or allow body art procedures to be performed by anyone who does not
have a current valid body art technician license issued by the health officer.
   (e)   Body art establishment and body art technician licenses expire on
April 30 of each year and shall be renewed before May 1 of each year.
   (f)   Licensees shall maintain compliance with all requirements of this
chapter and all other provisions of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances.
Licensees shall notify the health officer within ten (10) days of any change of
information provided in accordance with Sections
9-2102 and
9-2103 of this chapter.
SEC. 9-2102.   BODY ART TECHNICIAN LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Prior to filing an application for a body art technician license
required by this chapter, the applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted
by the Moline Police Department, said fingerprinting to be used in connection
with obtaining the applicant’s criminal history information from the Illinois
Department of State Police pursuant to the Illinois Uniform Conviction
Information Act (20 ILCS 2635/1 et seq.) and amendments thereto.   
   (b)   Every applicant for a body art technician license shall submit an
application to the health officer providing the applicant’s: (1) name; (2) date
of birth; (3) gender; (4) residence address; (5) mailing address; (6) home and
work phone numbers; (7) any and all previous place(s) of employment as a
technician; and (8) training and experience in body art procedures. The
applicant shall also provide a statement as to whether the applicant has ever
been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere to, or is currently charged with
committing, by indictment or information, any felony violation or offense or
any crime of moral turpitude, and as to each such conviction, plea or charge,
the applicant shall provide the conviction or plea date if applicable, the case
number, the nature of the felony offense or crime of moral turpitude and the
name and location of the court or other adjudicative body. The applicant must
sign a fully executed waiver on a form prescribed by the City to obtain
criminal conviction information based upon fingerprint identification pursuant
to the Illinois Uniform Conviction Information Act (20 ILCS 2635/1 et seq.) and
amendments thereto.
   (c)   The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to the
veracity of all statements made on or in connection with the application and
any attachments thereto. It shall be unlawful for an applicant to provide
incorrect or false information in connection with a license application.
   (d)   Applicants must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   (e)   All applicants must furnish to the health officer written proof of
completion of the Hepatitis B vaccination series or written documentation that
the applicant declined the series prior to the issuance of a body art
technician license.
   (f)   Applicants must demonstrate proof of satisfactory completion within
the past three (3) years of satisfactory completion of a bloodborne pathogen
training program compliant with Bloodborne Pathogens, OSHA, 29 CFR 1910.1030.
Equivalent training provided by professional body art organizations or
equipment manufacturers shall be accepted as sufficient to meet this
requirement.
   (g)   A body art technician license may not be issued pursuant to this
chapter to:
   (1)   A person who has been convicted of a forcible felony or more than one
felony under any federal or state law, or who has refused to appear and
forfeited bond after having been arrested for such forcible felony or has been
convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. “Forcible felony” means
treason, first degree murder, second degree murder, predatory criminal sexual
assault of a child, aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual
assault, robbery, burglary, residential burglary, aggravated arson, arson,
aggravated kidnapping, kidnapping, aggravated battery resulting in great bodily
harm or permanent disability or disfigurement and any other felony which
involves the use or threat of physical force or violence against any
individual;
   (2)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (3)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of his or her body
art technician license issued pursuant to this chapter would not be eligible
for the license upon a first application;
   (4)   A person who has unlawfully performed body art procedures without
first obtaining a body art technician license as provided in this chapter;
   (5)   A person who is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors,
narcotics or stimulants to such extent as to incapacitate such person for the
performance of his professional duties for any period of time.
   (h)   Upon determination that the applicant meets the minimum requirements
set forth herein, the health officer shall issue a body art technician license
to the applicant.
   (i)   The annual fee for a body art technician license is fifty dollars
($50.00), which shall be due and payable to the City’s accounts and finance
office and which is in addition to any fees due to the State of Illinois
pursuant to the Act.
   (j)   Exception: Any individual who is a student of a bona fide body art
training program shall be exempt from the body art technician licensing
requirements set forth in this chapter for up to thirty (30) days total while
enrolled and practicing the application of permanent body art as a student in
said training program.
SEC. 9-2103.   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Prior to filing an application for a body art establishment license
required by this chapter, the applicant shall provide a valid copy of a License
of a Body Art Establishment issued by the State of Illinois and the applicant
shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Moline Police Department, said
fingerprinting to be used in connection with obtaining the applicant’s criminal
history information from the Illinois Department of State Police pursuant to
the Illinois Uniform Conviction Information Act (20 ILCS 2635/1 et seq.) and
amendments thereto. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, then the
individual who shall be responsible for operation of the body art establishment
shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Moline Police Department as
described herein.
   (b)   Every applicant for a body art establishment license shall submit an
application to the health officer providing: (1) owner name (if partnership or
corporation, include names and resident addresses of all partners, officers,
directors and the name of its resident agent for purpose of service); (2)
establishment name; (3) street address; (4) mailing address; (5) proposed hours
of operation; (6) names of all body art technicians and their exact duties; (7)
description of all body art procedures to be performed or not performed; (8)
names and addresses of suppliers of body art equipment and supplies utilized;
and (9) name, local address, and local residence telephone number of the
individual who shall be responsible for operation of the body art
establishment. The applicant shall also provide a statement as to whether the
applicant, any of the applicant’s partners, officers or directors and the
individual who shall be responsible for operation of the body art establishment
have ever been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere to, or is currently charged
with committing, by indictment or information, any felony violation or offense
or any crime of moral turpitude, and as to each such conviction, plea or
charge, the applicant, any of its partners, officers or directors and the
individual who shall be responsible for operation of the body art establishment
shall provide the conviction or plea date if applicable, the case number, the
nature of the felony offense or crime of moral turpitude and the name and
location of the court or other adjudicative body. The applicant, or if the
applicant is a partnership or corporation then the individual who shall be
responsible for operation of the body art establishment, must sign a fully
executed waiver on a form prescribed by the City to obtain criminal conviction
information based upon fingerprint identification pursuant to the Illinois
Uniform Conviction Information Act (20 ILCS 2635/1 et seq.) and amendments
thereto.
   (c)   A scale drawing and floor plan of the establishment shall be submitted
with the application as well as proof of meeting the minimum requirements
established in this chapter and other relevant provisions of the City of Moline
Code of Ordinances.
   (d)   A body art establishment license may be denied pursuant to this
chapter to an applicant:
   (1)   If the applicant, or any of its partners, officers or directors, or
the person who will be or is in charge of operating the establishment has been
convicted of a forcible felony or more than one felony under any federal or
state law, or who has refused to appear and forfeited bond after having been
arrested for such forcible felony or has been convicted of any crime involving
moral turpitude or has been convicted of prostitution, pandering, pimping or
other offenses opposed to decency and morality. “Forcible felony” means
treason, first degree murder, second degree murder, predatory criminal sexual
assault of a child, aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual
assault, robbery, burglary, residential burglary, aggravated arson, arson,
aggravated kidnapping, kidnapping, aggravated battery resulting in great bodily
harm or permanent disability or disfigurement and any other felony which
involves the use or threat of physical force or violence against any
individual;
   (2)   If the applicant, or any of its partners, officers or directors, or
the person who will be or is in charge of operating the establishment has had a
license issued under this chapter revoked for cause;
   (3)   If, at the time of application for renewal of a body art establishment
license issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant would not be eligible
for the license upon a first application;
   (4)   If the individual who will be in charge of the body art establishment
operation does not reside in the County of Rock Island, Illinois;
   (5)   If the applicant, or any of its partners, officers or directors, or
the person who will be or is in charge of operating the establishment has
unlawfully operated a body art establishment without first obtaining a body art
establishment license as provided in this chapter;
   (6)   If the applicant or any of its partners, officers or directors, or the
person who will be or is in charge of operating the establishment is addicted
to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such
extent as to incapacitate such person for the performance of his professional
duties for any period of time.
   (e)   Upon determination that the minimum requirements for a body art
establishment set forth in this chapter have been met, the health officer shall
issue a body art establishment license to the applicant.
   (f)   The annual fee for a body art establishment license is one hundred
dollars ($100.00), which shall be due and payable to the City’s accounts and
finance office and which is in addition to any fees due to the State of
Illinois pursuant to the Act.
   (g)   If a body art establishment changes location following issuance of a
license, the licensee shall be required to pay a re-inspection fee in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the City’s accounts and finance office;
said fee is in addition to any fees due to the State of Illinois pursuant to
the Act.
SEC. 9-2104.   EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS.
   (a)     A body art establishment existing or a body art technician
performing body art procedures in the City before the effective date of this
chapter may continue to exist and operate, provided that the establishment or
technician complies with the following:
   (1)   The establishment or technician shall submit an application for a
license as soon as practicable but in no event shall the application be
submitted later than thirty (30) days after this chapter’s effective date;
   (2)   The establishment shall be inspected no later than sixty (60) days
after this chapter’s effective date. The purpose of this inspection is to
enable the health officer to assist the establishment in identifying those
items that need to be addressed for the establishment to meet the requirements
of this chapter;
   (3)   The establishment or technician shall cease performing body art
procedures no later than ninety (90) days after this chapter’s effective date
unless the establishment or technician has secured a license from the City as
provided in this chapter. The health officer may grant an establishment or
technician additional time for good cause shown not to exceed ninety (90) days
to secure a license;
   (4)   The establishment or technician, shall, as of this chapter’s effective
date, comply with the following:
      a.    Section
9-2106 of this chapter;
      b.   Section
9-2109 of this chapter.
   (b)   A body art establishment existing or a body art technician performing
body art procedures in the City before the effective date of this chapter shall
not be denied a license to operate or perform procedures under Sections
9-2102(f)(1) and Sections
9-2103(e)(1) based upon adverse criminal history incurred prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
SEC. 9-2105.   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT PREMISES STANDARDS.
   (a)   The body art establishment license shall be posted within the
establishment in a prominent and conspicuous area where it may be readily
observed by the establishment’s clients.
   (b)   The establishment shall be well ventilated and shall have an
artificial light source equivalent to at least twenty (20) foot candles at
three (3) feet above floor level, and at least one hundred (100) foot candles
at the level where the body art procedure is performed and where instruments
and sharps are assembled.
   (c)   All walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be light
colored, washable, smooth, free of open holes or cracks, and shall be
maintained in good repair and clean condition. Carpeting is not permitted
within any body art procedure area.
   (d)   Each technician working in the establishment shall have a procedure
area with at least forty-five (45) square feet of floor space. The technician’s
license shall be displayed within his or her procedure area in a prominent and
conspicuous place where it may be readily observed by the technician’s clients.
   (e)   Multiple body art procedure areas shall be separated by solid or
opaque dividers, curtains, or partitions, at a minimum.
   (f)   Each establishment shall have at least one (1) procedure area
completely screened from public view for clients requesting privacy.
   (g)   All body art procedure areas shall be completely separated by solid
partitions or by walls extending from floor to ceiling from any room used for
human habitation or food preparation, and from any food establishment, hair
salon, retail business, or other such activity, which could contaminate work
surfaces.
   (h)   All procedure surfaces, including client chairs and benches, shall be
of such construction as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client,
with a liquid chemical germicide.
   (i)   A separate handsink with hot and cold running water, under pressure,
preferably equipped with wrist or foot operated controls, and supplied with
liquid soap and disposable paper towels, shall be located within or immediately
adjacent to the body art procedure area(s). One handsink shall serve no more
than three (3) technicians. In addition, there shall be a minimum of one (1)
equipment washing sink, one (1) service sink and restroom facilities as
required by the Illinois Plumbing Code in each body art establishment.
   (j)   At least one (1) covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each
procedure area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the procedure area shall be
emptied daily. Solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly.
All refuse containers shall be lidded, cleanable, and shall be kept clean.
   (k)   No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment,
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g., seeing eye
dogs). Fish aquariums may be allowed in waiting rooms and non-procedural areas.
   (l)   Effective measures shall be taken to prevent the entrance of insects,
vermin, and rodents into the establishment, such as screened openings and
automatic closures on doors. No insects, vermin, and rodents shall be present
in any part of the establishment, its appurtences, and appertaining premises.
SEC. 9-2106.   PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall perform or license the performance of body art
procedures upon a person under eighteen (18) years of age without the presence,
photo identification, and written consent of the minor’s parent or legal
guardian. A technician or body art establishment may refuse to perform a body
art procedure on a minor regardless of parental consent.
   (b)   No technician or body art establishment shall perform or license the
performance of body art procedures on any person who appears incoherent for any
reason, or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   (c)   No technician or body art establishment shall perform or license the
performance of body art procedures on any skin or mucosa surface where a rash
or any visible infection is present.
   (d)   No person affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
keloids, weeping dermatological lesions, or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which there is
a likelihood that the person could contaminate body art equipment, supplies,
instruments, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms.
   (e)   Ear piercing systems using studs and clasps shall not be used anywhere
on the body other than the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear.
   (f)   No technician or body art establishment shall perform or license the
performance of any procedures implanting any object(s) under the skin, such as
ball bearings, beads, etc.
   (g)   Smoking, eating, or drinking is strictly prohibited in the body art
procedure area. No technician shall perform any body art procedure if under the
influence of alcohol or drugs. No alcoholic beverages are to be on the body art
establishment premises while body art procedures are being performed.
SEC. 9-2107.   BODY ART NOTICE AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Every person requesting a body art procedure shall be provided with
verbal and written public educational information prior to the start of the
procedure, in a form approved by the health officer.
   (b)   Every person receiving a body art procedure shall be provided with
verbal and written instructions for aftercare of the body art procedure site,
in a form approved by the health officer. The instructions shall advise the
client of proper care for the healing of the body specific to the procedure
performed and to consult a physician at the first sign of infection or
swelling. The instructions shall include the name, address, and phone number of
the establishment and the printed name of the technician who performed the
procedure.
   (c)   The written information and aftercare instructions shall be signed and
dated by the client and the technician. The originals shall be retained by the
establishment and copies shall be given to the client.
   (d)   Every body art establishment shall prominently display a disclosure
notice, which shall be provided with each establishment license issued by the
health officer, containing the following information:
   (1)   advising the public of the risks and possible consequences of body art
services;
   (2)   the name, address, and phone number of the health officer; and
   (3)   the procedure for filing a complaint relating to body art services.
   (e)   Any infection, complication, or disease resulting from a body art
procedure which becomes known to the technician or establishment shall be
reported to the health officer within twenty-four (24) hours. The technician
and the establishment shall be jointly and severally responsible for reporting
such information.
SEC. 9-2108.   CLIENT MEDICAL HISTORY.
   (a)   Prior to performing any body art procedure, in order to properly
evaluate the client’s medical condition for receiving a body art procedure, the
technician shall specifically request from the client verbally and in writing
the following information:
   (1)   history of diabetes;
   (2)   history of hemophilia (bleeding);
   (3)   history of skin diseases, skin lesions or skin sensitivities to soaps,
disinfectants, etc.;
   (4)   history of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or other
skin sensitivities;
   (5)   current or recent medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the
blood or interfere with blood clotting; and
   (6)   any other information that would aid in evaluating the client’s body
art healing expectations.
   (b)   Prior to performing any body art procedure, the technician shall
obtain a release form signed by the client confirming that the technician
obtained or attempted to obtain the medical history, and listing the
information provided.
   (c)   The technician may refuse to perform a body art procedure if the
client refuses to disclose the information requested.
SEC. 9-2109.   PERFORMANCE OF BODY ART PROCEDURES.
   (a)   When performing body art procedures, the technician shall maintain a
high degree of personal cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices, wear clean
clothes, and his or her skin shall be free of rash or infection. Clothing worn
by the body art technician while performing body art procedures shall not be
worn by any person at any other time outside the body art establishment.
   (b)   Before performing a body art procedure, the immediate skin and
surrounding skin area where the body art procedure is to be applied shall be
washed with soap and water or an approved surgical skin preparation, depending
on the type of body art to be performed. If shaving is necessary, a single use
disposable razor shall be used then discarded; or a safety razor with a single
service blade shall be used, the blade discarded, and then the reusable holder
shall be sterilized. After shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be
washed with soap and water, and the washing pad shall be discarded.
   (c)   Immediately before performing body art procedures on an individual,
the technician shall thoroughly wash his or her hands in hot running water with
use of liquid soap, then rinse his or her hands and dry them with disposable
paper towels. This shall be done as many times as necessary to remove
contaminants. After hand washing is completed, the technician shall don
disposable medical gloves.
   (d)   The technician shall wear disposable gloves during all procedures.
Gloves shall be discarded after the completion of each procedure on an
individual client, and hands washed prior to donning the next set of gloves.
Under no circumstances shall a single pair of gloves be used on more than one
(1) person. The use of disposable medical gloves does not preclude or
substitute for the hand washing procedures described herein.
   (e)   If, prior to or while performing a body art procedure, the
technician’s glove or gloves are pierced or torn or become contaminated by
contact with any non-clean surface or object, by contact with a third person,
or otherwise, the technician shall immediately discard the gloves, repeat the
hand washing procedure, and put on a fresh pair of gloves to complete the
procedure.
   (f)   Any instrument used for body art, which is contaminated during the
procedure, shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a new disposable or
sterilized instrument before the procedure resumes.
SEC. 9-2110.   RECORDS.
   (a)   The body art establishment shall keep a record of all body art
procedures performed. The record shall include the client’s name, date of
birth, client’s address, date of the procedure, type and location of each
procedure performed, name of the technician who performed each procedure,
signature of client, and, if the client is a minor, proof of parental or
guardian presence and written consent. Signed copies of the client release
form, and aftercare forms shall also be maintained by the establishment. All
records shall be available for inspection by the health officer upon request.
   (b)   Records containing a client’s personal medical information shall be
considered confidential by the establishment. The health officer shall keep
personal medical information confidential to the extent disclosure is not
required under applicable state and federal law, in the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
   (c)   All records required by this code shall be retained by the
establishment for a minimum of three (3) years.
SEC. 9-2111.   EQUIPMENT, INSTRUMENTS AND SUPPLIES; SANITATION AND
STERILIZATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Both sterilized and clean instruments and supplies shall be stored in
clean, dry, covered containers.
   (b)   All instruments used in body art procedures shall remain stored in
sterile packages until just prior to use. Sterile instruments and equipment
shall not be used if the package has been breached or the expiration date has
expired, without first repackaging and resterilizing.
   (c)   All products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall
be single use and disposable.
   (d)   All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall
be single use and disposable. Petroleum jellies, soaps and other products used
in the application of stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to be
tattooed with sterile gauze or in a manner to prevent contamination of the
original container and its contents. The gauze shall be used only once and then
discarded.
   (e)   All inks, dyes, pigments, needles, and instruments used shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures, and shall be used
according to manufacturer’s instructions. The mixing of approved inks, dyes, or
pigments, or their dilution with potable water, is acceptable. Immediately
before applying a tattoo, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be
transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic
cups or caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups or caps and
their contents shall be discarded.
   (f)   Jewelry used in body art procedures shall be made only of the
following materials: surgical implant grade stainless steel, solid 14k or 18k
white or yellow gold; niobium; titanium; platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic. All jewelry shall be free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces,
and shall be properly sterilized prior to use.
   (g)   When assembling instruments used for performing body art procedures,
the technician shall wear disposable medical gloves and shall use medically
recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not
contaminated.
   (h)   Single-use items shall be discarded immediately after each use, and
shall not be used on more than one (1) client for any reason.
   (i)   Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and
dried after each use.
   (j)   Every body art establishment shall have a health officer-approved
sterilizer unless only sterile supplies and single-use disposable instruments
and products are used. Sterilizers shall be located away from procedures areas
and areas frequented by the public.
   (k)   The following process shall be followed after each use for all non-
single use, non-disposable instruments used for body art:
   (1)   the instrument shall be cleaned by scrubbing with an appropriate soap
or disinfectant solution and hot water, or by following the manufacturer’s
cleaning instructions, to remove blood and tissue residue;
   (2)   the instrument shall be placed in an autoclave sterilization unit,
which shall be operated in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions;
   (3)   the instrument shall be packed individually in a peel-pack containing
either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator, and
sterilized;
   (4)   peel-packs shall be dated with an expiration date not to exceed sixty
(60) days, and before the expiration of such time shall be re-sterilized.
   (l)   Sterilizers shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to
manufacturer’s instructions. A copy of the manufacturer’s recommended
procedures for the operation of the sterilization unit shall be available for
inspection by the health officer.
   (m)   Each body art establishment shall demonstrate by monthly spore
destruction tests that the sterilizer used is capable of attaining
sterilization. The tests shall be verified through an independent laboratory.
Tests records shall be retained for a period of three (3) years, and shall be
made available to the health officer upon request. The establishment license
shall not be issued or renewed until the health officer receives documentation
of the sterilizer’s ability to destroy spores.
SEC. 9-2112.   STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   (a)   Storage of biomedical waste on-site shall not exceed the period
specified by the health officer, or more than thirty (30) days.
   (b)   Sharps shall be disposed of in approved sharps containers.
   (c)   All products used to check the flow of blood or to absorb blood shall
be disposed of immediately after use in appropriate covered containers, unless
the disposal product meets the definition of biomedical waste.
   (d)   Non-biomedical waste which does not release liquid blood or body
fluids when compressed, or does not release dried blood or body fluids when
handled, shall be placed in a covered receptacle and disposed of through
normal, approved disposal methods.
   (e)   Biomedical waste which may release liquid blood or body fluids when
compressed, or which may release dried blood or body fluids when handled, shall
be placed in an approved “red” bag marked with the International biohazard
symbol, and disposed of by a biomedical waste transporter registered by the
Illinois Department of Health.
ARTICLE III. TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS
SEC. 9-3100.   TEMPORARY LICENSES.
   (a)   Temporary body art establishment and temporary body art technician
licenses may be issued for events such as product demonstrations, industry
trade shows, educational training, and special events.
   (b)   Temporary licenses shall be issued only for the specific duration of
the event and shall not be valid for any period in excess of three (3)
consecutive days.
   (c)   Temporary licenses shall not be transferable.
   (d)   Temporary licenses may be immediately suspended or revoked for failure
of the licensee to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
SEC. 9-3101.   TEMPORARY LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   An application for a temporary body art establishment or mobile body
art vehicle license must be submitted in writing for review by the health
officer at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. The request shall
specifically identify:
   (1)   the purpose for which the license is requested;
   (2)   the period of time for which the license is requested, not to exceed
three (3) days;
   (3)   the location of the temporary establishment; and
   (4)   the names of all technicians who will perform body art procedures in
the temporary establishment.
   Applicants are responsible for compliance with all other City of Moline
regulations, including without limitation, zoning and business license
requirements.
   (b)   An application for a temporary body art technician license must be
submitted in writing for review by the health officer at least thirty (30) days
prior to the event. The application shall include:
   (1)   proof of compliance with the body art technician requirements set
forth in this chapter; or
   (2)   proof that the applicant is currently affiliated with a fixed location
or permanent body art establishment permitted by an appropriate state or local
government.
   (c)   No temporary establishment license shall be issued unless the
establishment has body art technicians with valid annual or temporary licenses
issued by the health officer.
SEC. 9-3102.   TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   Temporary establishments shall be inspected prior to use to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Additional inspections may be
performed during the event.
   (b)   The temporary establishment must be within a completely enclosed non-
mobile structure and be secured against the entry of insects or vermin.
   (c)   All establishment and technician licenses and the disclosure notice,
health officer information, and complaint procedure as set forth in this
chapter must be displayed in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be
readily seen by clients.
   (d)   The temporary establishment must comply with all of the requirements
of this chapter, except as follows:
   (1)   drainage in accordance with local plumbing codes shall be provided;
   (2)   tuberculocidal single use hand wipes, approved by the health officer,
must be available in each booth or cubicle to augment the hand washing
requirements of this section;
   (3)   a minimum of eighty (80) square feet of floor space shall be
available.
   Facilities and equipment shall be available to properly sterilize
instruments. A spore test report performed on sterilization equipment thirty
(30) days or less prior to the date of the event shall be provided, or only
single use, prepackaged, sterilized equipment obtained from reputable suppliers
or manufacturers shall be used.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 9-4100.   HEALTH OFFICER TO ENFORCE.
   The health officer is hereby designated as the person charged with enforcing
the provisions of this chapter. The health officer shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (a)   To administer and rule upon license applications as set forth in this
chapter;
   (b)   To conduct and provide for inspections of body art establishments as
shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and other applicable provisions of law in accordance with the Act;
   (c)   To conduct such hearings on license suspension or revocation as
required pursuant to this chapter;
   (d)   To take such further action as the health officer deems necessary to
carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to exercise such
additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to those
powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter.
SEC. 9-4101.   HEALTH OFFICER COMPETENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   The health officer performing licensing functions, environmental health/
sanitary evaluations, complaint investigations, inspections of body art
establishments or performing any other duties pursuant to this chapter shall be
trained in body art licensing and inspections as administered by the State of
Illinois.
SEC. 9-4102.   RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   All body art establishment and body art technician licenses, except
for temporary body art establishment licenses, shall be renewed annually by
submitting a re-licensing application to the health officer at least thirty
(30) calendar days prior to May 1 of each year. Whenever an inspection for
renewal of a license reveals serious or repeated violations of this chapter or
other provisions of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances, the license shall
not be issued and the health officer shall notify the applicant immediately
thereof. Any such notice shall set forth in writing the reasons for failing or
refusing to renew the license. Such notice shall also state that an opportunity
for a hearing shall be provided for the applicant at a time and date designated
by the health officer. Such hearing shall be scheduled not later than ten (10)
calendar days from the date of the notice. A license which expires without
being renewed shall be removed from the body art establishment or the body art
technician by the health officer.
   (b)   If the applicant for renewal of a license provides adequate
documentation of a reasonable time schedule for correcting non-health
threatening repeat violations, the health officer may renew the license.
Failure to comply with the time schedule for corrections may result in
immediate suspension of the license as provided herein.
SEC. 9-4103.   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING; COMPLIANCE CONFERENCE.
   Whenever a license holder fails to comply with a notice to correct repeated
violations, the license holder may be required to attend a compliance
conference with the health officer, the building official and other parties
deemed necessary by the health officer and the license holder. The intent of
this conference shall be to achieve compliance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to invoking license suspension or revocation proceedings.
SEC. 9-4104.   LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (a)   A license may be suspended temporarily by the health officer for
failure by the license holder to comply with the requirements of this chapter
or other provisions of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances. Whenever a
license holder has failed to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the license holder shall be notified in writing
that the license is, upon service of a notice, immediately suspended or that
the suspension shall be effective on a specific future date, and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the health officer within three (3) days of the suspension notice
date. The license holder shall be afforded a hearing as soon as practicable.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the health
officer finds unsanitary or other conditions, which, in the judgment of the
health officer, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, the
license may be immediately suspended. A license may be suspended without
warning or notice of hearing, and upon conditions, specifying the corrective
action to be taken and specifying the time period within which such action
shall be taken. If deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is
immediately suspended and all body art procedures are to cease at once. Any
person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately; but upon
written petition to the health officer within three (3) days of the suspension
date, the license holder shall be afforded a hearing as soon a practicable.
SEC. 9-4105.   REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   Any license holder whose license has been suspended may at any time make a
written request for a reinspection for the purpose of license reinstatement.
This request shall include a statement signed by the licensee that, in said
licensee’s opinion, the conditions resulting in suspension of the license have
been corrected. The request shall also contain any necessary documentation
required by the health officer to assure compliance with the notice to correct.
Within five (5) business days following receipt of a written request, the
health officer shall make a re-inspection or otherwise evaluate the written
request. If the licensee is found to be in compliance with the requirements of
this chapter and other provisions of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances, the
license shall be reinstated.
SEC. 9-4106.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
   (a)   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
chapter or other provisions of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances, including
without limitation unlawfully operating a body art establishment or performing
body art procedures without having first obtained the appropriate license as
required by this chapter, or for interference with the health officer in the
performance of any of his or her duties as set forth herein, any body art
establishment or body art technician license may be permanently revoked after
an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health officer.
   (b)   A body art establishment license may also be revoked, after an
opportunity for hearing has been provided by the health officer, for the
following reasons:
   (1)   If the licensee, or any of its partners, officers or directors, or the
person who is in charge of operating the establishment who has been convicted
of a forcible felony or more than one felony under any federal or state law, or
who has refused to appear and forfeited bond after having been arrested for
such forcible felony or has been convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude or has been convicted of prostitution, pandering, pimping or other
offenses opposed to decency and morality. “Forcible felony” means treason,
first degree murder, second degree murder, predatory criminal sexual assault of
a child, aggravated criminal sexual assault, criminal sexual assault, robbery,
burglary, residential burglary, aggravated arson, arson, aggravated kidnapping,
kidnapping, aggravated battery resulting in great bodily harm or permanent
disability or disfigurement and any other felony which involves the use or
threat of physical force or violence against any individual;
   (2)   If the licensee or any of its partners, officers or directors, or the
person who is in charge of operating the establishment is addicted to the
habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such extent as
to incapacitate such person for the performance of his professional duties for
any period of time. If the individual who is in charge of the body art
establishment operation does not reside in the County of Rock Island, Illinois;
   (3)   If the licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or
deceptive advertising;
   (4)   If the licensee is guilty of willful negligence in the practice of
tattooing or has been guilty of employing, allowing or permitting any
unlicensed person to perform tattooing in his establishment;
   (5)   If liquor is being sold or consumed within the establishment;
   (6)   If the establishment has abandoned the practice of tattooing or that
the individual licensee has abandoned the same practices. For purposes of this
subsection, "abandonment" shall mean that the activities regulated hereunder,
or any of them, have ceased or are otherwise not conducted for a period of
sixty (60) days at the establishment in question, or where an individual
licensee has abandoned the activities regulated hereunder, or any of them, for
a like period;
   (7)   If the licensee, or any of its partners, officers or directors, or the
person who is in charge of operating the establishment has unlawfully operated
a body art establishment without first obtaining a body art establishment
license as provided in this chapter.
   (c)   Prior to the revocation provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above,
the health officer shall notify the license holder in writing stating the
reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising that the
license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) calendar days
following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with
the health officer by the license holder within such five (5) calendar-day
period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a
hearing relative thereto.
   (d)   In lieu of revocation, a body art establishment or body art technician
may be granted a conditional license. An agreement shall be submitted by the
body art establishment or the body art technician stating the actions said
establishment or technician deems necessary to provide a continuing compliance
program. Based on approval from the health officer, the license shall be
removed and replaced with a new license marked as “Conditional.” The
conditional license shall then be in effect until the regular license
expiration date. Failure to comply with the terms of the written agreement
shall cause the license to be permanently revoked pursuant to the provisions
contained herein.
   (e)   Any licensee, whether an establishment or technician, who has had its
license revoked three (3) times, shall be ineligible for any license hereunder
for a period of five (5) years beginning with the effective date of the third
revocation.
SEC. 9-4107.   NOTICES.
   A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is
delivered to the license holder or the person managing a body art establishment
holding a license, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder. A copy of
the notice shall be maintained in the records of the health officer. A
completed inspection report form or a letter are considered proper forms of
notice.
SEC. 9-4108.   HEARINGS, IN GENERAL.
   Hearings provided for in this chapter shall be conducted in a time and place
designated by the health officer. Hearings shall be held before a body art
hearing committee consisting of the City’s police chief or designee, revenue
manager or designee, and a paramedic designated by the fire chief. Based upon
the record of the hearing, the body art hearing committee shall make written
findings and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order of
the health officer considered in the hearing.
DIVISION 2. INSPECTIONS
SEC. 9-4200.   RIGHT TO INSPECT AND EXAMINE RECORDS.
   The health officer may conduct inspections as often as necessary throughout
the year to ensure compliance with this chapter and other provisions of the
City of Moline Code of Ordinances. The health officer, after providing proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter any body art establishment at any
reasonable time, but in no event less than all hours said establishment is open
for business for the purpose of making inspections and to determine compliance
with this chapter and other provisions of the City of Moline Code of
Ordinances. The health officer shall be permitted to examine the records of the
body art establishment to obtain information pertaining to any matter regulated
herein.
SEC. 9-4201.   REPORT OF INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever an inspection of a body art establishment is made, the findings
shall be reported on an inspection report form. The inspection report form
shall summarize the requirements of this chapter. Inspection remarks shall be
written and shall state any correction to be made. Following such inspection, a
copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the licensee. The health
officer shall retain the original of all inspection reports. The completed
inspection reports are public documents that shall be made available for public
inspection to any person who requests same according to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, 5 ILCS 140/7, and amendments thereto.
SEC. 9-4202.   CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of any violations found. Correction of a violation
shall be accomplished within the period specified in accordance with the
following provisions:
   (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, the body art establishment or
body art technician shall immediately cease body art procedures;
   (2)   For serious violations, violations shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, within ten (10) business days following inspection.
Within fifteen (15) days following inspection, the license holder shall receive
notice by the health officer stating that violations have been corrected. A
follow-up inspection, as deemed necessary by the health officer, shall be
conducted to confirm correction;
   (3)   Non-serious violations shall be corrected within ten (10) calendar
days;
   (4)   In the case of temporary body art establishments or mobile body art
vehicles, all violations shall be corrected immediately. If the violations are
not corrected the temporary body art establishment or mobile body art vehicle
shall immediately cease performing body art procedures until authorized by the
health officer.
   (b)   Failure of the license holder to comply with any time limits for
corrections may result in the health officer ordering the cessation of body art
procedures. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time
limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the
heath officer within ten (10) calendar days following cessation of operations.
If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held as soon as
practicable.
   (c)   Whenever a body art establishment or body art technician is required
under the provisions of this chapter to cease performing body art procedures,
they shall not resume such procedures until it is shown upon reinspection that
the conditions responsible for the order to cease procedures no longer exists.
Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
SEC. 9-4203.   EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Where equipment used in performing body art procedures is found to be
in a state of disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use or unsanitary, such
equipment shall be taken out of use and a hold order placed on said equipment
by the health officer. Such equipment may not be put back into service until
written permission is obtained from the health officer. It shall be unlawful
for any person to move or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on equipment
by the health officer. After the license holder has had a hearing as provided
in this chapter and on the basis of the evidence produced at such hearing or on
the basis of examination in the event that a written request for a hearing is
not received within ten (10) business days, the health officer may vacate the
hold order or may, by written notice, direct the license holder to bring such
equipment into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall
be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within
ten (10) business days.
ARTICLE V. PENALTIES
SEC. 9-5100.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or exists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter commits an offense. Any person committing any
offense under this chapter shall be fined as follows: not less than two hundred
fifty ($250.00) for a first offense, not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for a second offense, and not less than seven hundred fifty ($750.00)
for a third or subsequent offense.
ARTICLE VI. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SEC. 9-6100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have, unless the context
indicates otherwise, the meaning ascribed to them:
   (1)   Health officer means the health officer of the City of Moline, as set
forth in
Chapter 8, Division 2, of the Moline Code of Ordinances, and his or her
designee.
   (2)   Massage means any method of pressure on, friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, bathing, touching, binding,
painting, irritating, or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with
hands or with the aid of any manual, mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptic oils, powder, creams, lotions, soaps, ointments or other
similar preparations commonly used in this practice, but does not mean the
provision by a State of Illinois licensed barber or cosmetologist of customary
barber or cosmetologist services, including without limitation scalp rubs, hand
rubs, feet and lower leg rubs, and facials, that are authorized by the State
license. Further massage does not include an act of a State registered athletic
trainer or the diagnosis, prescribing drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint
manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a license to practice
medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law.
   (3)   Massage establishment means any building, room, place or
establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, dispensary, or nursing
home, where nonmedical and nonsurgical manipulative exercises are practiced
upon the human body or where activities described in the definition of
“massage,” whether as a primary, secondary, or ancillary purpose of the
business, are engaged in for a fee or other gratuity. Any establishment engaged
in or carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bath house
shall also be deemed a massage establishment. 
   (4)   Operator means individual or other entity that operates, owns, or
controls a massage establishment under this chapter.
   (5)   Therapist means an individual who is properly licensed and maintains
such license by the State of Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, in
accordance with the Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq., or an
individual specifically exempted therefrom. By reference hereto, and to the
fullest extent possible, the City adopts the provisions of 225 ILCS 57/1 et.
seq., including all requirements thereof.
   (6)   Sexual or genital area means the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus
or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
SEC. 9-6101.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a massage establishment within the City without
first having obtained a massage establishment license therefore from the City.
All massage therapists employed in the massage establishment must possess a
current and valid massage therapist license issued by the State of Illinois.
SEC. 9-6102.   LICENSE OFFICER – DESIGNATED POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The health officer is hereby designated as the person charged with enforcing
the provisions of this chapter. The health officer shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (a)   To administer and rule upon license applications as set forth in this
chapter;
   (b)   To conduct and provide for inspections of massage establishments as
shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and other applicable provisions of law;
   (c)   To conduct such hearings on license suspension or revocation as
required pursuant to this chapter;
   (d)   To take such further action as the health officer deems necessary to
carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to exercise such
additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to those
powers and duties expressly set forth in this chapter.
SEC. 9-6103.   LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   Every applicant for a license to operate a massage establishment shall
file an application under oath with the City on a form provided by the City
along with the proper license fee. The application shall contain the following
information:
   (1)    Every applicant for a massage establishment license shall submit an
application to the health officer providing: (1) owner name (if partnership or
corporation, include names and resident addresses of all partners, officers,
directors and the name of its resident agent for purpose of service); (2)
establishment name; (3) street address; (4) mailing address; (5) proposed hours
of operation; (6) names of all therapists and employees and their exact duties;
(7) description of all services to be performed; (8) name, local address, and
local residence telephone number of the individual who shall be responsible for
operation of the massage establishment. The applicant shall also provide a
statement as to whether the applicant, any of the applicant’s partners,
officers or directors and the individual who shall be responsible for operation
of the massage establishment have ever been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere
to, or is currently charged with committing, by indictment or information, any
felony violation or offense or any crime of moral turpitude, and as to each
such conviction, plea or charge, the applicant, any of its partners, officers
or directors and the individual who shall be responsible for operation of the
massage establishment shall provide the conviction or plea date if applicable,
the case number, the nature of the felony offense or crime of moral turpitude
and the name and location of the court or other adjudicative body.
   (2)   An attestation that the individual submitting the application is at
least eighteen (18) years of age, and an acknowledgement that the information
submitted in the application is true and correct, under penalty of perjury as
set forth in 735 ILCS 5/1-109.
   (3)   Previous experience in the massage therapy business, and whether or
not any previous license to operate a massage establishment has ever been
suspended or revoked.
   (4)   Certification from the City of Moline building and zoning departments
that proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all regulations and
ordinances of said departments.
   (5)   The applicant for a massage establishment license shall provide proof
that all therapists so employed in the establishment possess a current and
valid massage therapist license issued by the State of Illinois.
   (b)   Upon receipt of all required application materials, the chief of
police, or designee thereof, shall review the criminal history of the applicant
and provide a report to the health officer that includes information on any
criminal history and whether the applicant meets the requirements of the
ordinance.
SEC. 9-6104.   LICENSE TERM, EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   (a)   Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be granted for a period of not more than one (1) year, unless sooner
revoked or suspended, and every license shall expire on the thirtieth (30th)
day of April following the date of its issuance. All massage establishment
licenses shall be renewed annually by submitting a re-licensing application to
the health officer at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to May 1 of each
year. Whenever an inspection for renewal of a license reveals serious or
repeated violations of this chapter or other provisions of the City of Moline
Code of Ordinances, the license shall not be issued and the health officer
shall notify the applicant immediately thereof. Any such notice shall set forth
in writing the reasons for failing or refusing to renew the license. Such
notice shall also state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for
the applicant at a time and date designated by the health officer. Such hearing
shall be scheduled not later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of the
notice. A license which expires without being renewed shall be removed from the
massage establishment by the health officer.
   (b)   If the applicant for renewal of a license provides adequate
documentation of a reasonable time schedule for correcting violations and a
plan to ensure violations are not repeated, the health officer may, but is not
required, to renew the license. Failure to comply with the time schedule for
corrections may result in immediate suspension of the license as provided
herein.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, each license may be renewed upon proper
application and payment of the required fee. The requirements, procedures, and
fees for renewal of a license shall be the same as the requirements,
procedures, and fees for granting a new license.
SEC. 9-6105.   LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a massage establishment license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
per year.
SEC. 9-6106.   EMPLOYEE RECORDS AND LICENSE DISPLAY REQUIRED.
   (a)   The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of
all persons employed as massage therapists and must maintain copies of each
individual’s valid license issued by the State of Illinois pursuant to the
Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/1, et seq., or valid certificate issued by
an authorized bona fide organization as set forth in the Act. Every licensee
shall display a valid State of Illinois license and a City of Moline license in
a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the licenses may
be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
   (b)   The operator shall keep a list containing the names and current
addresses of all employees working at the licensee’s business premises along
with a declaration as to whether the employee is employed as a massage
therapist as defined herein. This list shall be revised by the licensee within
five (5) business days of the departure or upon the hiring of a new employee.
Such register, licenses, certificates, and corresponding documentation shall be
available for inspection at all times during regular business hours or whenever
requested by the City.
SEC. 9-6107.   HOURS OF OPERATION AND INSPECTION.
   (a)   No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any day. Hours shall be posted and be
conspicuously visible from the exterior of the establishment.
   (b)   Each establishment shall allow inspection by the City of Moline police
department, code official, health official, city attorney or any other designee
of the City during regular business hours with or without notice or cause.
   (c)   In the event that the establishment does not maintain regular business
hours, but operates by appointment, the establishment shall provide the City
with a telephone number which shall include a working voice mailbox and email
address of a person, employee, or agent with authority to allow access to the
establishment for inspection by the City. Said establishment shall allow access
for inspection within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving notice of the City's
request for inspection.
   (d)   If the City requests inspection by email, notice shall be deemed to
have been received by the massage establishment on the date and time of the
City’s email transmission. If the City requests inspection by phone, notice
shall be deemed to have been received by the massage establishment on the date
and time of the City’s phone call. If the City is unable to speak to an agent
or employee of the massage establishment by phone, the City shall request
inspection by leaving a message in the establishment’s voicemail box, which
shall include the contact information of the health officer or other City
employee or designee requesting the inspection. Notice shall be deemed to have
been received on the date and time the City leaves the voicemail message.
SEC. 9-6108.   LICENSE CONSTITUTES PROPERTY; NONTRANSFERABLE.
   The license granted under this chapter is a personal privilege and shall
constitute property. All licenses are nontransferable.
SEC. 9-6109.   CHANGE OF BUSINESS LOCATION; NOTIFICATION.
   The licensee shall notify the health officer ten (10) days in advance of any
change of business location and must obtain the health officer’s written
approval of such change of business location.
SEC. 9-6110.   OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Every portion of the massage establishment and all mechanical and
therapeutic devices that come into contact with the human body shall be kept
cleaned, sanitized and operated under sanitary conditions.
   (b)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower
compartments and toilet room shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business
is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
   (c)   Each therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using
a proper disinfectant soap before administering a massage to each patron. Hand
washing facilities should be in each room or as close as practicable.
   (d)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for
use of one (1) patron shall not be furnished for use of another until
laundered.
   (e)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by
nontransparent towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee or therapist.
   (f)   At all times, all employees, including therapists, shall be clean and
wear clean, opaque, nontransparent outer garments without holes, and provide
complete coverage from midthigh to two (2) inches below the collarbone.
   (g)   No therapist shall administer a massage to a patron who exhibits any
skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, skin eruption or skin lesions
(open or healing sores), unless a physician duly licensed by the State of
Illinois has certified in writing that such person may be safely massaged and
the patron provides a copy of such document to the therapist prior to the
massage.
   (h)   No person suffering from any symptoms described in subsection (g) of
this section shall work in a massage establishment.
   (i)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (j)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for duly certified service animals, shall not be permitted in the
massage work areas.
   (k)   No therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to
perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron’s sexual or
genital area. It is unlawful for any person in the massage establishment to
touch, fondle, or massage a sexual or genital area of any other person.
   (l)   Each therapist shall disclose to each patron health problems that may
be contraindicated to the administration of massage therapy.
SEC. 9-6111.   PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator, owner, proprietor, manager or other
person in charge of any massage establishment to be or to employ any person who
is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
SEC. 9-6112.   ADVERTISING.
   Any advertising for a massage establishment shall be for the establishment
itself and services authorized by the establishment licensing under this
chapter. False and misleading advertising by the licensee or operator of a
massage establishment is prohibited. No massage establishment granted a license
under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or
cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to
prospective patrons that any service, including any sex service and/or escort
service, is available. No advertising shall suggest that employees or massage
therapists are dressed in any manner other than permitted by this chapter. Any
licensed establishment is expected to actively monitor advertising for its
establishment and its employees or any other information pertaining to be
within its operations. A violation of this section shall be presumed to be with
the knowledge of the licensee, without further proof of actual or constructive
knowledge, if the advertising persists for forty-eight (48) hours after the
health officer or other City designee identifies a potential violation of this
section.
SEC. 9-6113.   OUT-CALL MASSAGE SERVICE.
   No out-call massage service may be operated other than by a licensee under
this chapter. All massages performed by an out-call massage service shall be
performed in conformance with this chapter. An out-call massage service is a
business which gives massages at a location designated by the patron rather
than a fixed and permanent location.
SEC. 9-6114.   INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It is unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow the health officer or
other City designee access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any
manner.
   (b)   The health officer, Moline Police Department and the Moline building
and zoning departments may make inspections of the massage establishments for
the purposes of determining whether the establishment is operating under and in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances
and state and federal laws.
SEC. 9-6115.   LICENSEE PUNISHABLE FOR ACTS OR OMISSIONS.
   Every act of omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such operator or licensee, and said operator or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
SEC. 9-6116.   LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES.
   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended
by the health officer for good cause or for any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
SEC. 9-6117.   CAUSE FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The license may be denied, immediately revoked or suspended for just cause
including but not limited to:
   (a)   The correct license fee and/or application costs have not been
tendered to the City.
   (b)   The applicant for, or holder of, a license, if an individual; or any
of the stockholders holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant or license
holder is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant or license holder is a partnership; or the operator, manager or
any other person principally in charge of the massage establishment, has been
convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside
the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the following offenses
if committed within the State of Illinois in the past ten (10) years;
   (1)   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex
offenses, as defined in Chapter 720 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
   (2)   A felony that involved the use of a deadly weapon, trafficking
narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including rape or other
sexual misconduct, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of
application;
   (3)   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation from any jurisdiction,
based upon conduct related to the business for which the business license was
applied; or
   (4)   A crime of moral turpitude.
   (c)   The applicant for, or holder of, a license has knowingly made any
false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application,
or in any document required by the City in connection with this chapter.
   (d)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
   (e)   The application was incomplete or incorrectly completed.
   (f)   The establishment would not comply with this chapter and all
applicable laws, including but not limited to, both the City of Moline’s and/or
Rock Island County’s building, zoning and health regulations.
   (g)   Any person has committed, on the premises of the establishment, an act
that would constitute prostitution pursuant to the laws of the State of
Illinois, or any offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or gambling,
whether or not such person has been convicted of such prostitution, narcotics,
dangerous drugs or gambling offense under the laws of the State of Illinois.
   (h)   The establishment or any employee of the establishment has not
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
   (i)   Any violation of the advertising restrictions under this chapter.
   (j)   Upon the determination of the health officer that such business is
being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or
health of its patrons or without due regard to proper sanitation and hygiene.
SEC. 9-6118.   APPEAL OF DENIAL/SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.
   (a)   Any person desiring to contest a denial, suspension or revocation of a
license under this chapter shall have a right to appeal such decision to the
mayor or designee thereof as provided in this section within fourteen (14) days
after receipt of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation by giving such
notice in writing and requesting a hearing.
   (b)    The mayor or designee thereof, after receipt of the written request
for a hearing, shall set a time and date certain for such hearing within a
reasonable time.
   (c)    The mayor or designee thereof shall give written notice of the time,
date and place for hearing to the applicant or permit holder at least five (5)
days in advance of the hearing date.
   (d)   At the hearing, the applicant or license holder may present and submit
evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited for suspending, revoking or
denying the license. The appealing party shall have the right to file
additional documents, amend the written appeal and appear at such hearing in
person, be represented by an attorney and examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (e)    The mayor or designee thereof shall not be bound by the rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts of law but shall, in ascertaining the
conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account
all reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit.
   (f)    The appealing party shall supply at his or her own cost a court
reporter.
   (g)    Within fourteen (14) days after the close of the hearing, the mayor
or designee thereof shall render a decision in writing and make it available to
the appealing party.
   (h)   The mayor or designee thereof may reinstate a revoked license, grant
the requested license or renewal thereof, or affirm the suspension.
   (i)   The decision issued pursuant to this section shall be final.
   (j)   If a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit what
documentation he or she desires to have the mayor or designee thereof consider
with the written appeal, and the mayor or designee thereof shall render a
decision within fourteen (14) days of the filing of the written appeal.
SEC. 9-6119.   PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or exists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this Article VI commits an offense, and each day a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any person
committing any offense under this Article VI shall be fined as follows: not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first offense, not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second offense, and not less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
   Further, the city attorney shall be authorized to obtain an injunction
against the operation of any massage establishment or out-call massage service
being operated in violation of any provision of this chapter.”
Amendments :
(Ord. No. 2001-12-04; new Chapter 9, “BODY ART CODE,” enacted; 12/11/01)
(Ord. No. 3011-2009; new Sec. 9-2102(l) enacted; 04/21/09)
(Ord. No. 3027-2010; Chapter 9 repealed in its entirety and new Chapter 9,
“BODY ART CODE,” enacted; 06/08/10)
(Ord. No. 3013-2017; Chapter 9 repealed in its entirety and new Chapter 9,
“BODY ART CODE,” enacted; 08/08/17)
(Ord. No. 3005-2019; Chapter title amended from “BODY ART CODE,” to “BODY ART
AND MASSAGE CODE;” enacted 03/12/19)
(Ord. No. 3005-2019; new Art. VI, “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS,” enacted; 03/12/19)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTIONS
SEC. 10-1100.   ELECTION CODE ADOPTED.
   Article IV of the Election Code, contained in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, is hereby adopted and made applicable to all elections held within
the City for nominations at all primaries and all elections of the officers
thereof.
SEC. 10-1101.   WARDS.
   The City shall be divided into seven (7) wards. The boundaries of each ward
shall be determined as follows except to the extent same are modified by
ordinances annexing to the corporate limits of the City tracts, parcels, or
blocks of land:
FIRST WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying west and north of the following
described line:
   Beginning at the south bank of the south branch of the Mississippi River and
the intersection of the centerline of 8th Street extended; thence south along
said extended centerline to the centerline of 5th Avenue; thence east along the
centerline of 5th Avenue to the centerline of 8th Street to the south; thence
southerly along the centerline of 8th Street to the centerline of 12th Avenue;
thence east along the centerline of 12th Avenue to the centerline of 9th
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 9th Street to the centerline
of 16th Avenue; thence east along the centerline of 16th Avenue to the
centerline of 9th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 9th Street
to the centerline of 21st Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 21st
Avenue to the west property line of John Deere Junior High School; thence
southerly along said west property line of John Deere Junior High School to the
northwest corner of Lot 1 of Vize’s First Addition; thence south southeasterly
along western lot line and across its access drive, approximately 282 feet to
the easternmost corner of the Shady Oaks subdivision; thence westerly 86.71
feet; thence southerly along the eastern boundary line of said Shady Oaks
subdivision and Morgan Park Woods subdivision to the centerline of 25th Avenue;
thence arcing southerly along the centerline of 25th Avenue to the centerline
of 10th Street Place; thence arcing southerly along the centerline of 10th
Street Place to the north property line of Lot 15, Morgan Park Estates
Addition; thence easterly along said property line to the east property line of
said Lot 15 and the 1/16th Section Line of the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4, Section 8,
T17N, R1W of the 4th P.M.; thence southerly along said Section Line to the
south 1/2 Section Line of said Section 8; thence westerly along said 1/
2 Section Line of said Section 8; and thence continuing westerly along the 1/
2 Section Line of the adjacent NE 1/4 of Section 7 to the Moline City limit;
thence following the Moline limit to the point of the beginning.
SECOND WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying east of the First Ward and south
of the Moline limit along the south bank of the south branch of the Mississippi
River and north/west of the following described line:
   Beginning at the south bank of the south branch of the Mississippi River and
the intersection of the centerline of 19th Street extended; thence southerly
along the centerline of 19th Street extended and centerline of 19th Street, to
the centerline of 13th Avenue extended; thence westerly along the centerline of
13th Avenue extended and centerline of 13th Avenue to the centerline of 15th
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 15th Street to the centerline
of 30th Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 30th Avenue to the
centerline of 14th Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 14th Street
to the 1/2 Section Line (centerline of 34th Avenue Drive) of Section 8; T17N,
R1W of the 4th P.M.; thence westerly along said Section Line to the First Ward
boundary.
THIRD WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying east of the Moline-Rock Island
city limits, and south of the First Ward and south/east of the Second Ward and
north/west of the following described line:
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of 19th Street and 13th
Avenue extended; thence southerly along the centerline of 19th Street, situated
east of Interstate 74, to the centerline of Avenue of the Cities; thence
easterly along the centerline of Avenue of the Cities to the centerline of 27th
Street and boundary between South Moline Township Precincts 7 and 9; thence
southerly along the centerline of 27th Street and said Precincts boundary to
the centerline of Interstate 74 thence southerly along the centerline of
Interstate 74 and said Precincts boundary, approximately 2,835 feet; thence
easterly along the boundary between South Moline Township Precincts 7 and 9 to
the west property line of Lot 4, E Andries 1st Subdivision; thence southerly
approximately 78 feet along west property line of Lot 4, E Andries 1st
Subdivision to the north property line of Lot 43, Rock River Estates 4th
Addition subdivision; thence approximately 252 feet east and southeasterly
along said Lot 43 and extended into the centerline of 34th Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of 34th Street and 34th Street extended to the
centerline of 38th Avenue; thence west-northwesterly along the centerline of
38th Avenue to the Moline limit surrounding the unincorporated island in the
vicinity of the junction of Interstate 74 and John Deere Road to the
centerline, again, of 38th Avenue; thence northwesterly along the centerline of
38th Avenue to 27th Street; thence continuing west-northwesterly along the
centerline of 36th Avenue to the centerline of 16th Street; thence southerly
along the centerline of 16th Street and 16th Street extended to the Rock River
and the Moline City limit; thence following the Moline limits to the First Ward
boundary.
FOURTH WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying east of the Second Ward and south
of the Moline limit along the south bank of the south branch of the Mississippi
River and south bank of the Mississippi River and north and east of the Third
Ward and north/west of the following described line:
   Beginning at the intersection of the south bank of the Mississippi River and
the centerline of 43rd Street extended north; thence southerly along 43rd
Street extended and the centerline of 43rd Street to the centerline of 8th
Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of 8th Avenue to the centerline of
42nd Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 42nd Street to the
extended south property line of Lot 9, M Horstkamp’s subdivision approximately
180.6 feet to the east property line of Lot 401 of Supervisors’ Assessment
Plat, Sheet 59; thence southerly along east property line of said Lot 401;
thence westerly along the south property line extended of said Lot 401,
approximately 185 feet to the centerline of 41st Street; thence southerly along
the centerline of 41st Street to the centerline of 10th Avenue; thence westerly
along the centerline of 10th Avenue to the centerline of 38th Street; thence
southerly along the centerline of 38th Street to the centerline of 11th Avenue;
thence westerly along the centerline of 11th Avenue to the centerline of 34th
Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 34th Street to the centerline
of Avenue of the Cities; thence westerly along the centerline of Avenue of the
Cities to the Third Ward boundary.
FIFTH WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline generally south and east of the Third
Ward and south of the Fourth Ward and south/west of the following described
line:
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of 34th Street and Avenue
of the Cities; thence easterly along the centerline of Avenue of the Cities to
the centerline of 41st Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 41st
Street to the centerline of 34th Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline
of 34th Avenue to the centerline of 49th Street; thence southerly along the
centerline of 49th Street to the centerline of 38th Avenue; thence easterly
along the centerline of 38th Avenue to the boundary between South Moline
Township Precincts 19 and 29; thence southerly along said Precincts boundary to
the Moline City limit at the Rock River; thence following the Moline limits
meandering generally westerly to the Third Ward boundary to include all that
part of the City of Moline within Coal Valley Township Precincts One and Two,
and all that part of the City of Moline within Blackhawk Township Precincts
Three and Five; and excluding therefrom the unincorporated island in the
vicinity of the junction of Interstate 74 and John Deere Road; and excluding
therefrom the unincorporated island, generally consisting of Lot 402 of
Supervisors’ Assessment Map Sheet 47, and Cobb’s subdivision, and Cobb’s 2nd
and 3rd subdivisions until such time as said territory is annexed into the City
of Moline.
SIXTH WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying south/east of the Fourth Ward, and
south of the Moline limit along the south bank of the Mississippi River and
west of the Moline limit west of the City of East Moline and north of the
following described line:
   Beginning at the juncture of the City of Moline limit/City of East Moline
Limit and the centerline of Avenue of the Cities; thence westerly along the
centerline of Avenue of the Cities to the centerline of 34th Street and the
Forth Ward boundary; excluding therefrom the following bounded area: beginning
at the intersection of the centerlines of 34th Street and Avenue of the Cities;
thence northerly along the centerline of 34th Street to the boundary between
South Moline Township Precincts 5 and 25; thence easterly along the said
Precincts boundary to the west property line of Lot 155, Supervisors’
Assessment Map Sheet 10; thence southerly along said west property line,
approximately 133 feet to 1/16th Section Line of the NW 1/4 of Section 3, T17N,
R1W of the 4th P.M.; thence easterly along said 1/16th Section Line,
approximately 291 feet to the west property line of Lot 406, Molette Addition,
Parcel 3 15th Avenue Court subdivision; thence northeasterly along extended
said west property line of Lot 406, approximately 173.5 feet to the centerline
of 15th Avenue Court; thence easterly along centerline of 15th Avenue Court to
the extended north property line of Lot 412, Molette Addition, Parcel 3 15th
Avenue Court subdivision; thence southeasterly along said Lot 412 property line
approximately 178.3 feet to the west property line of Lot 18 White Oak Terrace
Addition subdivision; thence southerly along said west property line of Lot 18,
approximately 4 feet to the extended north property line of Lot 19, White Oak
Terrace Addition subdivision; thence northeasterly along said extended north
property line of Lot 19, approximately 205.6 feet to the centerline of 16th
Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of 16th Avenue to the centerline
of 41st Street; thence southerly along the centerline of 41st Street to the
centerline of Avenue of the Cities; thence westerly along the centerline of
Avenue of the Cities to the point of beginning.
SEVENTH WARD
   All that part of the City of Moline lying east of the Forth Ward and north/
east of the Fifth Ward and south/west of the Sixth Ward; also all those parts
of the City of Moline lying south of Rock River within Coal Valley Township
Precinct Three.
(Ord. 3015-2022; 6/28/22)
SEC. 10-1102.   ANNEXATIONS AND WARD BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS.
   At any time that new territory is annexed into the City of Moline, the ward
in which the newly annexed territory shall be encompassed shall be specified in
the adopting ordinance incorporating such territory.
(Ord. 3015-2022; 6/28/22)
SEC. 10-1103.   WARD MAP.
There is hereby incorporated by reference a ward map dated June, 2022, and on
file in the city clerk's office. The director of engineering is hereby
authorized and directed to prepare at least ninety (90) days prior to any
primary election at which candidates for nomination to office in the City are
proposed to be nominated a revision of said ward map to show all annexations
that have been made by the City since the last revision and to affix the
certification of the director of engineering thereon that said revision
contains all annexations identified by ordinance number and to date same.
(Ord. 3015-2022; 6/28/22)
CHAPTER 11
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Note: See end of chapter for list of chapter amendments
   Art. I.   Fire Prevention, §11-1100 - §11-1104
   Art. II.    The Fire Department, §11-2100 - §11-2118
   Art. III.   Spiller Pays Ordinance, §11-3100 - §11-3107
ARTICLE I. FIRE PREVENTION
SEC. 11-1100.   FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, including all International Fire Standards, 2012 Edition, and all
International Fire Code Appendices, 2012 Edition, published therewith, is
hereby adopted by reference as the “Moline Fire Code” as if set out in haec
verba at this point. Three (3) copies of such Code shall be kept on file in the
City Clerk’s office for inspection and shall remain on file therein for such
purpose.
SEC. 11-1101.   LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE.
   The Moline Fire Code adopted in this article by reference is specifically
amended as follows:
   (a)   101.1 Title. 
      Insert “the City of Moline” for [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
   (b)   103.4 Liability.  
      Replace entire section with:
      “103.4 Liability. Subject to Sec.
2-1109, “INDEMNIFICATION,” of the Moline Code of Ordinances, the code official
or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the
jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or
property as a result of an act required or permitted in the discharge of
official duties.”
   (c)   103.4.1 Legal defense.
      Replace entire section with:
      “103.4.1 Legal Defense. Subject to Sec.
2-1109, “INDEMNIFICATION,” of the Moline Code of Ordinances, any suit
instituted against any official or employee because of an act performed by that
officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction
until the final termination of the proceedings. The fire code official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that
is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of
the department of fire prevention, acting in good faith and without malice,
shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or
by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in
connection therewith.”
   (d)   105.3 Conditions of a permit.
      Add one new subsection:
      “105.3.9 Mandatory licensing required. All contractors performing
installation, service or maintenance on fire protection systems, including but
not limited to, fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems, sprinkler systems,
commercial kitchen extinguishing systems or any other automatic extinguishing
systems, shall be licensed by the office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal
and/or any other State regulatory agency as applicable. Documentation of
mandatory State licensing shall be available to the fire code official at all
times and submitted with any permit or license application.”
   (e)   105.6.30 Open burning. Delete entire section.
   (f)   107 Maintenance.
      1.   107.2.1 Test and inspection records.
         Delete subsection 107.2.1 and replace with:
         "107.2.1 Test and inspection records. Required test and inspection
records for Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems shall be maintained by the
system owner and made available to the fire code official at all times and the
system owner and/or any contractor performing inspection, testing and/or
maintenance services shall file the inspection records for all Fire Protection
and Life Safety Systems with the fire code official in an approved digital
format within a reasonable time after the inspection is performed, not to
exceed forty-five (45) days. For purposes of this Chapter, “Fire Protection and
Life Safety Systems” shall have the same meaning as given by the National Fire
Protection Association.
         107.2.1.1 Critical deficiencies. In circumstances where a fire
sprinkler system, commercial kitchen extinguishing system, or fire alarm system
is found to be inoperable, be out of service, have a critical deficiency which
creates a risk to life or property, or otherwise incapable of performing its
intended purpose, the contractor performing the inspection shall immediately
report said deficiency to the fire code official.
         107.2.1.2 Penalty. Any person violating Section 107.2.1.1, as a first
offense, shall be subject to a citation, which citation shall be paid at the
City of Moline accounts and finance office in the amount of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00), or if paid within seven (7) calendar days, seventy five
dollars ($75.00). Any person violating Section 107.2.1.1, as a second or
subsequent offense, shall be subject to a citation, which citation shall be
paid at the City of Moline accounts and finance office in the amount of three
hundred dollars ($300.00), or if paid within seven (7) calendar days, one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Any person who fails to make payment as
outlined above within thirty (30) days shall thereafter be subject to an action
in Circuit Court which may be commenced in accordance with the requirements of
the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., and any person found to
have violated Section 107.2.1.1 shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs, plus reimbursement to the City for the
costs the City incurred in serving the person with process. Each day during
which or on which any person violates Section 107.2.1.1 shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      2.   Add one new subsection 107.2.2.1 Reinspection fee:
         "107.2.2.1 Reinspection fee. If the work or installation requires
reinspection and testing by the fire code official, the system owner shall pay
the City a flat reinspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each
subsequent reinspection."
      3.   Add one new subsection 107.2.3 Mandatory licensing required:
         “107.2.3 Mandatory licensing required. All contractors performing
installation, service or maintenance on fire protection systems, including but
not limited to, fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems, sprinkler systems,
commercial kitchen extinguishing systems or any other automatic extinguishing
systems, shall be licensed by the office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal
and/or any other State regulatory agency as applicable. Documentation of
mandatory State licensing shall be available to the fire code official at all
times and submitted with any permit or license application.”
      4.   Add one new subsection 107.6 Citations:
                                  
         “107.6 Citations. Any person operating or maintaining any occupancy,
premises or vehicle subject to this Code who shall permit any fire hazard to
exist on premises under said person's control or who shall fail to take
immediate action to abate a fire hazard when ordered or notified to do so by
the fire code official or duly authorized representative thereof shall be
guilty of an offense.”
   (g)   108.1 Board of Appeals.
      Replace entire section with:
      “108.1 Board of Appeals.
      a.   Except as to citations or notices of violations issued by the fire
code official, any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the fire code
official or other duly authorized person acting pursuant to the Moline Fire
Code may appeal said decision or order to the Board of Appeals as defined
herein by giving written notice of appeal to the fire marshal within five (5)
days of receipt of said order or decision. The Board of Appeals, upon hearing,
may sustain, modify, or revoke the order or decision from which appeal was
taken and may interpret the provisions of the Moline Fire Code, if required.
The Board's decision shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be provided
to the city clerk, the fire code official, and all interested parties having
filed an appearance before the Board. Examples of such orders or decisions of
the fire code official that may be appealed to the Board of Appeals include,
but are not limited to, disapprovals of applications, refusals to grant
licenses or permits, or disapproval of plan review.
      b.   Any decision and order of the committee shall be final and binding,
and any person aggrieved thereby may pursue said remedies provided by law or
equity to have said decision reviewed. However, no decision may be reviewed
unless notice of review is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after
receipt of said decision or order, and any action of review is commenced within
thirty-five (35) days from the date that a copy of the decision sought to be
reviewed is served upon the party affected by the decision, in accordance with
the Illinois Administrative Review Act.
      c.   No decision or order of the Board of Appeals shall be stayed by the
filing of a notice of review; however, the Board of Appeals or court upon
proper motion may stay the effect of any such decision or order upon a showing
that the public interest will not be harmed thereby.
      d.   Should no notice of appeal or notice of review be filed within the
time prescribed above, a person aggrieved by any decision or order shall be
deemed to have waived any rights to have the decision or order reviewed; and
such decision or order may not be collaterally attacked in an action to enforce
said decision or order.”
   (h)   109.3.3 Prosecution of violations.
      Delete entire section and replace with:
      “109.3.3 Prosecution of violations. If the notice of violation is not
complied with promptly, the fire code official is authorized to request the
legal counsel for the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal
proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or
to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in
violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made
pursuant hereto. Proceedings taken by the jurisdiction may be in accordance
with the Municipal Code Enforcement System (MUNICES) as set forth in
Chapter 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, as well as in the Circuit Court.”
   (i)   109.3.5 Reinspection fees.
      Add one new subsection 109.3.5 Reinspection fees.
      “109.3.5 Reinspection fees. If a reinspection is needed, there will not
be a fee for the first compliance reinspection. However, if additional
compliance reinspections are required, a reinspection fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) per visit will be billed to the owner, operator, occupant or other
person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of
violation pertains.”
   (j)   109.4 Violation Penalties.   
      Replace section with:
      “109.4 Violation penalties. Any person violating any provision of the
Moline Fire Code or any order issued thereunder shall be guilty of an offense
subject to and punishable by the penalty provisions of Sec.
11-1104, “Penalty” below.”
   (k)   111.4 Failure to comply.
      Replace entire section with:
   “111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).”
   (l)   201.3 Terms defined in other codes.
      Replace entire section with:
      “201.3 Terms defined in other codes.  Where terms are not defined in this
code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Fuel Gas
Code, International Mechanical Code or the Moline Plumbing Code, as amended,
such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in such codes. All
references to the International Plumbing Code in this and all other adopted
supporting codes are to be interpreted as meaning the Moline Plumbing Code, as
amended, unless explicitly stated otherwise.”
   (m)   202 General Definitions.
      1.   Add in alphabetical order:
         “BOARD OF APPEALS shall be known as the Moline Building Board of
Appeals.” 
         “CODE OFFICIAL shall be known as the fire chief, or a duly authorized
representative of the fire department, or other designated authority charged by
the applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement
of the code, or a duly authorized representative.”
         “DEPUTY CODE OFFICIAL shall be known as the fire marshal.”
      2.   Amend as follows:
         “FIRE WATCH is a temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and
systematic surveillance of properties or a portion or portions thereof by one
or more qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling
fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire
and notifying the fire department. Individual qualifications shall be
commensurate with the level or degree of risk or hazard, the difficulty of
detection or extinguishment, and the number and types of persons and properties
or portions thereof to be protected by the fire watch, as determined by the
fire code official. Examples of fire watch personnel include civilian employees
of the property to be protected, a third party contractor, or fire fighters.”
         “FIREWORKS are any combustible or explosive composition of any
substance or combination of substances or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combination, explosion,
deflagration or detonation and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy
cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, sky
lanterns, torpedoes, sky-rockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, or other devices
of like construction and any devices containing an explosive substance, except
that the term "fireworks" shall not include any auto flares; paper caps
containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five-hundredths of a grain of
explosive content per cap; and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other
devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
all times, and sparklers.”
   (n)   307 Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor fireplaces.
      Replace entire section with:
      “307 Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor fireplaces.
      307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in
accordance with the following sections.
      307.2 Prohibited open burning. At the discretion of the fire code
official, open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances, such as extended drought conditions, make such fires hazardous.
      307.2.1 Leaves and landscape waste. The burning of leaves and lawn and
landscape waste, including, without limitation, shrubs, bushes and brush, is
expressly prohibited within the jurisdiction of the City of Moline.
      307.2.2 Other waste. The burning of waste matter other than leaves and
lawn and landscape waste shall be prohibited.
         Exceptions: 
         1.   The provisions of Section 307 shall not apply to an entity which
holds a valid State of Illinois or Federal EPA permit to burn materials within
the City of Moline for the express purpose of the training of municipal
employees in the areas of fire fighting and public safety, or for the
production of energy.
         2.   The provisions of Section 307 shall not apply to the fire
department insofar as limited, controlled, open burning is allowed for the
training of municipal employees or civilians and for demonstration or
educational purposes. Examples of training, demonstration or educational
purposes include but are not limited to the training of employees in the use of
portable fire extinguishers or live sprinkler system demonstrations. Open
burning for the purposes of training, education or demonstrations by any person
or entity other than the fire department shall require the express consent of
the fire code official or his designee who may institute specific requirements
or restrictions at his discretion.
      307.3 Recreational fires. Recreational fires are allowed, but safety
precautions as herein set forth shall apply. Recreational fires shall be made
of dry logs or wood only, excluding building material. Wood or logs shall not
exceed twelve (12) inches in diameter. Fires shall not exceed five (5) feet in
diameter and shall be no more than three (3) feet in height. Recreational fires
shall be allowed between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight. All
recreational fires shall be fully and properly extinguished no later than 12:00
midnight.
      307.3.1 Location. No person shall kindle or maintain any recreational
fire within twenty-five (25) feet of any structure, combustibles, or adjoining
property. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent the spread of fire.
         Exception: Recreational fires that are adequately and fully confined
within an approved brick or metal container or below-grade fire pit and located
not less than fifteen (15) feet from any structure, combustibles, or adjoining
property.
      307.4 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be
used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall comply with
all other requirements for recreational fires set forth in Section 307.
         Exception:  Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one and two family
dwellings shall be exempt from the recreational fire location requirements set
forth in Section 307.3.1.
      307.5 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official or his designee
may order the immediate suspension of any burning which may be permitted, when
due to atmospheric or other objectionable conditions, such burning contributes
substantially to a hazard to the health and welfare of the public and/or to a
fire hazard and suspension and extinguishment is reasonably necessary for the
protection of persons or property. The fire code official or his designee is
authorized to order any such fire be extinguished by the responsible party or
by the fire department.
      307.6 Attendance. Recreational fires and portable outdoor fireplaces
shall be constantly attended by a responsible person capable of appropriately
responding to an emergency and extinguishing the fire, until the fire is fully
and properly extinguished. A minimum of one (1) portable fire extinguisher
complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4A rating or other approved on-site
fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, pressurized water can, water
barrel, garden hose, or water truck shall be made available for immediate
utilization.
      307.7 Violation penalties. Any person violating any provision of the
Moline Fire Code or any order issued hereunder shall be guilty of an offense
subject to and punishable by the penalty provisions of Sec.
11-1104, “Penalty,” below.”
   (o)   Section 308 Open Flame(s).
      Add one new subsection 308.1.6.3 Portable heating appliances:
      “308.1.6.3 Portable heating appliances.  The use of listed portable
unvented fuel burning heating appliances, when approved by the fire code
official or his designee, shall be limited to use in a structure during the
construction process when such use is necessary for construction and the use
does not represent a hazard to life or property.”
   (p)    403.1.2 Fees. 
      Add new subsection:
      “403.1.2 Fees. When required by the fire code official under the
provisions of Sections 403, 3304.5, 107.2, 901.7, or any other section of this
Code, to provide firefighters as qualified fire watch personnel or standby
personnel, the hourly rate shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
firefighter per hour. The number of hours required shall be calculated by the
fire code official and will reflect, as accurately as can be reasonably
foreseen, the number of personnel hours incurred by the City."
   (q)   603.4  Portable unvented heaters.
      Delete “Exceptions” and replace with:
      “Exception:  Listed and approved unvented fuel-fired heaters in one- and
two-family dwellings: when approved by the fire code official or his designee,
use of listed portable unvented fuel burning heating appliances shall be
limited solely to use in a structure during the construction process when such
use is necessary for construction and the use does not represent a hazard to
life or property.”
   (r)   901.2 Construction documents.
      Add the following to the end of the paragraph: “and shall have the stamp
of the registered design professional affixed prior to submission.”
   (s)   901.2.1 Statement of compliance.
      Delete: “where required by the fire code official”.
   (t)   901.4 Installation.
      1.   Add one new subsection to subsection 901.4.1 “Required fire
protection systems”:
         “901.4.1.1 Mandatory licensing required. All contractors performing
installation, service or maintenance on fire protection systems, including but
not limited to, fire extinguishers, fire alarm systems, sprinkler systems,
commercial kitchen extinguishing systems or any other automatic extinguishing
systems, shall be licensed by the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal
and/or any other State regulatory agency as applicable. Documentation of
mandatory State licensing shall be available to the fire code official at all
times and submitted with any permit or license application.”
      2.   Add new subsections:
         “901.4.7 Flexible sprinkler hose fittings. Braided flexible sprinkler
hose fittings shall be allowed   only when approved for use by the fire code
official or his designee. Flexible sprinkler hose fittings which are
constructed of corrugated metal shall not be used.
         901.4.7.1 Flexible sprinkler hose fittings bracing. Where braided
flexible sprinkler hose fittings are an approved component of the system design
and supported by suspended ceilings, the requirements   of NFPA 13, 2013
Edition, Section 9.2.1.3.3 through 9.2.1.3.3.4 and all applicable appendices
shall be applied to the installation. Where flexible sprinkler hose fittings
are used to connect sprinklers to branch lines in suspended ceilings, an
approved label limiting relocation of the sprinkler shall be provided on the
anchoring component.
         901.4.7.2 Flexible sprinkler hose fittings limitations. All products,
devices, assemblies and materials shall be utilized in complete accord with all
conditions, requirements, compatibility, and limitations of their listings.
Documentation regarding the listed use of the flexible sprinkler hose fittings,
bracing systems, and suspended ceiling assemblies shall be submitted as part of
any permit application.”
   (u)   901.6.2 Records.
      Delete “upon request” and replace with “as required by Section 107.2.1,
as amended by this ordinance.”
   (v)   903.2.11 Specific buildings areas and hazards.
      Change: “In all occupancies other than Group U, an automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed …”
      to: “In all occupancies other than Groups R-3 and U, an automatic
sprinkler system shall be installed …”
   (w)   907.8.5 Maintenance, inspection and testing.
      Delete last sentence and replace with:
      “Required test and inspection records shall be maintained by the system
owner and made available to the fire code official at all times, and inspection
records for fire sprinkler systems, commercial kitchen extinguishing systems,
and fire alarm systems shall be filed with the fire code official in an
approved digital format within a reasonable time after the inspection is
performed, not to exceed forty-five (45) days. In circumstances where a
sprinkler system, commercial kitchen extinguishing system, or fire alarm system
is found to be inoperable, out of service, having a critical deficiency which
creates a risk to life or property, or otherwise incapable of performing the
intended purpose, the contractor performing the inspection shall immediately
report said deficiency to the fire code official.”
   (x)   5601.1.3 Fireworks.
      Replace entire section with:
      “5601.1.3 Fireworks – Unlawful Possession.
      Fireworks are defined in Sec.
11-1101(m), “202 General Definitions,” above. Pursuant to said definition, any
person who unlawfully possesses, manufactures, stores, sells, handles or uses
any such substance(s) or device(s) within the City in contradiction thereof
shall be guilty of an offense subject to the penalty provisions of Sec.
11-1104, “Penalty,” below.”
   (y)   5602.1 Definitions.
      1.   Change:    “5602.1 Definitions. The following terms are defined in
Chapter 2:”
         to: “5602.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings
shown herein.”
      2.   Change the “FIREWORKS” definition to:
         “FIREWORKS shall be as defined in Section
11-1101(m), “202 General Definitions,” above.”
   (z)   1104.5 Illumination emergency power.
      Replace entire section with:
      “1104.5 Illumination emergency power. The power supply for means of
egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises’ electrical
supply. In the event of power supply failure, illumination shall be
automatically provided from an emergency system in occupancies with two (2) or
more means of egress.”
   (aa)   5704.2.12.3 Periodic testing.
      Add one new section:
      “5704.2.12.3 Periodic testing. In addition to the testing required by the
above subsections, all underground storage tanks and piping are subject to the
following:
      1.   All underground storage tanks must conform to 40 CFR Parts 280 and
281 Underground Storage Tanks; Technical Requirements and State Program
Approval, Final Rules as published in the Federal Register, Friday, September
23, 1988, and 40 CFR Parts 280 and 281, Underground Storage Tanks Containing
Petroleum - Financial Responsibility Requirements and State Program Approved
Objective; Final Rule as published in the Federal Register, Wednesday, October
26, 1988, which documents are hereby adopted by the reference thereto, and
which documents shall be on file in the city clerk’s office for public
inspection for at least thirty (30) days prior to adoption hereof.
      2.   Any and all reports required by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or any other
state regulatory body concerned with underground storage tanks will also be
sent to the Moline Fire Department within five (5) days of filing with the
appropriate regulatory agency.”
   (bb)   Chapter 80 Referenced Standards. 
      Delete the following NFPA standards shown in Column 1 below and replace
them with those shown in Column 2 below:
Column 1 Column 2
(Delete) (Replace with)
Column 1 Column 2
(Delete) (Replace with)
13-10    13-13
13D-10   13D-13
13R-10   13R-13
20-10    20-13
24-10    24-13
25-11    25-14
51-07    51-13
55-10    55-13
59A-09   59A-13
61-08    61-13
72-10    72-13
80-10    80-13
101-12   101-2000
105-10   105-13
110-10   110-13
111-10   111-13
170-09   170-12
204-07   204-12
318-09   318-12
385-07   385-12
654-06   654-13
720-09   720-12
790-04   790-12
1122-08  1122-13
1124-06  1124-13
1127-08  1127-13
 
      All other referenced standards contained in Chapter 80 shall apply.
((Ord. No. 3004-2021; Sec. 11-1101(f) amended; 04/13/21; Ord. No. 3027-2022;
Sec. 11-1101(f), (p) amended; 9/20/22)
SEC. 11-1101.1.   FEES.
   (a)    The annual permit fee for the sale of department-approved fireworks
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), subject to subsection (c) hereinbelow.
   (b)   The annual permit fee for the sale of department-approved fireworks at
multiple sites of the same permittee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
initial site and five dollars ($5.00) per each additional site, subject to
subsection (c) hereinbelow.
   (c)   As part of the application for permit hereunder, applicants shall
demonstrate compliance with
Chapter 17, Article II, or, conversely, the non-applicability of said Article.
If a fee has been paid pursuant to Sec.
17-2206, then no additional fees shall be due pursuant to subsections (a) and
(b) hereinabove.
   (d)   Pyrotechnic permit fee of $100.00 (indoor and outdoor) plus on-site
personnel costs of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per hour.
   Pyrotechnic Firing Fees :
      1 - 100 Devices…………………………..   one firefighter
   101 - 250…………………………………   two firefighters
   over 250 devices…………………….......   subject to review   
   (e)   The annual permit fee for department-approved multiple in-house events
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), or fifty dollars ($50.00) per event.
   (f)   The following table lists the hazardous material with the quantity
ranges and corresponding annual permit fees:
 
UN Category Substances  Notes           Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Range 4 Range 5
3           Combustible See             X       X       X       X       X
            Liquids     Sec.105.6.16
8 Corrosive Materials
2           Gases       See Sec.105.6.8 X       X       X       X       X
8           Liquids     >55 Gallons     X       X       X       X       X
8           Solids      >1000 lbs.      X       X       X       X       X
 
Flammable Materials
2 Gases   See Sec.105.6.8  X X X X X
3 Liquids See Sec.105.6.16 X X X X X
4 Solids  >100 lbs.        X X X X X
 
Highly Toxics
2 Gases   See Sec.105.6.8 X X X X X
6 Liquids Any Amount      X X X X X
6 Solids  Any Amount      X X X X X
 
Oxidizing Materials
UN Category Substances Notes           Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Range 4 Range 5
2           Gases      See Sec.105.6.8 X       X       X       X       X
5           Liquids    Table 105.6.20  X       X       X       X       X
5           Solids     Table 105.6.20  X       X       X       X       X
5           Organic    Table 105.6.20  X       X       X       X       X
            Peroxides
 
 
Pyrophoric Materials
UN Category Substances Notes      Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Range 4 Range 5
2           Gases      Any Amount X       X       X       X       X
3           Liquids    Any Amount X       X       X       X       X
4           Solids     Any Amount X       X       X       X       X
 
Toxic Materials
Toxic Materials
2  Gases              See Sec.105.6.8 X X  X X X
6  Liquids            >10 Gallons     X X  X X X
6  Solids             >100 lbs.       X X  X X X
Unstable (Reactive)
Materials – 4 ClasseTable 105.6.20
1  Liquids – Class 4& 3                    Not Allowed
1 Liquid–Class 2     >5 Gallons     X X  X X X
1 Liquid –Class 1    >10 Gallons    X X  X X X
1                     Solids – Class 4 & Not Allowed
1 Solids-Class 2       > 50 lbs       X X  X X X
1 Solids-Class 1       >100 lbs       X X  X X X
 
Water-reactive
Water-reactive
Materials – 3 Classes       Table 105.6.20
1                 Liquid – Class Not allowed
3 Liquid-Class 2 >5 Gallons  X X   X X X
3 Liquid-Class 1 >55 Gallons X X   X X X
1                 Solids – Class Not Allowed
4 Solids-Class 2 >50 lbs     X X   X X X
4 Solids-Class 1 >500 lbs    X X   X X X
 
 
Compressed Gases
2 Corrosives    See Sec.105.6.8 Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Range 4 Range 5
2 Flammables    See Sec.105.6.8 X       X       X       X       X
2 Highly Toxics Any Amount      X       X       X       X       X
2 Inerts        See Sec.105.6.8 X       X       X       X       X
2 Oxidizing     See Sec.105.6.8 X       X       X       X       X
2 Toxics        Any Amount      X       X       X       X       X
 
 
Cryogenics
UN Category Substances  Notes        Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Range 4 Range 5
2           Flammables  See          X       X       X       X       X
                        Sec.105.6.10
2           Inerts      See          X       X       X       X       X
                        Sec.105.6.10
2           Oxidizing   See          X       X       X       X       X
                        Sec.105.6.10
2           LPG         See Sec.     X       X       X       X       X
                        105.6.7
4           Underground See          X       X       X       X       X
            Tanks       Sec.105.6.16
 
Quantity Ranges:
                                 Up to and including 500 pounds for solids or
Range #1 = permit fee of $100.00 55 gallons for liquids or 200 cubic feet at
                                 NTP for compressive gasses.
                                 Between 500 and 5,000 pounds for solids or 55
Range #2 = permit fee of $150.00 and 550 gallons for liquids or 200 to 2,000
                                 cubic feet at NTP for compressed gasses.
                                 Between 5,000 and 25,000 pounds for solids or
Range #3 = permit fee of $200.00 550 and 2,750 for liquids or 2,000 to 10,000
                                 cubic feet at NTP for compressed gasses.
                                 Between 25,000 and 50,000 pounds for solids or
Range #4 = permit fee of $250.00 2,750 to 5,500 gallons for liquids or 10,000
                                 to 20,000 cubic feet at NTP for compressed
                                 gasses.
                                 More than 50,000 pounds for solids or 5,500
Range #5 = permit fee of $250.00 gallons for liquids or 20,000 cubic feet at
                                 NTP for compressed gasses."
 
   (g)   The finance director shall collect the above fees; however, said
director may designate in writing a person or persons, either in the City
service or otherwise, as the agent of the City for purposes of collecting said
fees.
(Ord. No. 3027-2022; Sec. 11-1101.1 amended; 9/20/22)
SEC. 11-1102.   PROHIBITION ON CODE OR STANDARD ADOPTION BY IMPLICATION.
   (a)   The City supports fire services and fire protection, and towards that
end, the City has adopted the 2012 International Fire Code into the Moline Code
of Ordinances, as amended in this
Chapter 11 thereof. The City disclaims any other adoption, whether directly or
indirectly, whether by implication or by express purpose, of any other fire
protection standard whatsoever, including without limitation, the adoption of
NFPA 1710, NFPA 1720 or any similar or related standard. This disclaimer
extends to any and all actions of any City staff or elected officers of the
Moline City Council, and the City Council hereby notifies the public and any
interested persons that such a standard can be adopted only by express, written
action of the City Council by way of a special ordinance.
   (b)   That the City does not recognize NFPA standard 1710 or NFPA standard
1720 and both such standards are specifically excluded from City policy and
practice until repealed by the Moline City Council.
SEC. 11-1103.   SEVERABILITY.
   The City Council of the City of Moline hereby declares that, should any
section, paragraph, sentence, phrase, or word of the adoptive ordinance of the
Moline Fire Code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is
the intent of the City Council that it would have passed all other portions of
said adoptive ordinance and said Moline Fire Code independent of the
elimination therefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid.
SEC. 11-1104.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Except for violations of Sections
11-1101(n) and (x) (“Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor
fireplaces” and “Fireworks-Unlawful Possession,” respectively), and except as
otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of the Moline
Fire Code or any order issued thereunder shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) plus court costs nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. The
imposition of a penalty for any such violation shall not excuse the violation
or permit it to continue, and any such person shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty
(30) days. When not otherwise specified, each day that such violation exists or
is maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   Any person violating Sections
11-1101(n) or (x) (“Open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor
fireplaces” and “Fireworks-Unlawful Possession,” respectively), as a first
offense, shall be subject to a citation, which citation shall be paid at the
City of Moline accounts and finance office in the amount of fifty dollars
($50.00), or if paid within seven (7) calendar days, twenty-five dollars
($25.00). Any person violating Section
11-1101(n) or (x), as a second or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a
citation, which citation shall be paid at the City of Moline accounts and
finance office in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or if paid
within seven (7) calendar days, fifty dollars ($50.00). Any person who fails to
make payment as outlined above within thirty (30) days shall thereafter be
subject to an action in Circuit Court which may be commenced in accordance with
the requirements of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., and
any person found to have violated Section
11-1101(n) or (x) shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs, plus reimbursement to the City for the costs the
City incurred in serving the person with process. Each day during which or on
which any person violates Section
11-1101(n) or (x) shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (c)   The application of the above penalty shall not be construed as a bar
to the enforced removal of prohibited conditions under any section of the
Moline Fire Code or any other Code or ordinance provision of the City of
Moline.
ARTICLE II. THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
SEC. 11-2100.   ESTABLISHED, COMPOSITION.
   (a)   There is hereby created and established within the executive
department of the City, the fire department.
   (b)   The fire department shall consist of a chief and such number of deputy
fire chiefs, division chiefs, battalion chiefs, fire marshals, fire inspectors,
training officers, captains, lieutenants, fire engineers and firefighters as
are authorized from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (c)   Appointment of Deputy Chief: The fire chief shall appoint a deputy
chief or deputy chiefs as authorized by the City Council.
      Applicants for the position of deputy chief shall have a thorough
knowledge of all aspects of the fire service and shall have attained a rank of
captain or lieutenant in the Moline Fire Department, or shall have attained an
equivalent in knowledge, rank and position in a fire department outside of the
City of Moline.
      The deputy chief of the fire department shall be subject to the direction
and control of the fire chief. The deputy chief of the fire department shall
serve in such a position until such time as the fire chief determines
otherwise.
   (d)   Removal of the Deputy Chief: If the fire chief determines that it is
necessary and desirable to appoint another person to the position of deputy
chief, then the previously appointed person shall, to the extent he or she was
a sworn officer of the fire department prior to being appointed deputy chief,
automatically return to his or her prior rank, together with all authority,
responsibility and compensation commensurate with such prior rank.
(Ord. No. 3032-2024; Sec. 11-2100 amended; 9/24/24)
SEC. 11-2101.   ORDER OF RANKING.
   The order of ranking of the members of the fire department shall be as
follows:
   1.   Fire chief;
   2.    Deputy fire chief;
   3.   Division chief;
   4.   Battalion chief;
   5.   Captain;
   6.   Lieutenant;
   7.   Fire engineer;
   8.   Firefighter/Paramedic.
Fire marshal and training officer will hold the temporary rank of division
chief and will have the equivalent authority.
Fire inspectors will hold the temporary rank of captain and will have the
equivalent authority.
(Ord. No. 3032-2024; Sec. 11-2101 amended; 9/24/24)
SEC. 11-2102.   FIRE CHIEF TO BE EXECUTIVE HEAD OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The fire chief shall be the executive head of the fire department and in
control thereof, and every member of the fire department shall be under the
jurisdiction of the fire chief and subject to said fire chief's orders and
directions at all times.
SEC. 11-2103.   OFFICE OF CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of chief of the fire department who shall
be appointed by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
SEC. 11-2104.   QUALIFICATIONS; FILLING OF VACANCY; REMOVAL.
   (a)   Applicants for the position of fire chief shall have a thorough
knowledge of all aspects of fire service and shall have attained the rank of
deputy fire chief, captain or lieutenant in the Moline fire department, or
shall have attained an equivalent in knowledge, rank or position in a fire
department outside the City of Moline.
   (b)   In the event of a vacancy in the office of the chief of the fire
department, the board of fire and police commissioners shall examine each
applicant from within or from outside the fire department to determine each
applicant's qualifications for the position. Following examination, the board
of fire and police commissioners shall submit a list of the names of the top
six (6) applicants in alphabetical order to the city administrator, along with
a report of their findings on each applicant, prior to the consideration for
appointment of any such applicant by the city administrator. After
consideration of each applicant and the report on the applicant from the board
of fire and police commissioners, the city administrator shall appoint the
chief of the fire department with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (c)   The city administrator shall have the power to remove the chief of the
fire department from office in accordance with the provisions of Sec.
2-3202(c)(3) of the Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 11-2105.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE FIRE CHIEF, IN GENERAL.
   The fire chief shall be subject to the orders of the city administrator and
the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council. The fire chief
shall make certain that all laws of the state and all provisions of this Code
or other ordinances of the City, the execution of which depends upon the fire
department, are enforced, and make certain that all orders are executed
promptly and all departmental rules and regulations are complied with fully.
The chief is the final departmental authority in all matters of policy,
operations, administration and discipline.
SEC. 11-2106.   TRANSMITTAL OF ORDERS.
   All orders to the fire chief shall be issued by the city administrator, and
all orders to fire employees shall be issued by the fire chief and communicated
to the force through the chain of command, or in such a manner as the
circumstances may require.
SEC. 11-2107.   POLICE AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OFFICERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   At fires, the chief of the fire department, or any chief officers of
the fire department in command, shall have the full powers of a police officer;
in the absence of the chief of police, the chief of the fire department, or in
the chief's absence, the fire scene commander, shall have authority to control
and direct all members of the police department present.
   (b)   The chief of the fire department, or any chief officers of the fire
department in command, may prescribe limits in the vicinity of the fire within
which no person except those residing therein, members of the fire department,
members of the police force, or those admitted by the command officer or
subordinates thereof, shall be permitted to come.
   (c)   During the extinction or investigation of a fire, the chief of the
fire department or any chief officers of the fire department in command shall
have the power to arrest without a warrant as provided for peace officers by
statute, including power during the time of a fire to arrest without a warrant,
any person hindering or interfering with the extinction of a fire or refusing
to obey a police officer or firefighter in execution of their duties to
extinguish the fire, or to protect the lives of persons and property imperiled
by the fire.
   (d)   After a fire, the chief of the fire department or any chief officer of
the fire department in command shall have the power to arrest without a warrant
any person hindering or obstructing any arson investigation or investigation
relating to the causes of a fire, or concealing evidence related thereto.
   (e)   As soon as their duties in relation to the extinguishment of the fire
will permit, the chief of the fire department or any chief officer of the fire
department shall take a person arrested by either of them before an associate
judge, to be dealt with according to law.
   (f)   The chief of the fire department or any chief officer of the fire
department shall be severally vested with the usual powers and authority of
police officers to command all persons to assist them in the performance of
such duty.
SEC. 11-2108.   AUTHORITY TO DEMOLISH OR REMOVE PROPERTY.
   (a)   The city administrator or the chief of the fire department, or any
chief officer of the fire department in command during the course of a fire,
shall have the power to cause the removal or demolition of any property, real
or personal, whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of the
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of the fire, or to protect
adjoining property.
   (b)   The chief of the fire department, or any chief officer of the fire
department, with the consent of the city administrator, shall have the power to
tear down any portion of any building that may be standing after a fire, or has
become dilapidated, and in the judgment of the fire chief may be dangerous to
persons or property.
SEC. 11-2109.   PROTECTION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to prevent all
persons not belonging to the fire department or the City Council or who are not
city officers, from entering any fire station or handling any apparatus
belonging to the fire department without permission of the city administrator
or the chief of the fire department, or any chief officer of the fire
department.
SEC. 11-2110.   INVESTIGATION OF FIRES; ARSON INVESTIGATIONS.
   The chief of the fire department, the director of the bureau of fire
prevention or a fire inspector shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the City by which property has been
destroyed or damaged, and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire
is the result of carelessness or design. The investigations shall be begun
immediately upon the occurrence of a fire, and if it appears to the officer
making the investigation that the fire is of suspicious origin, the chief of
the fire department shall immediately be notified of the facts. The
investigating officer shall immediately take charge of the physical evidence
and shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the
investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities
in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
SEC. 11-2111.   REPORTS OF FIRES REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
   Every fire shall be reported in writing to the bureau of fire prevention
within two (2) days after the occurrence of the fire. The report shall be in
such form as shall be prescribed by the chief of the fire department, and shall
contain a statement of all the facts relating to the cause, origin and
circumstances of the fire; the extent of the damage thereof; the insurance upon
the property; and such other information as may be required.
SEC. 11-2112.   CITY ATTORNEY TO ASSIST IN ARSON INVESTIGATIONS.
   The city attorney, upon request of the chief of the fire department, shall
assist in the investigation of any fire which, in the opinion of the fire
chief, is of suspicious origin.
SEC.11-2113.   RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.
   The chief of the fire department shall recommend any amendments to this
chapter which, in the judgment of the fire chief, shall be desirable.
SEC. 11-2114.   AMBULANCE SERVICE - AREA.
   The City, through its fire department, shall provide emergency ambulance
service solely within the corporate limits of the City, within any area
specially designated by the City Council, and within any area designated for
such service by an intergovernmental service or mutual aid agreement; however,
the chief may respond to requests for aid outside of said service area in cases
of major disaster.
SEC. 11-2115.   AMBULANCE, PERMISSIBLE POINTS OF TRANSPORTATION.
   The ambulance service shall transport patients to the closest appropriate
facility. Patients may be transported to Genesis Medical Center East Campus as
necessary for specialized cardiac care or when the above named facilities are
on bypass. Paramedic personnel may disregard patient preference if, in the
opinion of the paramedic and confirmed by the resource hospital, it is
imperative that the patient be transported to the nearest facility or nearest
trauma center. Paramedics may also disregard patient preference in multiple
patient or multiple emergency situations where transport of patients to the
nearest emergency room or trauma facility is in the best interests of care to
all patients involved.
SEC. 11-2116.   SAME – FEES.
   (a)   The fee schedule for said emergency service shall be as follows:
   (1)   Base Rate for Basic Life Support fee is seven hundred sixty dollars
($760.00) for Moline residents and one thousand thirty-five dollars ($1,035.00)
for non-residents for calls that are not life threatening.
      Base Rate for Advanced Life Support-1 fee is nine hundred sixty-three
dollars ($963.00) for Moline residents and one thousand two hundred thirty-
eight dollars ($1,238.00) for non-residents for calls that are life
threatening.
      Base Rate for Advanced Life Support-2 fee is one thousand two hundred
eighty-two dollars ($1,282.00) for Moline residents and one thousand five
hundred fifty-seven dollars ($1,557.00) for non-residents for calls that are
life threatening.
   (2)   Mileage fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per mile.
   (3)   Fees for medical assessment and treatment without transport.
      Users shall be assessed three hundred nineteen dollars ($319.00) for
Moline residents and five hundred ninety-four dollars ($594.00) for non-
residents for base fee for basic life support and advanced life support
services.
   (4)   Fees charged shall be charged to the person receiving the benefit of
service, or, in the event said person has not attained the age of eighteen
(18), to the parent or guardian of the person receiving the service. The person
receiving the benefit of service shall include the patient, a minor patient's
parent or guardian, and the patient's employer if the point of treatment and/or
transportation commencement is the patient's place of employment. In the event
of an "outreach" call, the person receiving benefit shall include the ambulance
service requesting the "outreach" services.
   (5)   Delinquency in payment of charges for previous service hereunder shall
not be grounds to refuse service.
   (6)   Fees for hourly rental of ambulance and personnel. Events employing
on-site Moline Fire Department emergency medical personnel and equipment shall
be charged by the City of Moline for those dedicated services according to the
following:
      a.   Cost per paramedic duty hour shall be a set fee of $60.00 per hour.
      b.   The minimum number of paramedics employed shall be a team of two
(2). This team shall include an onsite ambulance.
      c.    There shall be a minimum scheduling fee of two (2) hours for any
event.    
      d.   Persons treated and transported from the event shall be charged at
regular rates established by City ordinance.
      e.   The sponsor or the promoter of the event shall pay the total hourly
rental costs listed in a., b., and c.
      f.   The City Council may reduce or waive the fees collectible under this
section when such waiver is deemed in the best interests of the City of Moline
or the best interests of public safety.
      g.   The fees listed in this section shall apply to dedicated emergency
medical services for events on private or public property within the City of
Moline.
   (7)   Fees for mutual aid services. When EMS services are provided outside
the City of Moline in a mutual aid situation (i.e., the primary agency cannot
supply an ambulance, calls Moline for assistance) and Moline responds, the
patient receiving the service from Moline shall be billed as if the services
were performed within the City of Moline. Resident, nonresident, and itemized
charges shall be the same.
   (8)   Fees for “outreach” services. When EMS service is provided outside the
City of Moline in an “outreach” situation, i.e., the primary agency requests an
“outreach” ambulance to meet their personnel en route to hospital for the
purpose of providing additional EMS personnel and ALS capabilities and the
Moline personnel meet the ambulance and provide ALS services, the service
requesting the “outreach” shall be billed for the services. Fees for the
services shall be the same as if the patient had been treated and transported
by the Moline ambulance.
   (9)   Repealed – Reserved for Future Use.
   (10)   Moline residents and healthcare facilities in need of lift assistance
from the Moline fire department with no medical attention required shall be
billed a lift assist fee.
      a.   Moline residents: the first lift assist call in a calendar year will
be provided at no charge to Moline residents. Thereafter, each lift assist call
in the same calendar year shall be billed at a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per call.
      b.   Healthcare facilities: each citizens assist call for healthcare
facilities shall be billed at a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
call. Healthcare facilities shall not receive a citizens assist call at no
charge.
(Ord. No. 3027-2022; Sec. 11-2116 amended; 9/20/22)
SEC. 11-2117.   SAME - FEE COLLECTION.
   The officer charged by ordinance with the control of and responsibility over
the finances of the City, hereinafter called "accounts and finance officer,"
shall be the City's agent for purposes of collecting the above fees; however,
said officer may designate in writing a person or persons, either in the City
service or otherwise, as the agent of the City for purposes of collecting said
fees.
SEC. 11-2118.   SAME - OBLIGATION OF SERVICE.
   Section
11-2114 does not create a contractual obligation to provide emergency ambulance
service to any person but merely describes that the City is endeavoring to
provide said service to the general public. The City will endeavor to provide
said service upon proper notification and when emergency ambulance vehicles are
available for service; however, failure to provide said service shall not
create liability on behalf of the City or its officers or employees.
ARTICLE III. SPILLER PAYS ORDINANCE
SEC. 11-3100.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be called “Spiller Pays Ordinance.”
SEC. 11-3101.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Costs : Means all expenses incurred by the City or any of the public
agencies assisting the City, as a result of any removal or remedial action.
   (2)   Facility : Means any building, structure, installation, equipment,
pipe or pipe line, including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or
publicly-owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch,
landfill, storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock
or aircraft; and shall also include any site or area where hazardous material
has been deposited, stored, disposed of, abandoned or otherwise come to be
located.
   (3)   Hazardous Materials : Mean any material, substance or mixture of
materials or substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive,
carcinogenic or radioactive, including, but not limited to, any substance or
material which is designated as hazardous material, pursuant to the “Hazardous
Material Transportation Act” (49 U.S.C., Section 1801, et. seq.) in a quantity
and form which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, property or the environment when improperly released, treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. This definition shall also
include hazardous waste, as defined in this section.
   (4)   Hazardous Waste : Means a waste, or combination of wastes, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating,
reversible, illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise managed, and which has been identified, by
characteristics or listing, as hazardous under Section 3001 of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, P.L. 94-850 or under regulations of the
Pollution Control Board. (420 ILCS 20/3). Examples of such waste or materials
shall include but not be limited to batteries, motor oil, oil base paint,
insecticides, herbicides, tires, roofing materials, acids, caustics, solvents,
and other similar materials. Hazardous waste shall also include but not be
limited to materials that are hazardous by reason of their pathological,
explosive, radiological, or toxic characteristics.
   (5)   Mutual Aid : Means any action taken by the City or any other public
agency, pursuant to an Intergovernmental Agreement or including, but not
limited to, any and all Mutual Aid Agreements.
   (6)   Person : Means any individual, business, firm, partnership,
corporation, association, trust, estate, joint venture, or other legal entity,
or their legal representative, each of their assign.
   (7)   Release : Means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
escaping, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a
hazardous material into or in any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or pipe
so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the
environment.
   (8)   Remedial Action : Means any action consistent with permanent remedy
taken instead of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release
or threatened release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent
or minimize the releases of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to
cause a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or
the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the
location of the release as storage, isolation, confinement, perimeter,
protection using dikes, trenches or ditches, clay cover, neutralization,
cleanup of released diversion, destruction, segregation of reactive wastes,
repair or replacement of leaking containers collection of leachate and runoff,
on-site treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water supplies and
any monitoring reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the
public health and welfare and the environment.
   (9)   Removal : Means the cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials
from the environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
monitor, assess and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous
materials, the disposal of removed material or the taking of such action as may
be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health
provision of alternative water supplies and temporary evacuation of threatened
individuals.
   (10)   Response : Means any removal or remedial action.
   (11)   Vessel : Means any object used as a storage container. 
SEC. 11-3102.   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall cause, permit, allow or threaten the release of hazardous
materials into the environment unless such release is in accordance with an
appropriate permit granted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or
other state or federal agency having primary jurisdiction over the release and
such release is in such place and manner as will not create a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, property or the environment.
SEC. 11-3103.   RESPONSE AUTHORITY.
   The Fire Chief of the City of Moline or his authorized representative shall
have authority to respond to any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials within the territory of the City or affecting the water supply, wells
or sewage treatment works located or servicing the City or pursuant to any
lawful intergovernmental agreement of which the City is a party. This authority
includes, but is not limited to, remedial action and removal.
   The Fire Chief or Environmental Manager shall have authority to respond to
any release, attempted release or threatened release of hazardous materials as
described above. The Fire Chief’s primary responsibility shall be to respond to
all releases, except those within the sanitary sewer system of the City. The
Environmental Manager shall have authority for those discharges into the
sanitary or storm sewer systems of the City. Either shall report any release or
threat of release of hazardous material to all appropriate federal, state and
local public health, safety and emergency agencies within the 24 hours of any
substantial release of hazardous materials. The Fire Chief or the Environmental
Manager shall relinquish their response authority at such time, if any, as the
federal, state or local public health, safety or emergency agency having
primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened release has assumed
responsibility for response to the release or threatened release.
   The Fire Chief, during such time as response authority is vested in such
position, shall be authorized to utilize all Fire personnel and equipment and
may, in said Chief’s sole discretion, take such remedial or removal action as
the Chief deems necessary or appropriate to respond to the release or
threatened release of hazardous material.
   All responding personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the Fire Chief or other person then exercising response authority
under this Ordinance until such time as the person exercising such response
authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for
response is assumed by the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release.
   The person exercising response authority under this Ordinance shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other federal, state or local public health,
safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened
release of hazardous materials.
SEC. 11-3104.   LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and subject only to the
defenses set forth in Section
11-3105, hereinafter, the following persons shall be jointly and severally
liable for all costs of removal and remedial action incurred by the City, as a
result of a release, attempted release or probable likelihood of a release of a
hazardous material.
   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or treatment of
a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility or vessel used for such
disposal, transport, treatment or storage from which there was a release,
attempted release or probable likelihood of a release of any such hazardous
material.
   Any person who by contract agreement, or otherwise has arranged with another
party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of hazardous
materials owned, controlled or possessed by such person at a facility owned or
operated by another party or entity from which facility there is a release,
attempted release or probable likelihood of a release of such hazardous
materials.
   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for transport to
disposal, storage or treatment facilities from which there is a release,
attempted release or probable likelihood of a release of such hazardous
substances.
SEC. 11-3105.   DEFENSES.
   There shall be no liability under Section
11-3104 hereof for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that the release, attempted release or probable
likelihood of a release of a hazardous material and the damages resulting is in
accordance with any of the permitted defenses enumerated in 415 ILCS 5/22.2
except for the exception listed in 415 ILCS 22.2 (j)(i)(c). 
SEC. 11-3106.   COSTS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who is liable for the release, attempted release or probable
likelihood of a release of a hazardous material or hazardous wastes who fails
without sufficient cause to pay for or provide removal or remedial action upon
or in accordance with a notice and request of the City, or in accordance with
any order of any court having jurisdiction on the matter, shall be liable to
the City for any costs incurred by the City as a result of such failure to
provide or take such removal or remedial action, together with the costs of any
removal or remedial action taken by the City in accordance with this section,
and all attorneys' fees and related legal costs incurred in connection
therewith.
   In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this section
and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. Where such violation is found to be the result of intentional,
willful and/or wanton conduct or gross negligence, or the person committing
such violation attempts to evade responsibility hereunder by leaving the scene
of the occurrence or by other means, that person shall be subject to a fine as
provided for above or a fine in an amount equai to three (3) times the costs,
including attorneys' fees and legal costs for which it is liable under
paragraph 1 of Section
11-3106, whichever is greater.
   Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the City shall be as
follows:
   (a)   The reasonable cost of each vehicle responding, but in no case less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour per vehicle; and
   (b)   The cost of all personnel, including any overtime cost to the City
incurred as a result of the removal or remedial action; and
   (c)   The cost of all materials and equipment used, expended, depleted,
destroyed or removed from service in accordance with federal, state or local
ordinance, as a result of the mitigation or containment operations if or at the
request of the City.
   Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the City in
conjunction with any other responding member of Mutual Aid Box Alarm System
("MABAS") 43 shall be according to the fee schedule approved by MABAS 43 and by
the City Council, from time to time, by a separate resolution or ordinance and
shall be billed and collected by MABAS 43. A copy of the "Fees for Hazardous
Materials Incident Responses" shall be maintained in the office of the fire
chief and available for review and inspection by the public during normal
business hours.
(Ord. No. 3006-2018; Sec. 11-3106 repealed; Sec. 11-3106 enacted; 3/6/18)
SEC. 11-3107.   AUTHORITY OF ORDINANCE.
   This Ordinance shall supersede any ordinances, resolutions or motions, or
parts of ordinances, resolutions or motions in conflict with any part herein,
any such sections or parts thereof, are hereby repealed.
   If any section or paragraph of this Ordinance shall be held invalid or
unenforceable for any reason, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not
affect any remaining provisions of this Ordinance.
_______________________
Chapter Amendments and Reference Notes
Code Section No. and Action                                                     Ordinance Adoption
                                                                                No.       Date
Art. I repealed; new Art. I enacted – adopts 2012 International Fire Code as  3063-2013 12/17/13
Moline Fire Code
Art. III enacted new                                                            3060-2006 12/12/06
Sec. 11-1100 repealed; new Sec. 11-1100                                         2003-03-  03/04/03
                                                                                03
Sec. 11-1100 repealed; new Sec. 11-1100 enacted                                 3081-2004 10/05/04
Sec. 11-1101 repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 enacted                                 3060-2006 12/12/06
Sec. 11-1101 repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 enacted; scrivener’s error correction 3029-2008 04/01/08
to Sec. 11-1101(l) pursuant to omission from 3029-2008; 09/11/08
                                                                                2003-08-
Sec. 11-1101 (h) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 (h) enacted                         04 as     08/19/03
                                                                                amended
Sec. 11-1101 (i) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101(i) enacted                          3020-2012 08/14/12
Sec. 11-1101 (l) and (m): (m) repealed, new subsection (l) enacted and the      3081-2004 10/05/04
current subsection (l) renamed as subsection (m)
Sec. 11-1101 (l) and (m) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 (1) and (m) enacted,        3016-2009 09/08/09
effective 09/18/09
Sec. 11-1101 (l) and (m) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 (l) and (m) enacted         3021-2010 04/20/10
Sec. 11-1101 (l) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101 (l) enacted                         3020-2012 08/14/12
Sec. 11-1101 (p): new subsection (p) enacted & remaining subsections            3033-2011 09/29/11
consecutively renamed
Sec. 11-1101(r) and (s): new subsections (r) and (s) enacted and remaining      3020-2012 08/14/12
subsections consecutively renumbered
Sec. 11-1101.1 enacted                                                          2002-08-  08/20/02
                                                                                02
Sec. 11-1101.1 amended by renaming subsection (g) as subsection (h) and         3081-2004 10/05/04
enacting one new subsection (g)
Sec. 11-1101.1 repealed; new Sec. 11-1101.1 enacted                             3012-2008 02/26/08
Sec. 11-1101.1(g) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101.1 enacted                          3032-2015 09/15/15
Sec. 11-1101.1(d) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101.1(d) enacted                       3021-2017 10/10/17
Sec. 11-1101.1(g) repealed; new Sec. 11-1101.1(g) enacted                       3022-2017 10/10/17
Sec. 11-1102 repealed; new Sec. 11-1102 enacted                                 2002-09-  09/17/02
                                                                                05
Sec. 11-1102 “PENALTY” renumbered to Sec. 11-1104 & new Sec. 11-1102        2003-01-  01/21/03
“PROHIBITION ON CODE OR STANDARD ADOPTION BY IMPLICATION” enacted           13
Sec. 11-1102 repealed; new Sec. 11-1102 enacted                                 3029-2008 04/01/08
Sec. 11-1104 repealed; new Sec. 11-1104 enacted                                 3020-2012 08/14/12
Sec. 11-2101 repealed; new Sec. 11-2101 enacted                                 3004-2006 02/21/06
Sec. 11-2101 repealed; new Sec. 11-2101 enacted                                 3002-2013 02/26/13
Sec. 11-2115 repealed; new Sec. 11-2115 enacted                                 3081-2004 10/05/04
Sec. 11-2116 repealed; new Sec. 11-2116 enacted                                 98-1-1    01/06/98
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3) repealed; new Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and 3   2002-06-  06/04/02
enacted                                                                         01
Sec. 11-2116 (a) (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) repealed; new Sec. 11-2116 (a) (1), 3043-2004 07/02/04
(2) and (3) enacted
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3) repealed; new Sec. 11-2116(a)(1), (2) and (3)  3027-2009 10/13/09
enacted
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3) repealed; new Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3) 3022-2013 09/10/13
enacted                                                                         (2)
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3) repealed; new Sec. 11-2116 (a)(1), (2) and (3)
enacted (non-Moline resident ambulance fee and $20.00 flat fee re: supply       3011-2015 04/07/15
costs)
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(10) enacted (lift assist fee)                                  3010-2015 04/07/15
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(9) enacted (first responder fee enacted)                       3014-2015 04/28/15
Sec. 11-2116 (a)(9) repealed (first responder fee repealed)                     3020-2017 09/26/17
 
CHAPTER 12
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 13
FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION
SEC. 13-1100. PURPOSE.
   This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this City
by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-
30-8 and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (1)   to prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (2)   to protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (3)   to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, as well as flood rescue and relief operations;
   (4)   to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (5)   to maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (6)   to make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (7)   to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
SEC. 13-1101. DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
   (1)   Base Flood . The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section
1102 of this ordinance.
   (2)   Base Flood Elevation (BFE) . The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.
   (3)   Basement . That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.
   (4)   Building . A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   (5)   Critical Facility . Any facility which is critical to the health and
welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to
the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or
can put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where
flood protection should be required include but are not limited to: emergency
services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals,
retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical
utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and
hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or
toxic substances).
   (6)   Development . Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
      a.   demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      b.   substantial improvement of an existing building;
      c.   installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      d.   installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      e.   construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;
      f.   drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface; and
      g.   storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      “Development” does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees.
   (7)   Elevation Certificate . A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify building elevation information
necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter.
   (8)   FEMA . Federal Emergency Management Agency
   (9)   Flood . A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   (10)   Flood Fringe . That portion of the floodplain outside of the
regulatory floodway.
   (11)   Flood Insurance Rate Map . A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or
may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations.
   (12)   Flood Insurance Study . An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   (13)   Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) are synonymous. Those
lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Moline and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction, or lands that may be annexed into the City of Moline, that are
subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the City are
generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Rock Island
County, Illinois and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated April 5, 2010. “Floodplain” also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the City of Moline.
   (14)   Floodplain Manager . The individual or individuals designated by the
Director of Planning & Development to administer the provisions of this
ordinance and to perform the duties specified at Section
13-1103.
   (15)   Floodproofing . Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
   (16)   Floodproofing Certificate . A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   (17)   Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) . The elevation of the base flood
plus one foot (1’) of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   (18)   Floodway . That portion of the floodplain required to store and
convey the base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Mississippi
River, Rock River, and their respective tributaries shall be as delineated on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Rock Island County, Illinois and Incorporated
Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated April 5,
2010. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the City of Moline
shall be according to the best data available from Federal, State, or other
sources.
   (19)   Freeboard . An increment of elevation added to the base flood
elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and
unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   (20)   Historic Structure . Any structure that is:
      a.   listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      b.   certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      c.   individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
      d.   individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, including a
historic landmark designated by the City under its authority as a Certified
Local Government.
   (21)   IDNR/OWR . Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   (22)   Lowest Floor . The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a
structure, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built or altered so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of
Section
13-1106.
   (23)   Manufactured Home . A structure transportable in one or more sections
that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. For purposes of
this Chapter, the terms “Manufactured Home” and “Mobile Home” are synonymous.
   (24)   Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision . A parcel or parcels of land
divided into two or more lots for rent or sale where manufactured homes are
harbored.
   (25)   Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Existing . A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be
constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
   (26)   Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Expansion to an Existing . The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   (27)   Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, New . A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be
constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
   (28)   New Construction . Structures for which the start of construction
commenced or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such
structures.
   (29)   NFIP . National Flood Insurance Program.
   (30)   Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer . A vehicle which is:
      a.   built on a single chassis;
      b.   four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
      c.   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   (31)   Repetitive Loss . Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two or more separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds
twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   (32)   SFHA . See “Floodplain”.
   (33)   Start of Construction . Includes substantial improvement and means
the date the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   (34)   Structure. See “Building”.
   (35)   Substantial Damage . Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes “Repetitive Loss” (see definition).
   (36)   Substantial Improvement . Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the
structure in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
      a.   equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
      b.   increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
      “Substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term
does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places, the Illinois Register of Historic Places, or a
locally-designated historic landmark.
   (37)   Violation . The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this Chapter. A structure or other development without the
required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
SEC. 13-1102.   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This ordinance’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (1)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Mississippi River,
the Rock River, and their respective tributaries shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Rock Island County
Illinois and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated April 5, 2010.
   (2)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Rock Island County, Illinois and Unincorporated Areas.
   (3)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as a “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Rock Island County,
Illinois shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by
the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (4)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Rock Island County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City, or that may be annexed into the City, shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Rock Island County, Illinois and Unincorporated Areas
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated April 5, 2010.
SEC. 13-1103.   DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   The Planning and Development Department shall be responsible for the general
administration of this ordinance and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City meet the requirements
of this ordinance. Specifically, the Director of Planning and Development shall
designate one or more individuals to serve as floodplain manager, who (whom)
shall:
   (1)   process floodplain development authorization forms in accordance with
Section
13-1104;
   (2)   ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of Section
13-1105;
   (3)   ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to Section
13-1106 are met and obtain a floodproofing certificate or an elevation
certificate for all finished construction;
   (4)   assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
Section
13-1107;
   (5)   ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public
Health standards of Section
13-1108;
   (6)   if a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Section
13-1110 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (7)   inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in Section
13-1112 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
   (8)   assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (9)   notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (10)   provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (11)   cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
   (12)   maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this ordinance;
   (13)   perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (14)   maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
SEC. 13-1104. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZATION.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining floodplain
development authorization from the Planning & Development Department and any
applicable building permits from the building official. The building official
shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this ordinance.
   (1)   The application form for a floodplain development authorization shall
be accompanied by:
      a.   drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      b.   existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      c.   the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      d.   the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Section
13-1106 of this ordinance; and
      e.   the cost of the project or improvements as estimated by a licensed
engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this
requirement.
   (2)   Upon receipt of an application for floodplain development
authorization, the floodplain manager shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
ordinance. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current
Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. The
floodplain manager shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
   (3)   The floodplain manager shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
floodplain manager shall not issue a floodplain development authorization
unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
SEC. 13-1105.   PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and within
all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following
standards shall apply:
   (1)   Except as provided in Section
13-1105(2) of this ordinance, no development shall be allowed which, acting in
combination with existing and anticipated development will cause any increase
in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The
following specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this
requirement:
      a.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         1.   the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet;
         2.   the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one half (0.5) feet at a point one thousand
(1,000) feet upstream of the proposed structure;
         3.   there are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile;
         4.   the proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel;
         5.   the design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit; and
         6.   the design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      b.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3:
         1.   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
      c.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         1.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         2.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         3.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         4.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         5.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated.
         6.   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and federal requirements must be met.
      d.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         1.   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty (50) feet into a
waterway and no more than one quarter (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and
Corps of Engineers.
         2.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten (10) feet.
         3.   For L-Shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner’s shoreline frontage nor fifty (50) feet.
         4.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten (10) feet of the projected
property line.
         5.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         6.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         7.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         8.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         9.   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         10.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      e.   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6:
         1.   the following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            a.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            b.   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures.
            c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            f.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      f.   Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         1.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         2.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity
of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures.
         3.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         4.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      g.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         1.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the
river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three (3) feet of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         2.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         3.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         4.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      h.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         1.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the State where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
         2.   In addition to the materials listed in Section
13-1105(h)(1), other materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         3.   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5).
         4.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
(1000) feet.
         5.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         6.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         7.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
         8.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width
and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            a.   For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along
the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent
(10%) nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal
foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a
flatter slope and to lessen the quantity of material required.
         9.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         10.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         11.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            a.   it is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            b.   the volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot.
         12.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      i.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         1.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         2.   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         3.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size, must not deflect floodwaters onto another property,
and must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         4.   No construction shall be undertaken within fifty (50) feet of the
bank of the stream channel.
         5.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         6.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure
shall be authorized by this permit. Plans for any subsequent addition must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         7.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      j.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         1.   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand (1000) feet.
         2.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel.
         3.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         4.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            a.   removed from the floodway;
            b.   used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten percent
(10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal
foot of streambank;
            c.   used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            d.   used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            e.   placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            f.   used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         5.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      k.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
         1.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            a.   no buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure; and
            b.   there is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         2.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         3.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR).
         4.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities).
         5.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      l.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13:
         1.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         2.   The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         3.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         4.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         5.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that
the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition Number
3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
         6.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         7.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         8.   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as
defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
      m.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within
a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit requirements.
   (2)   Other development activities not listed in Section
13-1105(1) may be permitted only if:
      a.   permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      b.   sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
SEC. 13-1106.   PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (a)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of Section
13-1105, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
   (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition
to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
seventy (70) square feet.
   (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or
equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be
figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
   (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall
be figured cumulatively during a ten (10) year period. If substantially damaged
the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
   (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
   (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section
13-1101.
   (b)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
   (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
      a.   the lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation;
      b.   the fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches before
compaction and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
      c.   the fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
      d.   the fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material; and
      e.   shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques such
as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
   (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
      a.   the building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters;
      b.   the lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing,
and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above
the flood protection elevation;
      c.   if walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one (1) permanent opening on
each wall no more than one (1) foot above grade with a minimum of two (2)
openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation; and
      d.   the foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed,
and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
         1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
         2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
         3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
         4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      e.   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         1.   the building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         2.   any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch per one (1) square foot of
enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above grade;
         3.   the interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         4.   the interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four (4) feet at any
point;
         5.   an adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event;
         6.   portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         7.   utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (c)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
   (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
   (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
   (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
   (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (d)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
   (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with
Section
13-1106(2); and
   (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (e)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
Section
13-1106(e) unless the following conditions are met:
   (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
   (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
   (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks
and porches.
   (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
   (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
   (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
   (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe
for movement out of the floodplain.
   (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
   (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and either:
      a.   be supported entirely by jacks; or
      b.   have a hitch jack permanently mounted with tires touching the ground
and supported by a block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily
removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (f)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted below the flood
protection elevation provided the following conditions are met:
   (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
   (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
   (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permits.
   (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to
an existing principle structure on the same lot.
   (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
   (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must
be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
   (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
   (8)   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater, and less
than five hundred (500) square feet in total floor area.
   (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
   (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
   (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised
of the flood insurance implications.
SEC. 13-1107.   SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The city shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (1)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of Section
13-1105 and Section
13-1106 of this ordinance. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      a.   the base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      b.   the boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      c.   a signed statement by a Licensed Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (2)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
SEC. 13-1108.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND CRITICAL FACILITIES STANDARDS.
   (a)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of Section
13-1105 and Section
13-1106 of this ordinance the following standards apply:
   (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of Section
13-1106 of this ordinance.
   (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
   (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain unless no feasible
alternative site is available. In such circumstances, critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency
elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
   (b)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
SEC. 13-1109   CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION
   (a)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (b)   The City shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days
prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
SEC. 13-1110.   VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the City Council for a
variance. The floodplain manager shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit a recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this ordinance.
   (1)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      a.   the development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      b.   an exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      c.   the relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      d.   there will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      e.   there will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      f.   the applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      g.   all other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (2)   The City Council shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protections standards of Section
13-1106 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      a.   result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-
five dollars ($25) per one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage;
      b.   increase the risk to life and property; and
      c.   require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (3)   Variances to the building protection requirements of Section
13-1106 of this ordinance which are requested in connection with
reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure
as defined in Section
13-1101 may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
Section
13-1105 and Section
13-1106 of this ordinance subject to the following conditions:
      a.   the repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      b.   the repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
SEC. 13-1111.   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability on the part
of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder.
SEC. 13-1112.   PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the floodplain manager may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this ordinance exists.
The floodplain manager shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (1)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the
violation:
      a.   the City shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the ordinance;
      b.   any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750) for each offense;
      c.   a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      d.   the City shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (2)   The City shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered
a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a
Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
   (3)   The building official or code enforcement officer, in consultation
with the floodplain manager, is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing,
shall indicate the violation or reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work
order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
   (4)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the City Council. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      a.   the grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation;
and
      b.   the time and place of the hearing.
   (5)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (6)   Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
SEC. 13-1113.   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City
Council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
including the prior ordinance enacted October 22, 2002 (Ord. No. 2002-10-09).
However, this ordinance does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this ordinance repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this ordinance and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
SEC. 13-1114.   SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder.
(Ord. No. 3014-2010; Chapter 13 repealed in its entirety; new Chapter 13
enacted; 03/23/10)
CHAPTER 14
FOOD SANITATION
Art. I.   In General, §14-1100 - §14-1103
Art. II.   Food Establishments
   Div. 1.   In General, §14-2100
   Div. 2.   License, §14-2200 - §14-2206
   Div. 3.   Cottage Food Operations, §14-3300
Art. III.   Administration & Enforcement
   Div. 1.   In General, §14-3100 - 14-3107
   Div. 2.   Inspections, §14-3200 - 14-3205
   Div. 3.   Additional Training Requirements, §14-3300 - §14-3302
Art. IV.   Equipment & Plan Approval, §14-4100
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 14-1100.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to safeguard public health in food
operations and provide consumers with food that is safe, unadulterated, and
honestly presented. This is accomplished through educating food establishment
owners and operators in the reduction or elimination of the risk of
transmission of microorganisms or communicable diseases through food
preparation and operations, and promoting safe food handling and hygienic
practices.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec.
14-1100 repealed; new Sec.
14-1100 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-1101.   SCOPE.
   Regulations provided within this ordinance provide the requirements needed
for issuance of licenses, inspections, enforcement actions, and plan approval.
Definitions and standards for management and personnel, inspections, equipment,
food operations, and physical facilities are also included in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; new Sec.
14-1101 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-1102.   ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   In addition to those provisions set forth herein, this ordinance hereby
adopts by reference and incorporates the current edition and subsequent
revisions of, and shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the Illinois Food Code 77 ILL. Adm. Code 750, Food
Handling Enforcement Act 410 ILCS 625, 2017 FDA Food Code, and the “Bed and
Breakfast Act”. One copy of each shall be on file in the office of the City of
Moline Clerk/Legal Records.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec.
14-1101 repealed; new Sec.
14-1102 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-1103.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Adulterated shall mean the condition of a food:
      a.   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
      b.   If it bears or contains an added poisonous or deleterious substance
for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in excess of
such tolerance if one has been established;
      c.   If it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or
decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
      d.   If it has been processed, prepared, packaged, or held under
unsanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
      e.   If it is, in whole or in part, the product of a diseased animal or
an animal which has died otherwise than by slaughter;
      f.   If its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health;
      g.   If the food product is not in compliance with the temperature and
labeling requirements set forth in the Code.
   (2)   Approved shall mean acceptable to the Health Authority based on
determination as to conformance with required standards and good public health
practice.
   (3)   Category I facility shall mean a food establishment that presents a
high relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based on the large number of
food handling operations typically implicated in food-borne outbreaks and/or
the type of population served by the facility. Category I facilities include
those where the following operations occur:
      a.   Potentially hazardous foods are cooled, as part of the food handling
operation at the facility;
      b.   Potentially hazardous foods are prepared hot or cold and held hot or
cold for more than 12 hours before serving;
      c.   Potentially hazardous cooked and cooled foods must be reheated;
      d.   Complex preparation of foods or extensive handling of raw
ingredients with hand contact for ready-to-eat foods occurs as part of the food
handling operations at the facility;
      e.   Vacuum packaging, other forms of reduced oxygen packaging, or other
special processes that require a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP)
plan; or
      f.   Immunocompromised individuals, such as the elderly, young children
under age four and pregnant women are served, in a facility in which these
individuals compose the majority of the consuming population.
   (4)   Category II facility shall mean a food establishment that presents a
medium relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based upon few food
handling operations typically implicated in food-borne illness outbreaks.
Category II facilities include those where the following operations occur:
      a.   Hot or cold foods are held at required temperatures for no more than
12 hours and are restricted to same day services;
      b.   Foods are prepared from raw ingredients, using only minimal
assembly; or
      c.   Foods that require complex preparation (whether canned, frozen or
fresh prepared) are obtained from approved food-processing plants, high-risk
food service establishments or retail food stores.
   (5)   Category III facility shall mean a food establishment that presents a
low relative risk of causing food-borne illness, based upon few or no food
handling operations typically implicated in food-borne illness outbreaks.
Category III facilities include those where the following operations occur:
      a.   Only potentially hazardous foods commercially pre-packaged in an
approved processing plant are available or served at the facility;
      b.   Only limited preparation of non-potentially hazardous foods and
beverages, such as snack foods and carbonated beverages, occurs at the
facility; or
      c.   Only beverages (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) are served at the
facility.
   (6)   Cease and desist order shall mean a written order issued by the health
authority which directs the responsible person to immediately stop doing or
allowing a specific action to occur. A cease and desist order may or may not
include a direction to completely cease operations at an establishment. A cease
and desist order may include a timeframe to achieve compliance as long as there
is not an imminent health hazard to public health or safety.
   (7)   Commissary shall mean a licensed food establishment in which food,
containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, washed, and/or
stored.
   (8)   Core item shall mean a provision in the Food Code that is not
designated as a priority item or a priority foundation item. "Core item"
includes an item that usually relates to general sanitation, operational
controls, sanitation standard operating procedures (SSOPs), facilities or
structures, equipment design, or general maintenance.
   (9)   Critical control point shall mean any point or procedure in a specific
food processing or packaging operation where loss of control may result in an
unacceptable health risk.
   (10)   Customer convenience counter shall mean an area located within a
licensed retail food establishment containing, without limitation, soda
dispensing machine, microwave oven for prepackaged foods, coffee machine,
pastries from a licensed facility, or hot chocolate machine. No potentially
hazardous foods shall be included within this definition.
   (11)   Embargo shall mean an order issued by the health authority that acts
as a temporary isolation or quarantine of food or equipment the health
authority believes or has reason to believe is in violation of this ordinance.
   (12)   Event coordinator shall mean any person or organization that is
responsible for organizing and planning an event at which three or more
temporary food establishments and/or mobile food units operate.
   (13)   Event participant or operator shall mean any person providing/serving
food, with or without charge, at an event at which one or more temporary food
service establishments or mobile food units operate.
   (14)   Follow-up inspection shall mean inspection(s) necessary to ensure
corrective actions have been taken to correct Food Code violations documented
during previous inspection(s). A follow-up inspection may be a charged
inspection depending on the nature of the Food Code violations requiring a
follow-up inspection.
   (15)   Food establishment shall mean an operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption.
      Such as:
      a.   A restaurant; satellite or catered feeding location; catering
operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to a
conveyance used to transport people; market; vending location; conveyance used
to transport people; institution; or food bank; and
      b.   That relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly or
indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders
or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common
carriers.
      c.   "Food establishment" includes:
         1.   An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a
central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite
feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the
regulatory authority; and
         2.   An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary,
temporary, or permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off
the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
      d.   "Food establishment" does not include:
         1.   An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not
potentially hazardous;
         2.   A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and
vegetables;
         3.   A food processing plant;
         4.   A kitchen in a private home if only food that is not potentially
hazardous is prepared for sale or service at a function such as a religious or
charitable organization's bake sale if allowed by law, and if the consumer is
informed by a clearly visible placard at the sales or service location that the
food is prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation and inspection
by the regulatory authority;
         5.   An area where food that is prepared as specified in subparagraph
(d)(4) of this definition is sold or offered for human consumption;
         6.   A kitchen in a private home, such as a small family day care
provider; or a bed-and-breakfast operation that prepares and offers food to
guests if the home is owner occupied, the number of available guest bedrooms
does not exceed six (6), breakfast is the only meal offered, the number of
guests served does not exceed eighteen (18), and the consumer is informed by
statements contained in published advertisements, mailed brochures, or placards
posted at the registration area, that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is
not regulated and inspected by the regulatory authority;
         7.   A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food; or
         8.   A cottage food operation.
   (16)   Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan shall mean a
comprehensive food safety control plan that includes a step-by-step description
of the food processing, packaging and storage procedure, including
identification of critical control points (CCPs); the food-contact surface
cleaning and sanitizing procedures; lot identification procedure; and training
procedures.
   (17)   Health authority shall mean the environmental health specialist or a
person designated by the building official to act with authority.
   (18)   Hearing shall mean a meeting requested by the license holder or
representative to the health authority to determine if a food license should be
suspended or revoked; or to determine whether an order from the health
authority to deny, suspend, or revoke said food license should be withdrawn.
   (19)   Hybrid Inspection shall mean an inspection combining an onsite
component with an offsite component that may include electronic, telephone, or
virtual communication prior to the site visit.
   (20)   Imminent health hazard shall mean a significant threat or danger to
health that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show
that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that
requires immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury,
based on:
      a.   The number of potential injuries;
      b.   The nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated injury.
Examples of imminent health hazards include but are not limited to:
         1.   Fire;
         2.   Flood;
         3.   Extended interruption of electrical service;
         4.   Extended interruption of water service;
         5.   Sewage backup;
         6.   Misuse of poisonous or toxic materials;
         7.   Onset of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak;
         8.   Persons with disease or infection which can be transmitted by
food or drink are not restricted to prevent food contamination within the food
service establishment;
         9.   Gross unsanitary conditions; or
         10.   Any other conditions deemed prejudicial to public health.
   (21)   Kiosk shall mean any free-standing, temporary retail food stand
selling prepackaged foods. The stand shall be limited to a location inside a
covered mall. Kiosks selling potentially hazardous foods or offering open foods
to the public as a sample shall meet all necessary requirements for food
protection.
   (22)   License shall mean the document issued by the health authority that
authorizes a person to operate a food establishment.
   (23)   License holder (permit holder) shall mean the entity that is legally
responsible for the operation of the food establishment, such as the owner, the
owner's agent, or other person, and possesses a valid license to operate the
food establishment.
   (24)   Mobile food unit shall mean a vehicle-mounted food establishment
designed and operated to be readily movable, e.g., mobile truck moving from
location to location continuously. The unit shall not have permanent
connections to water, wastewater, or electricity. This term includes trailer-
mounted kitchens.
   (25)   Multi Event Temporary Food Service Establishment License shall mean a
temporary event license for those who qualify, in which the license is valid
for a specified number of 1-3 day events or celebrations, per vendor, per
license year. Only one application and fee must be submitted for an annual
Multi-Event Temporary Food License.
   (26)   Notice as used in this ordinance, shall include, without limitation,
the document entitled Moline Food Establishment Inspection Report.
   (27)   Operator shall mean a person who has been approved by the license
holder to perform and/or oversee the day-to-day food service operation.
   (28)   Plan review shall mean an evaluation process conducted by the health
authority to determine whether or not a food establishment is in compliance
with
Chapter 14, Food Sanitation.
   (29)   Priority item shall mean a provision in the Food Code whose
application contributes directly to the elimination, prevention or reduction to
an acceptable level, hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and
there is no other provision that more directly controls the hazard. "Priority
item" includes items with a quantifiable measure to show control of hazards
such as cooking, reheating, cooling, handwashing; and is denoted in the Food
Code with a superscript P, P.
   (30)   Priority foundation item shall mean a provision in the Food Code
whose application supports, facilitates or enables one or more PRIORITY ITEMS.
"Priority foundation item" includes an item that requires the purposeful
incorporation of specific actions, equipment or procedures by industry
management to attain control of risk factors that contribute to foodborne
illness or injury such as personnel training, infrastructure or necessary
equipment, HACCP plans, documentation or record keeping, and labeling; and is
denoted in the Food Code with a superscript Pf, Pf.
   (31)   Public event shall mean any event open to the public where food is
prepared or served. An event that is advertised with fliers, banners, newspaper
articles, radio or TV announcements, social media, or by other means is
considered a public event and is subject to regulation under this ordinance.
Any event not considered a public event shall be considered private. The health
authority shall make the final determination as to whether an event shall be
considered private or public under this ordinance.
   (32)   Regulatory authority shall mean the "City of Moline."
   (33)   Seasonal concession stand shall mean any fixed facility operating for
no more than six (6) months of the calendar year. This term is intended to mean
such locations as baseball parks, swimming pools, and recreational facilities
serving a limited menu for a limited time based on seasonal needs. Seasonal
concession stands electing to serve potentially hazardous foods shall meet all
applicable requirements for a food establishment. Those stands unable to meet
basic food safety requirements, including without limitation, a potable water
source under pressure, hot water heating device, proper sewage disposal
facilities, required hand washing facilities, and required utensil washing
facilities, shall limit their menu to prepackaged foods only.
   (34)   Temporary food service establishment shall mean a food service
establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not
more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or
celebration.
   (35)   Variance shall mean a written document issued by the health authority
that authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more requirements of this
ordinance if in the opinion of the health authority, a health hazard or
nuisance will not result from the modification or waiver.
   (36)   All other definitions as stated in the rules and regulations as
adopted by reference herein are hereby in effect.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-2100 repealed; new Sec. 14-1103 enacted; 02/21/23)
ARTICLE II. FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 14-2100.   IN GENERAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment who does
not have a valid license issued to such person by the health authority within
the scope of this ordinance and the Food Code. Only a person who complies with
the requirements of this ordinance shall be entitled to receive or retain such
a license. Licenses are not transferable from one person to another or from one
premises to another. A valid license shall be posted in every food
establishment and shall expire April 30th of each year and shall be renewed
before May 1st of each year.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-2200 repealed; new Sec. 14-2100 enacted; 02/21/23)
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
SEC. 14-2200.   ISSUANCE OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES.
   (a)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written
application for a license on forms provided by the health authority. Such
application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location
and type of the proposed food establishment, and the signature of each
applicant.
   (b)   Prior to approval of an application for a license for a new food
establishment and/or change of ownership, the health authority shall inspect
the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with the requirements
of this ordinance and the Food Code. There shall be no food present for human
consumption until the license has been issued. If there are no priority or
priority foundation violations, the Health Authority shall approve the food
establishment to begin operations.
   (c)   Existing food establishments, where ownership has not changed, may
automatically renew annually a non-revoked license provided that the
establishment has been inspected and approved by the health authority within
the preceding six (6) month period.
   (d)   The health authority shall issue a license to the applicant if
inspection records reveal that the proposed or existing food establishment
complies with the requirements of this ordinance and upon payment of the
required fee.
   (e)   The license required by this division shall be signed by the health
authority prior to presentation to the establishment.
   (f)   Upon acceptance of the license issued by the health authority, the
license holder in order to retain the license shall:
      1.   Comply with the provisions of this ordinance including the
conditions of any granted variance(s);
      2.   Operate under a HACCP Plan and comply with the plan as approved if
one is required;
      3.   Immediately contact the health authority to report an illness of an
employee or conditional employee;
      4.   Immediately discontinue operations and notify the health authority
if an imminent health hazard may exist;
      5.   Allow the health authority access to the food establishment;
      6.   Replace existing facilities and equipment with facilities and
equipment that comply with the Food Code if:
         a.   The health authority directs the replacement because the
facilities and equipment constitute a public health hazard or nuisance or no
longer comply with the criteria upon which the facilities and equipment were
accepted;
         b.   The health authority directs the replacement of the facilities
and equipment because of a change of ownership; or
         c.   The facilities and equipment are replaced in the normal course of
operation.
      7.   Comply with directives of the health authority including time frames
for corrective actions specified in inspection reports, notices, and other
directives issued by the health authority in regards to the license holder’s
food establishment or in response to community emergencies.
      8.   Be subject to the administrative, civil, injunctive, and criminal
remedies authorized in law for failure to comply with the Food Code or a
directive of the health authority, including time frames for corrective actions
specified in inspection reports, notices, orders, warnings, and other
directives.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-2201 repealed; new Sec. 14-2200 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2201.   LICENSE POSTING.
   A license issued, pursuant to this division, shall be conspicuously posted
in the food establishment for which it was issued. In the case of a temporary
event, the temporary license shall be visible at the location for which it was
issued.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; new Sec. 14-2201 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2202.   LICENSING CATEGORIES.
   (a)   For every food establishment operating in the City of Moline, the
health authority shall assess the relative potential risks of creating a
foodborne illness. This classification shall result in the establishment being
placed into a license category as it relates to food safety.
   (b)   The following license categories are not meant to imply that any given
establishment is more or less safe than others. The criteria in the Illinois
Food Code 77 ILL. Adm. Code 750 shall be utilized to determine risk. The
following categories shall be utilized:
      1.   Category I (High Risk)
      2.   Category II (Medium Risk)
      3.   Category III (Low Risk)
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; new Sec. 14-2202 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2203.   ISSUANCE OF MOBILE LICENSES.
   (a)   Applicants obtaining a mobile unit license shall meet the requirements
set forth in this ordinance and provide the following:
      1.   Completion of forms provided by the health authority;
      2.   Drawn layout of the mobile unit depicting where fixed equipment,
plumbing, and mechanical fixtures are located;
      3.   Proposed menu;
      4.   Proof of access to a commissary; and
      5.   Any other information the health authority deems necessary to
evaluate the application.
   (b)   Mobile retail sales vehicles shall be licensed per vehicle. This shall
include, without limitation, home delivery of fresh or frozen product or door-
to-door solicitation of meat and seafood items.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-2202 repealed; new Sec. 14-2203 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2204.   ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY LICENSE.
   (a)   Applications for all temporary food service, temporary retail sales,
or temporary mobile retail sales shall be submitted at least five (5) business
days prior to the event being attended, or such lesser time period as directed
by the regulatory authority.
   (b)   Licenses issued to temporary food service establishments shall be
valid for the dates stated on the license and shall expire no more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days after the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 2002-07-08; Sec. 14-2202 (a) repealed; new Sec. 14-2202 (a) enacted;
07/23/02)
   (c)   Licensed food service establishments wishing to participate in a
temporary food service event, which is beyond the scope of normal operations or
requires outside food preparation, shall obtain a temporary food service
license. There shall be no fee for those establishments currently licensed with
approved kitchen facilities; provided, however, that said event takes place on
the grounds of the licensed facility.
   (d)   Unlicensed applicants or licensed establishments without kitchen
facilities shall meet the requirements for temporary food service and will not
be exempt from the fees associated with the license.
   (e)   The health authority shall provide consultation and/or on-site
inspections for each temporary food establishment as many times as necessary
for the enforcement of this ordinance and the Food Code. All violations shall
be corrected immediately. If violations are not corrected, the application for
temporary food service establishment license may be denied and the food
establishment shall immediately cease food service operation, until all
corrections can be made.
   (f)   Any person found to be operating a temporary food service
establishment without having applied for a license and approved to operate may
be subject to a penalty fee.
   (g)   Any event which has a minimum of three (3) food vendors, including
mobile units, must designate an Event Coordinator. The Event Coordinator shall
complete and submit an “Event Coordinator Information” sheet. The Event
Coordinator Information sheet must be submitted at least ten (10) business days
before the scheduled event. Any changes to the Event Coordinator Information
sheet shall be filed not less than five (5) business days prior to the event or
as soon as possible before the event.
   (h)   Applicants obtaining a temporary food service license shall meet the
requirements set forth in this ordinance and the Food Code.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; new Sec. 14-2204 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2205.   ISSUANCE OF MULTI-EVENT TEMPORARY LICENSE.
   (a)   Multi-event temporary license applies only to multi-event temporary
food service establishments as defined by this ordinance.
   (b)   A multi-event temporary license shall only be valid for a maximum of
twenty (20) events.
   (c)   A multi-event temporary food service establishment shall meet the
requirements set forth in this ordinance and provide the following:
      1.   Completion of forms provided by the health authority;
      2.   Properly prepared plans to scale and specifications, including
location of equipment set up and arrangement for all potential set-ups;
      3.   Proposed menu;
      4.   Proof of access to a commissary;
      5.   A list of all known events and locations;
      6.   Event list must be updated as new events are scheduled; and
      7.   Any other information the health authority deems necessary to
evaluate the application.
   (d)   Licenses issued to multi-event temporary food service establishments
shall be valid from the date of issue and shall expire on April 30th of the
following calendar year.
   (e)   Any person found to be operating a multi-event temporary food service
establishment without having applied for a multi-event temporary food service
establishment license and approved to operate may be subject to a penalty fee.
   (f)   The health authority shall provide consultation and/or on-site
inspections for each multi-event temporary food establishment as many times as
necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance, but at minimum, two (2)
inspections per license year.
   (g)   All violations shall be corrected immediately. If violations are not
corrected, the application for multi-event temporary food service establishment
license may be denied or suspended and the food establishment shall immediately
cease food service operations, until all corrections can be made.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; new Sec. 14-2205 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-2206.   LICENSE FEES & PAYMENT.
Food Establishments:                                                                  
Category I (High Risk)                                                               $400
Category II (Medium Risk)                                                            $300
Category III (Low Risk)                                                              $150
Mobile Units:                                                                         
Category I (High Risk)                                                               $150
Category II (Medium Risk)                                                            $125
Category III (Low Risk)                                                              $100
Commissary:                                                                           
Host Kitchen (serving more than 3 businesses)                                        $400
Category I (High Risk)                                                               $150
Category II (Medium Risk)                                                            $125
Category III (Low Risk)                                                              $100
Temporary Events:                                                                     
Single Day Event                                                                     $35
Single Day Event (ONLY pre-packaged, Non PHFs)                                       $25
2-14 Day Event                                                                       $70
Fundraiser/Bake Sale                                                                 $0
Multi Event Temporary (i.e. Mercado on 5th):                                          
Multi-Event (Max. 20 Events)                                                         $200
Multi-Event (Max. 20 Events) (ONLY pre-packaged, Non PHFs)                           $150
Annual                                                                               $175
Annual (ONLY pre-packaged, Non PHFs)                                                 $125
Schools (ONLY Public Schools)                                                        $0
Kiosks:                                                                               
Kiosk                                                                                $100
Kiosk (ONLY pre-packaged, Non PHFs)                                                  $40
Customer Convenience Counter                                                         $75
Other Fees:                                                                           
Late Temporary Fee                                                                   $50
Non Compliance Fee (issued on 4th and subsequent re-checks)                          $50
Re-Opening Inspection                                                                $47
                                                                                     2x the
Penalty Fee (operating without a valid license)                                      applicable
                                                                                     fee
   (a)   Annual license fees shall be assessed for each permitted establishment 
fees shall be based on the risk classification of the establishment.
   (b)   Any and all schools serving food on a temporary basis shall be issued a
license, but shall pay no fee. All schools obtaining a license shall be required to   
meet all of the provisions and requirements of this ordinance and the Food Code.
   (c)   Any person failing to obtain a license prior to operating any type of food
establishment shall be assessed two (2) times the applicable fee in addition to any   
other fine, penalty or cost assessed for violating this ordinance.
   (d)   Before any class of license is issued pursuant to this division, the
applicant therefore shall pay the license and/or option fee prescribed in this
section as well as any outstanding fines, fees, taxes, bills or invoices due and      
owing the City by the licensee or its partners if the license is a partnership or
its stockholders if the licensee is a corporation.
                                                                                     
 
(Ord. No. 2003-03-02; Sec.
14-2203 (a) repealed; new Sec.
14-2203 (a) enacted; 03/04/03); (Ord. No. 3041-2004; Sec.
14-2203 (a) repealed; new Sec.
14-2203 (a) enacted; 07/20/04); (Ord. No. 3070-2004; Sec.
14-2203 repealed; new Sec.
14-2203 enacted; 09/14/04) ; (Ord. No. 3036-2008; Sec.
14-2203(a)(1)-(3) repealed; new
14-2203(a)(1)-(3) enacted; 06/03/08); (Ord. No. 3034-2009; Sec.
14-2203(a)(1)(2)(3) repealed; new Sec.
14-2203(a)(1)(2)(3) enacted; 102/7/09); (Ord. No. 3026-2016; Sec.
14-2203(d) enacted; 10/11/16); (Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec.
14-2203 repealed; new Sec.
14-2206 enacted; 02/21/23)
DIVISION 3. COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS
SEC. 14-2300.   COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS.
   Cottage Food Operations must operate in accordance with of the Food Handling
Enforcement Act 410 ILCS 625 and register annually with the Rock Island County
Health Department.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-2300 - 14-2305 repealed; new Sec. 14-2300 enacted;
02/21/23)
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 14-3100.   RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Whenever the inspection for renewal of a license reveals serious or
repeated violations of this ordinance, the license shall not be issued and the
health authority shall notify the applicant immediately thereof. Any such
notice shall state the reasons for not renewing the license. All re-licensing
inspections must be completed at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to date
of renewal to allow said facility ample time to correct documented violations.
Such notice shall also state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be
provided for the applicant at a time and place designated by the health
authority. Such hearing shall be scheduled not later than fifteen (15) calendar
days from the date of the notice. A license which has expired shall be removed
from the establishment by the health authority.
   (b)   If the applicant for renewal of a license provides adequate
documentation of a reasonable time schedule for repair or correction of non-
serious repeat violations, the health authority may renew the license. Failure
to comply with the time schedule for corrections may result in immediate
suspension of the license to operate as provided herein.
SEC. 14-3101.   COMPLIANCE CONFERENCE.
   Whenever a license holder fails to comply with a notice to correct on a
repeat basis, that license holder may be required to attend a compliance
conference. Said conference shall be conducted before the building official and
other parties deemed necessary by the health authority and the license holder.
The intent of this conference shall be to achieve compliance with this
ordinance prior to invoking Sec.
14-3102 of this article.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3101 amended; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3102.   SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the health authority for
failure of the license holder to comply with the requirements of this
ordinance. Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any
notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the license holder
or operator shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of a
notice, immediately suspended or that the suspension shall be effective on a
specific future date, and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if
a written request for a hearing is filed with the health authority.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, should the
health authority find unsanitary or other conditions which, in the judgment of
the health authority, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health ,
the license may be immediately suspended. The license may be suspended without
warning, notice, or hearing, and upon issuance of a written notice to the
license holder. The notice shall be issued to the license holder or operator
citing the conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If deemed
necessary, such order shall state that the license is immediately suspended,
and all food operations are to cease at once. Any person to whom such an order
is issued shall comply immediately; but upon written petition to the health
authority, the license holder shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
practicable.
SEC. 14-3103.   REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for a re-inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
license. This application shall include a statement signed by the applicant
that, in said applicant's opinion, the conditions causing suspension of the
license have been corrected. The application shall also contain any necessary
documentation required by the health authority to assure compliance with the
notice to correct. The applicant must also remit payment of the re-inspection
fee in the amount of forty-seven dollars ($47.00) prior to scheduling of the
date of the re-inspection. Within three (3) business days following receipt of
a written request, the health authority shall make a re-inspection. If the
applicant is found to be in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance,
the license shall be reinstated.
SEC. 14-3104.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   For high risk or repeated violations of any of the requirements of
this ordinance, or for interference with the health authority in the
performance of any assigned duties, the license may be permanently revoked
after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health authority.
   (b)   Prior to the revocation provided for in Sec.
14-3104(a) above, the health authority shall notify the license holder in
writing stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and
advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5)
calendar days following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing
is filed with the health authority by the license holder within such five (5)
calendar day period. A license may be suspended for cause pending its
revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
   (c)   In lieu of revocation, a facility may be granted a conditional
license. An agreement shall be submitted by the license holder stating the
actions that said license holder deems necessary to provide a continuing
sanitation program. Based on approval of the agreement from the health
authority, the license shall be removed and replaced with a new license marked
as "Conditional." The conditional license shall then be in effect until the
April 30th licensing date. Failure to comply with the terms of the written
agreement for continued compliance shall cause the license to be permanently
revoked pursuant to this Sec.
14-3104.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3104(a) amended; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3105.   NOTICES.
   A notice provided for in this ordinance is properly serviced when it is
delivered to the license holder or the person in charge, or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the license holder.
   A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the health authority.
A completed inspection report form or a letter is considered proper forms of
notice.
SEC. 14-3106.   HEARINGS, IN GENERAL.
   Hearings provided for in this division shall be conducted through the
Municipal Code Enforcement System (“MUNICES”) at a place and time designated by
the health authority. Based upon the record of the hearing, the MUNICES hearing
officer shall make written findings and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any
official notice or order considered in the hearing.
SEC. 14-3107.   VIOLATIONS; FINES.
   (a)   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any person who
commits an offense, violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of the Food Code or the standards and regulations adopted by the
Food Code shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   On the fourth (4th) and subsequent follow up inspections, the license
holder will be responsible for paying a penalty fee of $50 for each inspection.
   (c)   Vendors that do not submit the temporary event application at least
five (5) business days prior to the event being attended will be subject to pay
a late fee of $50 in addition to the application fee.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03; Ord. No.
3033-2007; Art. III repealed; new Art. III enacted; 10/09/07; Ord. No. 3004-
2023; Sec. 14-3107(a) amended; Sec. 14-3107(b), (c) enacted; 02/21/23)
DIVISION 2. INSPECTIONS.
SEC. 14-3200.   INSPECTION FREQUENCY.
   The health authority shall inspect each food establishment within Moline in
accordance with requirements set forth by the Illinois Department of Public
Health. Additional inspections shall be performed as often as deemed necessary
by the health authority for the enforcement of this ordinance. The health
authority, shall inspect each food establishment within the City of Moline as
follows:
   1.   Category I   three (3) times annually
   2.   Category II   two (2) times annually
   3.   Category III   one (1) time annually
However, the health authority shall inspect all categories and types of food
facilities as many times as they deem necessary to enforce the provisions
within this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3200 repealed; new Sec. 14-3200 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3201.   ACCESS INTO FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   The health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted
to enter at any reasonable time, but in no event less than all hours said
establishment is open for business, at any food establishment within Moline for
the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this ordinance.
The health authority shall be permitted to examine the records of the
establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased,
received or used, and persons employed.
   (b)   If access is denied, the health authority shall inform the person in
charge that:
      1.   Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a license
to operate as specified in this ordinance, and
      2.   If access is denied, an order issued by the appropriate authority
allowing access, hereinafter referred to as an injunction or other legal
remedy, may be obtained according to law, and
      3.   Failure to allow access may result in immediate license suspension.
   (c)   If after the health authority presents credentials and provides
notice, explains the authority upon which access is requested, and makes a
final request for access, and the person in charge continues to refuse access,
the health authority shall provide details of the denial of access on an
inspection report form.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3201 repealed; new Sec. 14-3201 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3202.   REPORT OF INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings
shall be recorded on an inspection report form. The inspection remarks shall be
written to reference by item number the item violated, and shall state the
correction to be made. A copy (hard copy or electronic copy) of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the
establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection
report is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure
to any person who requests it according to law.
   (b)   Refusal to sign the inspection report will not affect the license
holder’s obligation to correct the violations noted in the inspection report
within the time frames specified in the report.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3202 repealed; new Sec. 14-3202 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3203.   CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found. Correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified in accordance with
the following provisions:
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, including but not limited; to
severe pest infestation (rodent or insect), no running water, complete lack of
refrigeration, no electricity, or sewage backup into the establishment, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service or sales operations.
      (2)   All violations of Priority item(s) and/or a Priority Foundation
item(s) shall be corrected and corrective actions (i.e. risk control plan/
standard operating procedure) must be implemented as part of a Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan provision that is not in compliance with
its critical limit as soon as possible. These corrections and implementations
shall be done at the time of inspection if possible, or by a time frame agreed
upon with the health authority, but at no time to exceed a period of ten (10)
calendar days.
      (3)   When Core item(s) are documented as a violation during an
inspection, such item(s) must be corrected at the time of inspection if
possible, or by a time frame agreed upon by the health authority, but at least
by the time of the next routine inspection.
      (4)   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all
violations shall be corrected immediately. If violations are not corrected, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized
to resume by the health authority.
      (5)   Failure of the license holder or person in charge to comply with
any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service
operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time
limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the
health authority within ten (10) calendar days following cessation of
operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held
within three (3) business days of receipt of the request.
      (6)   Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of
"Correction of Violations" to cease operations, it shall not resume operations
until it is shown on the follow-up inspection that conditions responsible for
the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for a follow-up
inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec.
14-3203 repealed; new Sec.
14-3203 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3204.   EXAMINATION & CONDEMNATION OF FOOD AND/OR EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Food may be examined or sampled by the health authority as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration. The health authority may,
upon written notice to the license holder or person in charge, place a hold
order on any food which the health authority determines, or has probable cause
to believe, to be adulterated. Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to
be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter a hold
order notice or tag placed on food by the health authority. Neither such food
nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repackaged or reprocessed,
altered, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the health authority,
except on an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. After the license
holder or person in charge has had a hearing as provided in this ordinance, and
on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the basis of
examination in the event that a written request for a hearing is not received
within ten (10) business days, the health authority may vacate the hold order
or may, by written notice, direct the license holder or person in charge to
denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance. Such order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10) business days.
   (b)   Where equipment used in the preparation of food products is found to
be in a state of disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, such
equipment shall be taken out of use and a hold order placed on said items by
the health authority. Such equipment may not be put back into service until
written permission is obtained from the health authority. It shall be unlawful
for any person to move or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on equipment
by the health authority. Such equipment shall not be altered, disposed of, or
destroyed without permission of the health authority except on an order in a
court of competent jurisdiction. After the license holder or person in charge
has had a hearing as provided in this ordinance and on the basis of the
evidence produced at such hearing or on the basis of examination in the event
that a written request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) business
days, the health authority may vacate the hold order or may, by written notice,
direct the license holder or person in charge to remove such equipment or bring
it into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Such order shall be
stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within ten
(10) business days.
SEC. 14-3205.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE OF CITY JURISDICTION.
   Food from food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health
authority of the City may be sold within the City if the food service
establishment conforms to the provisions of this article or to substantially
equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with the
requirements of this article, the health authority may accept reports from
responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service
establishments are located.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3205 amended; 02/21/23)
DIVISION 3. ADDITIONAL TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
SEC. 14-3300.   FOOD HANDLER CLASS.
   The health authority may order any food handler, manager, or establishment
owner to attend an immediate food handler training course when, in the judgment
of the health authority, the work habits of said food handler constitute a
hazard to public health. Fees may be charged to offset any costs incurred by
the health authority.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3300 repealed; new Sec. 14-3300 enacted 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3301.   CERTIFIED FOOD PROTECTION MANAGER.
   (a)   Each food service establishment, except certain types of
establishments deemed by the health authority to pose minimal risk of causing,
or contributing to, foodborne illness based on the nature of the operation and
extent of food preparation, shall be under the operational supervision of a
Certified Food Protection Manager who has completed a minimum of 8 hours of
Department Approved Training for food protection manager certification or
attended an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) - Accredited Training,
inclusive of the examination by the certification exam provider accredited
under standards developed and adopted by the Conference for Food Protection or
its successor organization. The certification shall be valid for five (5) years
and shall not be transferable from the individual to whom it was issued.
   (b)   Each food establishment shall maintain on its premises a separate file
(hard copy/electronic format) containing proof of Certified Food Protection
Managers certificates. This file shall be accessible to the health authority
for review at each inspection or upon request.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3301 enacted; 02/21/23)
SEC. 14-3302.   ALLERGEN AWARENESS TRAINING.
   (a)   All Certified Food Protection Managers employed by a non-franchise
Category I establishment must receive or obtain training in basic allergen
awareness principles within thirty (30) days after employment and every three
(3) years thereafter. Training programs must be accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or another reputable accreditation agency
under the ASTM International (Standard Practice for Certificate Programs).
   (b)   Each food establishment shall maintain on its premises a separate file
(hard copy/electronic format) containing proof that the Certified Food
Protection Managers are trained in basic allergen awareness principles. This
file shall be accessible to the health authority for review at each inspection
or upon request.
(Ord. No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-3302 enacted; 02/21/23)
ARTICLE IV. EQUIPMENT & PLAN APPROVAL
SEC. 14-4100.   PLAN REVIEW OF FUTURE CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled, and
whenever an existing structure is converted for use as a food establishment,
properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted to the health
authority for review and approval is required before work begins.
   (b)   At a minimum, a food service establishment that is constructed or re-
modeled shall have the following:
      1.   A ware washing sink with three compartments. Each compartment shall
be sized to allow for the immersion of the largest piece of equipment washed,
including drain boards on either side. A three compartment sink is required as
a back-up ware washing option for those facilities that have automatic ware
washing machines;
      2.   A food preparation sink for produce washing, thawing of food
products etc.;
      3.   A utility/mop sink;
      4.   Handwashing stations in each food preparation and ware-washing area;
and
      5.   Establishments that upgrade their operations to higher risk
categories after opening may be required to install additional sinks/equipment.
   (c)   Before such work begins, food establishments shall submit the
following to the health authority for review and approval:
      1.   A completed Plan Review Application Packet as provided by the health
authority;
      2.   All required HACCP plans if applicable;
      3.   The plans and specifications shall include the proposed menu, hours
of operation, layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, construction materials of
work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
All applicable food service equipment shall be of a quality as approved by the
National Sanitation Foundation (N.S.F.) or equivalent. New equipment which is
approved for a certain use by N.S.F. shall be automatically approved by the
health authority for said use. Other applicable equipment or used equipment
shall be evaluated for approval by the health authority;
      4.   The health authority shall approve the plans and specifications if
they meet the requirements of this ordinance. No food service establishment or
retail food store shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health
authority. The health authority may waive the submission of plans and
specifications provided it is found that the nature of the work is such that
reviewing of plans or specifications is not necessary to obtain compliance with
this ordinance;
      5.   Any other information the health authority deems necessary to
evaluate the application; and
      6.   See Section
14-2203 of this ordinance for additional information required for mobile units.
   (d)   A Pre-operational inspection shall be conducted by the health
authority prior to the beginning or resumption of operations to determine
compliance with approved plans, specifications, and the requirements of this
ordinance prior to the issuance or reinstatement of a license to operate.
(Ord. No. 97-6-3; Chapter 14 repealed; new Chapter 14 enacted; 06/17/97; Ord.
No. 3004-2023; Sec. 14-4100 repealed; new Sec. 14-4100 enacted; 02/21/23)
CHAPTER 15
GARBAGE AND TRASH
Note: See end of chapter for list of Chapter amendments
   Art. I.   In General, §
15-1100 - §
15-1106
   Art. II.   Containers and Collections
      Div. 1. Refuse Containers, §
15-2100 - §
15-2104
      Div. 2. Refuse Collections, §
15-2200 - §
15-2205
   Art. III.   Private Scavengers, §
15-3100 - §
15-3104
   Art. IV.   Sanitary Landfill, §
15-4100
   Art. V.   Pollution Control Facility Siting §
15-5100 - §
15-5115
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 15-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
assigned to them:
   (1)   Administrative Approval shall mean any building, zoning, health and
grading permit and any license from the City, and any permit, license or other
administrative action from the Illinois Department of Environmental Protection
or other agency of the State of Illinois or the United States of America that
is required prior to any person or bodies politic or corporate, dumping or
placing refuse on private or public property within the City.
   (2)   Appliance shall mean any household or office mechanical device or
apparatus, or instrument normally used in residential dwellings, that utilizes
a power supply, whether electrical or otherwise and which exceeds fifty (50)
pounds net weight. Examples of an appliance are, but not limited to:
refrigerator, freezer, range, stove, washer, dryer, hot water heater, air
conditioner, humidifier, dehumidifier, dishwasher, water cooler, and microwave
oven. Altering, disassembling, or modifying appliances to reduce their weight
below fifty (50) pounds total assembled weight is strictly prohibited. 
   (3)   Ashes shall mean and include the ashes of wood, paper, coal, coke or
charcoal and the residue resulting from the combustion of any material or
substance.
   (4)   Automated Tipper Cart shall mean a specialized container, either
ninety-six (96) gallons or forty-eight (48) gallons in size, owned by the City
and provided to the City’s residential customers for use in storing and
transporting household garbage for weekly collection.
   (5)   Biomedical Waste shall mean any waste material which was used in the
treatment of humans or animals.
   (6)   Brush shall mean trimmings from trees, shrubs, bushes or other woody
plants.
   (7)   Bulky Item shall mean an item or collection of items that does not fit
in a City-provided automated tipper cart, is not a tire or an appliance as
defined in this chapter, does not exceed two and a half (2.5) cubic yards in
volume or 100 pounds, and does not meet the definition of a paid brush
collection, yard waste, commercial waste, or hazardous waste. Each additional
two and a half (2.5) cubic yards/100 pounds will be charged $40.
   (8)   Commercial Waste shall mean trade wastes such as packing paper,
cardboard, excelsior, straw, crates, boxes, acids, oils, grease, chemicals,
tires, vehicle and aircraft parts, discarded merchandise, glass, metals, wire,
crockery, ashes, cinders, garbage, food and other waste materials, including
construction waste, such as earth, metals used in plating, wood, plastics,
tile, brick, concrete, terra cotta, slate, marble, and minerals; and waste
produced from a residential or commercial property of more than five (5) units;
but shall not include any hazardous waste as defined in this chapter, federal
or state law or regulation.
   (9)   Complex shall mean a group of two (2) or more buildings, developed as
an integrated unit and under single management or control.
   (10)   Construction Waste shall mean excess or discarded construction
materials associated with a construction project or home repair.
   (11)   Curbside shall mean within five (5) feet of the lot line when such a
lot line abuts a public alley (if the property is served by such an alley) and
shall mean within three (3) feet of the edge of the paved portion of public
street, or at the location designated by the director of public works or his
designee to be the most suitable for collection and that best facilitates the
City’s automated collection equipment.
   (12)   Curbside Bulky Recyclable Materials shall mean any and all materials
authorized for curbside placement and special collection by an authorized
vendor or agent (“vendor”) of the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency
pursuant to the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency’s white goods and
used tire program. Said materials shall include appliances and tires as defined
in this chapter. Materials prohibited from such collection shall include but
not be limited to televisions, hand held appliances, VCRs, garbage disposals,
business equipment and computers.
   (13)   Curbside Bulky Recycling shall mean any and all recyclable bulky
materials authorized for curbside placement and special collection by an
authorized vendor of the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency pursuant to
the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency’s white goods and used tire
program. All materials to be collected under this definition shall be per
Section
15-1100(12) above.
   (14)   Curbside Recyclable Materials shall mean any and all materials
authorized for placement in designated curbside recycling carts as provided by
any outside vendor or agent (“vendor”) authorized by action of the City Council
to collect curbside recyclable materials for the City; said materials shall
include newspaper, newspaper inserts, magazines, paper bags, telephone books,
catalogs, office paper, junk mail, envelopes of any type, corrugated cardboard,
chipboard, wet strength carrier stock (chip board), frozen food paper packages,
juice boxes, bulky cardboard, all #1 PET plastic containers, all #2 HDPE
plastic containers, all #3 (V-vinyl/polyvinyl Chloride-PVC) plastic containers,
all #4 LDPE plastic containers, all #5 (PP-polypropylene) plastic containers,
all #6 (PS-polystyrene) plastic containers, all #7 – other plastic, formed
steel containers, aluminum cans, tin/steel/bi-metal cans, glass, aseptic
packaging, or any other item characterized as a recyclable commodity.
   (15)   Curbside Recycling shall mean a single stream method of collection of
residentially generated recyclable materials by which the owner(s) or occupant
(s) of certain residential properties (single-family residences and residential
buildings of five (5) dwelling units or less) may dispose of curbside
recyclable materials by placing same in a City vendor designated curbside
recycling cart for bi-weekly collection, removal and transport to a recycling
process center by the City’s vendor All materials to be collected under this
definition shall be per Section
15-1100(14) above.
   (16)   Curbside Recycling Cart shall mean a cart designated and provided for
the collection of curbside recyclable materials.
   (17)   Drop-off Recycling Bin shall mean any bin designated and provided by
the City for the collection of recyclable materials pursuant to the Rock Island
County Waste Management Agency recycling drop-off collection system.
   (18)   Drop-off Recyclable Materials shall mean any and all materials
authorized for placement in the City’s drop-off recycling bins pursuant to the
Rock Island County Waste Management Agency recycling drop-off collection
system; said materials include without limitation co-mingled rigid containers
(plastics #1-7 including without limitation milk jugs, food containers,
detergent, shampoo and liter bottles, yogurt cups; metals of tin and aluminum;
glass of green, brown and clear colors) and co-mingled fiber (corrugated
cardboard, chipboard, newspapers, magazines, mixed office paper, phonebooks and
brown paper bags).
   (19)   Dumpster shall mean any commercial refuse container with a capacity
of at least a one (1) yard capacity and a maximum of six (6) yards capacity and
shall be equipped with a hinged lid, wheels and such other equipment as needed
for sanitary mechanical dumping. 
   (20)   Garbage or Household Garbage shall mean solid waste normally
associated with the operation of a household, including food waste, paper
goods, and other disposables not associated with recyclable materials, yard
maintenance, yard waste or hazardous waste.
   (21)   Hazardous Waste shall mean a waste, or combination of wastes, which
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible, illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise managed, and which has been identified, by
characteristics or listing, as hazardous under Section 3001 of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, P.L. 94-580 or under regulations of the
Pollution Control Board. (420 ILCS 20/3). Examples of such waste or materials
shall include but not be limited to batteries, motor oil, oil base paint,
insecticides, herbicides, tires, roofing materials, acids, caustics, solvents,
and other similar materials. Hazardous waste shall also include but not be
limited to materials that are hazardous by reason of their pathological,
explosive, radiological, or toxic characteristics.
   (22)   Lifter Device shall mean a device attached to a City sanitation truck
for the purpose of lifting and dumping automated tipper carts.
   (23)   Miscellaneous Rubbish shall mean household items or substances
discarded during a scheduled bulky item collection and shall include but not be
limited to paper, rags, cardboard, clothing, bottles, crockery, metals,
plastics, tin items, and other household items, but does not include
appliances, tires, yard waste or hazardous waste.
   (24)   Paid Brush Collection shall mean the prepaid collection of brush that
is larger than four (4) feet in length and four (4) inches in diameter.
   (25)   Private Scavenger shall mean any person engaged in the collection,
removal, transportation or disposal of residential refuse and/or commercial
waste.
   (26)   Refuse shall be the generic term and shall include within its meaning
garbage or household garbage, recyclable materials, yard waste, ashes,
miscellaneous rubbish, commercial waste, and construction waste.
   (27)   Residential Refuse shall mean garbage or household garbage,
recyclable materials, yard waste, ashes and/or miscellaneous rubbish
originating from a single-family residence or a residential building of five
(5) dwelling units or less, and construction waste when said construction waste
is the result of construction work done by the owner or the occupant of the
residential premises.
   (28)   Tire shall mean a residentially generated vehicle passenger tire with
the rim removed.
SEC. 15-1101.   ADMINISTRATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the director of
public works or said director’s designee.
SEC. 15-1102.   VACATION OF PREMISES.
   No person occupying or controlling any premises or building shall vacate the
premises before causing all refuse to be removed from the premises and disposed
of in a lawful manner.
SEC. 15-1103.   VEHICLES CARRYING REFUSE.
   No person shall convey or cause to be conveyed within the City any refuse
that is putrid, offensive in odor, or constitutes a health hazard without all
necessary administrative approval and without using a tightly closed container
or specially constructed conveyance authorized for such use by the
administrative approval.
SEC. 15-1104.   DUMPING IN THE CITY.
   For public health and safety, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump or
place any refuse or other offensive substances within the City except in an
area having received all necessary administrative approvals for operation of a
sanitary landfill.
SEC. 15-1105.   SCAVENGING OR THEFT OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No unauthorized person shall scavenge, pilfer, disturb or remove
(hereinafter: “scavenge”) recyclable materials once those materials have been
placed for collection in any of the City’s drop-off recycling bins, a curbside
recycling cart or at the curb for special collection. All recyclable materials
placed for collection in City recycling bins, in curbside recycling carts or at
the curb for special collection shall thereupon become the property of the
City, the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency or their authorized
vendors, and shall not be considered abandoned in any respect, and only persons
authorized by the City, the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency, or
their authorized vendors shall collect or handle recyclable materials once
those materials have been placed appropriately for collection.
   (b)   Vendors authorized by the City or the Rock Island County Waste
Management Agency for recycling of recyclable materials within the City shall
be exempt from the restrictions of this section.
SEC. 15-1106.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates Section
15-1105 of this article, pertaining to scavenging or theft of recyclable
materials, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for the first offense and not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second offense and each subsequent offense committed
within any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Each day during which or on
which any person violates this article shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (b)   Any person who violates any of the remaining provisions of this
article shall be administered as either a littering offense pursuant to Section
22-6100 et seq. of this Code or as a violation of the Health Code, as
determined by the health officer. Penalties and remedies shall be as provided
therein; provided, however, that any person or property violating this article
shall, in addition to any other fine, penalty or requirement of this Code, pay
the City no less than a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) administrative fee or the
complete and actual costs, charges and expenses incurred by the City in
remedying or alleviating such violation or nuisance, whichever amount is
greater.
ARTICLE II. CONTAINERS AND COLLECTIONS
DIVISION 1. REFUSE CONTAINERS
SEC. 15-2100.   REQUIRED CONTAINERS FOR PROPERTY TYPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep refuse on said person’s premises
except in the appropriate container as prescribed in this section. The required
containers are as follows:
   (a)   Type of building.
   (1)   Single-family residence. City-owned and provided automated tipper
carts will be used for collection at single-family residences located within
the City and pursuant to the provisions of Section
15-2101. The City will provide curbside recycling carts to single-family
residences within the City for the collection of curbside recyclable materials
pursuant to the provisions of Section
15-2102.
   (2)   Residential buildings of five (5) dwelling units or less. City-owned
and provided automated tipper carts will be used for collection at residential
buildings with five (5) dwelling units or less, and the City’s vendor for
curbside recycling will provide curbside recycling carts to the owner or the
owner’s agent of said residential buildings for the collection of curbside
recyclable materials. The owner or the owner’s agent shall maintain or require
the occupant of each dwelling unit to maintain, at the occupant’s registered
collection address, the automated tipper cart and the curbside recycling cart
assigned to each unit, and shall be responsible for selecting the tipper cart
size for each unit. Additional tipper carts may be requested from the City in
accordance with Section
15-2101.
   (3)   Residential buildings of more than five (5) dwelling units. Dumpsters
will be used for collection at residential buildings or complexes with more
than five (5) dwelling units. The owner or the owner’s agent shall provide no
more than one (1) dumpster with a minimum capacity of one (1) cubic yard per
every six (6) dwelling units or portion thereof contained in a residential
building or complex with more than five (5) dwelling units. The City will not
provide dumpster collection or collection of refuse placed in dumpsters; said
collection shall be the responsibility of the owner or the owner’s agent.
   (4)   Commercial and industrial buildings. Dumpsters will be used for
collection at commercial and industrial buildings. The owner or occupant, or
the agent of the owner or occupant, of any commercial or industrial building
shall provide a sufficient number of dumpsters so that all commercial waste can
be stored therein during the interval between collections; however, the
director of public works or said director’s designee shall provide by rule or
regulation exemption for the storage of commercial waste in dumpsters when said
commercial waste is unsuitable for containerization and the open storage of
such commercial waste will not be a threat to the public health. No refuse of
any type created by a commercial enterprise will be collected by the City; said
collection shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant, or the agent
of the owner or occupant, of the commercial or industrial building.
      a.   Food establishments with drive-through service.
         1.   A food establishment is defined by Sec.
4-2100(4) of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
         2.   In addition to the commercial buildings requirements of this
section, each food establishment with drive-through service shall also have a
minimum of one (1) refuse container located within its drive-through lane
beyond the pickup window so that the container is accessible to the
establishment’s patrons from within their vehicles. Said container shall be of
metal construction or other material designed for outdoor use and shall be for
the disposal of refuse related to the establishment, including food and
beverage waste, paper, straws and other plastic products, and other such waste
materials.
         3.   Any new food establishment with drive-through service must comply
with the requirements of subsection 2. above prior to the opening of the
establishment. All food establishments with drive-through service in operation
at the time of this ordinance adoption shall comply with the requirements of
subsection 2. within eighteen (18) months of the effective date of this
ordinance.
         4.   The owner or occupant, or the agent of the owner or occupant, of
a food establishment with drive-through service shall keep the establishment’s
premises, including the parking area and adjacent public right-of-way, free
from all rubbish, waste products and debris, including those referenced above,
at all times.
   (b)   Type of refuse.
   (1)   Household garbage and commercial waste shall be placed in either an
automated tipper cart or a dumpster as required in Section
15-2100(a) above. The weight and volume of refuse placed in an automated tipper
cart shall not exceed the maximum capacity of the cart.
   (2)   Curbside bulky recyclable materials shall be placed at the location
designated for special collection by the Rock Island County Waste Management
Agency or its authorized vendor.
   (3)   Curbside recyclable materials shall be placed in a curbside recycling
cart as required in Section
15-2100(a) above. The weight and volume of refuse placed in a curbside
recycling cart shall not exceed the minimum capacity of the cart.
   (4)   Miscellaneous rubbish/bulky items and construction waste. When
miscellaneous rubbish and construction waste is generated by the owner or
occupant of a residence pursuant to the owner’s or occupant’s own labor and the
rubbish and construction waste exceeds the capacity of the owner’s or
occupant’s normal automated waste collection, said rubbish and construction
waste shall be scheduled, prepared and placed for collection in accordance with
the rules and regulations adopted by the director of public works or said
director’s designee for collection of miscellaneous rubbish/bulky items, as
follows:
      a.   Types of materials which cannot be practically collected as part of
the weekly scheduled City collection;
      b.   Procedures by which special collections are requested;
      c.   Preparation and placement of construction waste for City collection,
provided said    construction waste is a result of construction work done by
the occupant of the premises;    and
      d.   Preparation and placement of miscellaneous rubbish that is not
suitable for placement in an automated tipper cart.
      Said rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk at least
ten (10) days prior to their effective date. Any such rules adopted by the
director of public works or said director’s designee shall provide that those
materials listed in said rules as not capable of being placed for weekly
collection by the City shall be collected by the City by special collection in
accordance with the procedures contained in said rules.
      Containerized rubbish and debris placed for miscellaneous rubbish/bulky
item collection may not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, or more than two
(2) cubic yards in volume, and must be organized for handling and disposal by
City public works’ crews. When generated by a contractor, miscellaneous rubbish
and construction waste disposal shall be the responsibility of the contractor
creating the waste.
   (c)   Exception - Compost. Yard waste may be stored on premises if stored in
properly maintained compost piles.
SEC. 15-2101.   AUTOMATED TIPPER CARTS.
   (a)   The City will provide, at no charge, one (1) ninety-six (96) gallon
automated tipper cart to each residence and one (1) ninety-six (96) gallon
automated tipper cart per unit to each residential building of five (5)
dwelling units or less. The property owner or occupant of the residence, or the
owner of a residential building of five (5) dwelling units or less, may request
a forty-eight (48) gallon cart in lieu of the ninety-six (96) gallon cart by
completing a waiver for same at the City’s accounts and finance department or
public works department. A second and/or additional cart may be requested and
will be provided by the City upon payment to the City of a prepaid fee of
seventy-eight dollars and 96/100 ($78.96); an annual administrative fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged to cover the extra volume of any
additional cart and will be added to the property owner’s or occupant’s City
utility bill. In special circumstances, two (2) forty-eight (48) gallon carts
may be substituted for a single ninety-six (96) gallon cart upon request and
when the director of public works or said director’s designee, in said
director’s or designee’s sole discretion, determines that it is in the best
interest of the City to do so.
   (b)   Collection Location of Automated Tipper Carts.   For collection of the
automated tipper carts, the carts shall be placed at the location designated by
the director of public works or said director’s designee to be the most
suitable for collection and that best facilitates the City’s automated
collection equipment. The cart shall be placed at the designated location with
the cart’s lid facing the right-of-way and with a three (3) foot minimum
clearance on all sides of the cart, including clearance from any additional
automated tipper cart(s) or curbside recycling cart placed at that location. In
addition, residents shall keep the designated location free of debris, snow,
and any other matter that may hinder the City’s accessibility of the cart for
collection.
   (c)   Tampering with Automated Tipper Carts. Automated tipper carts are the
sole property of the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface a
City-provided automated tipper cart in any way, to cause damage to an automated
tipper cart by either intent or negligence, or to remove an automated tipper
cart, with the intent of theft, from the residence or residential customer to
which it was provided by the City. No unauthorized person shall open, pilfer,
disturb or remove an automated tipper cart that has been set out for collection
or otherwise scatter or disperse the contents of same or cause the scattering
or dispersing of the contents of same. No person shall remove or leave open an
automated tipper cart lid except for the purpose of depositing refuse therein
for collection thereof or for the cleaning thereof.
SEC. 15-2102.   CURBSIDE RECYCLING CARTS.
   (a)   The City shall provide, at no charge, one (1) ninety-five (95) gallon
curbside recycling cart to each single-family residence and one (1) ninety-five
(95) gallon curbside recycling cart per unit to each residential building of
five (5) dwelling units or less. The curbside recycling carts shall be blue or
a color approved by the director of public works or said director's designee,
and its exterior shall be emblazoned with the word "RECYCLE" and the recycling
logo, and directions for curbside collection. The property owner or occupant of
the residence, or the owner of a residential building of five (5) dwelling
units or less, may request a forty-eight (48) gallon cart in lieu of the
ninety-five (95) gallon cart by completing a waiver for same at the City's
accounts and finance department or public works department. A second and/or
additional cart may be requested and will be provided by the City upon payment
to the City of a prepaid fee of seventy-eight and 96/100 dollars ($78.96). In
special circumstances, two (2) forty-eight (48) gallon carts may be substituted
for a single ninety-five (95) gallon cart upon request and when the director of
public works or said director's designee, in said director's or designee's sole
discretion, determines that it is in the best interest of the City to do so.
   (b)   Fee for Curbside Recycling. The fee for curbside recycling of curbside
recyclable materials shall be three and 69/100 dollars ($3.69) per single-
family residence per month. Residential buildings of five (5) dwelling units or
less shall be charged three and 69/100 dollars ($3.69) per unit per month.
   A residential refuse collection fee of eleven and 77/100 dollars ($11.77)
per month will be combined with the curbside recycling fee of three and 69/100
dollars ($3.69) per month, and the combined fee will be added to the property's
monthly City utility bill. Said combined fee will be known as "solid waste
collection and recycling fee" of fifteen and 46/100 dollars ($15.46) per month,
and its payment shall be applied immediately after storm water fees and prior
to water or sewer charges.
   (c)   Collection Location of Curbside Recycling Carts. For collection of the
curbside recycling carts, the carts shall be placed at the location designated
by the director of public works or said director's designee to be the most
suitable for collection and that best facilitates the City's vendor's curbside
collection. The cart shall be placed at the designated location with the cart's
lid facing the right-of-way and with a three (3) foot minimum clearance on all
sides of the cart, including clearance of any automated tipper cart(s) placed
at that location. In addition, residents shall keep the designated location
free of debris, snow, and any other matter that may hinder the City's vendor's
accessibility to the curbside recycling cart for collection.
   (d)   Collection Schedule of Curbside Recycling Carts. Collection of
curbside recycling carts shall be by the City's vendor on a bi-weekly basis.
Collection shall be on the same day of the week as the City's collection of its
automated tipper carts and between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (e)   Tampering with Curbside Recycling Carts. Curbside recycling carts are
the sole property of the City's vendor. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deface such a cart in any way, to cause damage to such a cart by either intent
or negligence, or to remove a curbside recycling cart where such removal would
otherwise constitute theft under the City Code or the State of Illinois
Criminal Code, either and both as now existing or hereafter adopted. No
unauthorized person shall open, pilfer, disturb or remove a curbside recycling
cart that has been set out for collection or otherwise scatter or disperse the
contents of same or cause the scattering or dispersing of the contents of same.
No person shall remove or leave open a curbside recycling cart lid except for
the purpose of depositing materials therein for collection thereof or for the
cleaning thereof.
   (f)   Agreement. The agreement between the City and its vendor that provides
for the curbside recycling collection and services herein referenced shall be
filed with the City Clerk prior to its effective date.
(Ord. No. 3040-2023; Sec. 15-2102(b) amended; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3059-2023;
Sec. 15-2102(b) amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3036-2024; Sec. 15-2102(b)
repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 10/22/24; Ord. No. 3046-2025; Sec. 15-
2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 10/14/25)
SEC. 15-2103.   TIME FOR MAKING CONTAINERS AVAILABLE FOR COLLECTION.
   No container shall be placed at the location designated for curbside
collection or, in the case of a private collection, or a dumpster placed at the
collection location, any earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the day
of collection. On the day of collection, all containers shall be placed at the
curbside collection location or, in the case of private collection or a
dumpster placed at the collection location, before 6:00 a.m. During all times
other than those mentioned above, the containers shall be stored on private
property.
SEC. 15-2104.   PLACING CONTAINERS ON THE RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place a container for collection on the improved portion of
a street, alley, or sidewalk or in such a manner on any other portion of public
right-of-way or on other public property so as to constitute a danger to the
traveling public.
DIVISION 2. RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION
SEC. 15-2200.   FEE FOR RESIDENTIAL REFUSE COLLECTION.
   The fee for residential refuse collection shall be eleven and 77/100 dollars
($11.77) per single-family residence per month. Residential buildings of five
(5) dwelling units or less shall be charged eleven and 77/100 dollars ($11.77)
per unit per month. Said fee will be added to the property's monthly City
utility bill and will be combined with the recycling fee for curbside
recyclable materials of three and 69/100 dollars ($3.69). Said combined fee
will be known as "solid waste collection and recycling fee" of fifteen and 46/
100 dollars ($15.46) per month, and its payment shall be applied immediately
after stormwater fees and prior to water or sewer charges.
(Ord. No. 3040-2023; Sec. 15-2200 amended; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3059-2023; Sec.
15-2200 amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3036-2024; Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec.
15-2200 enacted; 10/22/24; Ord. No. 3046-2025; Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec.
15-2200 enacted; 10/14/25)
SEC. 15-2201.   PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL REFUSE.
   The City shall collect and dispose of all residential refuse, yard waste,
and miscellaneous rubbish and construction waste, provided, however, such
miscellaneous rubbish and construction waste is the result of construction work
done by the owner or occupant of the premises. The City’s vendor shall collect
curbside recyclable materials, and the Rock Island County Waste Management
Agency’s vendor shall perform special collection of curbside recyclable
materials. Said refuse, waste and curbside recyclable materials must be
properly prepared for collection and disposal and placed for collection as
provided below.
   (a)   Household Garbage.
   (1)   No person shall place household garbage out for collection unless it
has been properly prepared for collection in accordance with all administrative
requirements governing the collection of same. Collection may be denied until
all administrative requirements for the proper preparation of household garbage
for collection have been met. The City shall not collect any household garbage
placed for regularly scheduled collection in any container other than a City-
provided automated tipper cart. Exceptions to this subsection shall be given
when the director of public works or said director’s designee, in said
director’s or designee’s sole discretion, decides it is in the best interest of
the City to do so.
   (2)   Only household garbage contained inside of the City-provided automated
tipper cart or carts will be collected.
   (3)   Sharps. No person shall place refuse containing sharps such as
lancets, needles, syringes, or metals with sharp corners or sides in an
automated tipper cart without first properly preparing the sharps for
collection. Lancets, needles, and syringes shall be placed in puncture-proof
hard plastic or metal containers with corresponding lids affixed and reinforced
with tape. Metal sharps shall be placed in containers or have the edges
wrapped.
   (4)   Household garbage including body wastes from pets shall be wrapped or
placed in disposable containers before being placed into automated tipper carts
for collection.
   (5)   The automated tipper cart shall be placed at the point of collection
in accordance with the provisions of Section
15-2101(b) above.
   (6)   In no event shall the City be responsible for collecting or cleaning
up the contents of an automated tipper cart that has been improperly prepared
for collection and/or that has been spilled, emptied, or has otherwise leaked,
deteriorated, or disintegrated, including, without limitation, whether such
spillage is caused by weather or non-weather related reasons.
   (b)   Curbside Bulky Recyclable Materials.
   (1)   No person shall place curbside bulky recyclable materials out for
special curbside collection unless such materials have been properly prepared
for collection in accordance with the Rock Island County Waste Management
Agency’s white goods and used tire program. Collection may be denied until all
requirements for the proper preparation of curbside bulky recyclable materials
for collection have been met in accordance with the Rock Island County Waste
Management Agency’s white goods and used tire program.
   (2)   Curbside bulky recyclable materials shall be placed at the point of
collection in accordance with the provisions of Section
15-2100(b)(2) above.
   (c)   Curbside Recyclable Materials.
   (1)   No person shall place recyclable materials out for curbside collection
unless such materials have been properly prepared for collection in accordance
with all administrative requirements governing collection of same. Collection
may be denied until all administrative requirements for the proper preparation
of curbside recyclable materials for collection have been met. The City’s
vendor shall not collect any recyclable materials placed for regularly
scheduled collection in any container other than a designated curbside
recycling cart provided by the City.
   (2)   Only recyclable materials contained inside of the curbside recycling
cart provided by the City will be collected. However, the City’s vendor shall
be responsible for collecting and cleaning up the contents of a curbside
recycling cart that has been spilled, emptied, or has otherwise leaked,
deteriorated, or disintegrated, including, without limitation, whether such
spillage is caused by weather or non-weather related reasons.
   (3)   The curbside recycling cart shall be placed at the point of collection
in accordance with the provisions of Section
15-2102(c) above.
   (d)   Yard Waste. Yard waste shall be collected separately from household
garbage per state law and it shall be a violation of this article for any
person to intentionally place or comingle, at any time, yard waste of any kind
with any other household refuse or recyclable materials prepared for
collection.
   (1)   Leaf vacuuming. During the months of October and November of each
year, it shall be permissible for City residents to rake leaves to the
boulevard area or other public right-of-way near the street or avenue on which
the real estate is located for pick-up by City vacuum loaders. All leaves must
be placed within six (6) feet of the street or avenue, but in no event shall
leaves be placed in a manner so as to block any public sidewalk or otherwise
impede regular pedestrian traffic on such public right-of-way. No leaves will
be picked up in any alley, private drive or other non-public thoroughfare,
unless otherwise approved by City ordinance. It shall be a violation of this
article to intentionally place, at any time, leaves and/or yard waste of any
kind in any street, avenue or alley.
   (2)   With the exception of leaf vacuuming collection as provided in Section
15-2200(d)(1) and excluding brush, yard waste shall be containerized for
collection in biodegradable paper trash bags of thirty (30) gallons or less in
capacity or an optional ninety-six (96) gallon City yard waste cart. Plastic
bags are not allowed for such use and will not be collected by the City. An
optional yard waste cart may be requested and will be provided by the City upon
payment to the City of a prepaid fee of seventy-eight dollars and 96/100
($78.96); an annual administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be
charged to cover disposal of contents and will be added to the property owner’s
or occupant’s City utility bill. The biodegradable paper trash bags and/or yard
waste cart shall be placed at the curbside for collection or at the location
designated by the director of public works or said director’s designee to be
the most suitable for collection. A sticker imprinted with either “Approved by
the City of Moline” or the City of Moline logo shall be affixed to each
biodegradable paper trash bag in the manner provided on the sticker. The
sticker may be purchased for two dollars ($2.00) from either the City of Moline
accounts and finance department or from a retail store that offers the stickers
for sale. It shall be a violation of this section for retail stores or others
to sell said designed stickers unless they are purchased from the City of
Moline, Illinois.
   (3)   Brush, as defined in this chapter, and other similar waste from shrubs
or trees shall be bundled and tied in four (4) foot lengths and in bundles no
larger than one (1) foot square. The maximum diameter of the bundled brush
shall be four (4) inches. The bundled brush shall be placed at the same
location as that designated for containerized yard waste collection and within
the same time limitations as provided in Section
15-2102.
   (4)    Paid brush collection. The administrative fee for a paid brush
collection, as defined in this chapter, is thirty dollars ($30.00) for up to
the first two and a half (2.5) cubic yards not exceeding six (6) feet in length
and each additional two and a half (2.5) cubic yards will be charged forty
dollars ($40.00) not exceeding six (6) feet in length. It shall be a violation
of this chapter to accumulate brush from any other property or with any other
person for the purpose of avoiding this collection fee.
   (5)   In no event shall the City be responsible for collecting or cleaning
up any yard waste that has been improperly prepared for collection and that has
been spilled, emptied, or has otherwise leaked, deteriorated, or disintegrated,
including, without limitation, when such spillage is caused by weather or non-
weather related reasons.
   (6)   No yard waste created by the work of a commercial service will be
collected by the City. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or
tenant, or the commercial agent of the owner, occupant or tenant, to properly
collect and dispose of the yard waste.
   (e)   Bulky Items. Each calendar year, collection of one (1) free bulky item
or bulky items, as defined in this chapter, will be provided to each City
residence upon request to the public works department. Each additional bulky
item collection will require a prepaid administrative fee of forty dollars
($40.00) to the City’s accounts and finance department.
   (f)   Hazardous Waste. No person shall place or cause to be placed in any
container intended for City collection any hazardous waste as defined in this
chapter. Hazardous waste disposal within the City shall be permitted only in
accordance with prior administrative approval by the director of public works
or said director’s designee and all other administrative approvals. 
   (g)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit, inhibit or diminish the
City’s ability to enforce its Spiller Pays Ordinance located at
Chapter 11, Article III, of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 15-2202.   COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL REFUSE NOT AUTHORIZED FOR CITY
COLLECTION.
   All refuse other than refuse hereinabove authorized to be collected by the
City, the City’s vendor, or the Rock Island County Waste Management Agency or
its vendor shall be collected and disposed of at the expense of the occupant,
tenant, owner or agent of the owner of the premises upon which the refuse is
located. The collection and disposal shall be performed by a private scavenger,
or by equipment owned by the owner, occupant or tenant, or the agent of the
owner, occupant or tenant of the premises upon which the refuse is located.
Said collection and disposal shall be in accordance with this Code, all other
ordinances of the City, and with state and federal laws and regulations, and
shall be performed or done as often as the need requires but in no case less
often than once per week.
SEC. 15-2203.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   Because the City has in the past allowed development of property to proceed
that has no public street serving said development and because the City in the
past has provided refuse collection to those developments, the City Council
hereby finds and declares that it would cause undue and serious hardship to
those developments specified herein to cease refuse collection and also finds,
however, that in certain of these specified developments that refuse collection
by the City in times of bad weather is itself hazardous. Therefore, the City
Council shall make special exception to the curbside automated collection of
residential refuse for the following areas:
   (1)   Glenwood Drive: 2314, 2315, 2318, 2319, 2322, 2327, 2400, 2415, 2418,
2423, 2428, 2431, 2438, 2439, 2614, 2625, 2716, 2722, 2806, 2816, 2825, 2826,
2835, 2845, and 2854, Eighteenth Street C and 2355, 2365, 2645, and 2815,
Eighteenth Street D;
   (2)   Twelfth Street extended south of 2660 Twelfth Street to and including
2910 Twelfth Street;
   (3)   Lots 24 through 31, inclusive, Mineral Springs Subdivision;
   (4)   Hawthorne Drive: 809, 815, 815½, 817, 825, 833, and 1001 Twenty-
Seventh Street and 902 Twenty-Sixth Street;
   (5)   Robinswood Drive; 1115, 1135, 1137, 1139, and 1141 Twenty-Seventh
Street and 2625 and 2635 Eleventh Avenue B;
   (6)   Twenty-Ninth Avenue Court, Lots 1 and 2 – Heene’s Subdivision, and
2300 Twenty-Ninth Avenue Court (also known as SM-186, SM-186-1, SM-186-2, as
shown on the supervisor of assessments map for the NW 1/4 of Section 9, T 17 N,
R 1 W, of the 4th P.M. on Sheet 20, Supplemental 1979 for South Moline
Township);
   (7)   315, 316, 318, 319, and 320 Twenty-Sixth Avenue Court Drive;
   (8)   308, 311, 324, and 325 Twenty-Ninth Avenue;
   (9)   1001, 1009, 1020, 1030 and 1036 Twenty-Fifth Avenue Court;
   (10)   3360, 3362, 3364, 3366, and 3368 Park 17th Street;
   (11)   1702, 1712, and 1740 Thirtieth Avenue Drive;
   (12)   2400 Twenty-Fourth Avenue;
   (13)   2601, 2602 and 2604 Tenth Avenue;
   (14)   1610, 1620, 1630, 1638, and 1646 Thirty-Fourth Street;
   (15)   4800 to 4838 Sixth Avenue Drive (20 condominium units);
   (16)   530, 544, 556, 559, and 560 Fifty-Third Street Drive;
   (17)   1210, 1214, 1216, 1220, and 1224 Fifty-Fourth Street Court;
   (18)   2441, 2443, 2448, 2463, 2511 and 2520 Fifty-Fourth Street;
   (19)   2431, 2435, 2439, 2440, 2443, 2444, 2447, 2449, 2451, 2452, 2455,
2456, 2459, 2530, 2531, 2630, and 2537 Fifty-Third Street A;
   (20)   2623, 2630, and 2909 Forty-Fifth Street;
   (21)   3213 Fifty-Fourth Street Court;
   (22)   3200, 3211, and 3220 Fifty-Fifth Street Court;
   (23)   3523, 3527, 3525, and 2539 Thirty-Ninth Street Drive;
   (24)   2800 to 2826, inclusive, Thirty-Second Avenue Drive;
   (25)   950, 951, 952, 953, 954, 955, 956, 957, 1011, 1013, 1015, 1017, 1022,
1023, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1027, 1028 and 1029 Arbor Drive;
   (26)   2730 Thirty-Sixth Street; 2801 Thirty-Seventh Street; 2805 Forty-
First Street, 2825 and 2829 Thirty-Eighth Street, and such developments shall
continue to have residential refuse picked up at locations currently used;
however, for (3), (4), and (5), the City shall not collect residential refuse
if the private streets are not free of snow and ice (as determined by the
department) at the regularly scheduled collection time;
   (27)   1405, 1406, 1407, 1408, 1409, 1410, 1411, 1412, 1415, 1416, 1417,
1418, 1419, 1420, 1421, and 1422 51st Street Drive;
   (28)   3100, 3110, and 3120 27th Street Drive;
   (29)   3704, 3708, 3712, 3716, 3720, 3724, 3750, 3752, and 3754 47th Street
Drive; and
   (30)   3518, 3602 and 3610 Thirty-Seventh Avenue.
(Ord. No. 3003-2018; enacts new subsections (27), (28), (29); 2/13/18; Ord. No.
3050-2018; enacts new subsection (30); 12/4/18)
SEC. 15-2204.   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS CONDITIONS.
   Special exceptions authorized by Section
15-2203 shall be conditional upon the following:
   (1)   For those currently receiving City pickup service on private property,
receipt by the City of a hold-harmless agreement whereby the property owner and
said owner’s successors, heirs, and assigns, agree to hold harmless the City
from damage to the owner or said owner’s occupant’s property caused by or
arising out of City refuse trucks going upon the owner’s property other than by
a willful and wanton act within sixty (60) days of passage of this section;
   (2)   For any special exceptions hereafter created, receipt of a hold-
harmless agreement similar to that provided for in subsection (1) above,
received prior to commencement of pickup on private property; and
   (3)   For all special exceptions, no pickup will occur on private property
unless the private streets, roads, drives, or ways are free of snow and ice (as
determined by the public works department) at the regularly scheduled
collection time.
SEC. 15-2205.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates Section
15-2201(a)(3) of this article, pertaining to the disposal of sharps for
collection, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for the first offense and not less
than three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court costs nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second offense and each subsequent
offense committed within any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Each day
during which or on which any person violates this article shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (b)   Any person who violates Section
15-2100(a)(4) of this article, pertaining to refuse containers required for
commercial and industrial buildings, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
   (c)   Any residential refuse that is placed for collection in contravention
of any of the remaining provisions of this article shall be administered as
either a littering offense pursuant to Section
22-6100 et seq. of this Code or as a violation of the Health Code, as
determined by the health officer. Penalties and remedies shall be as provided
therein; provided, however, that any person or property violating this article
shall, in addition to any other fine, penalty or requirement of this Code, pay
the City no less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) administrative fee or the
complete and actual costs, charges and expenses incurred by the City in
remedying or alleviating such violation or nuisance, whichever amount is
greater.
ARTICLE III. PRIVATE SCAVENGERS
SEC. 15-3100.   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Private scavengers shall use only equipment designed for the purpose in
which it is used and complying with all necessary administrative approvals and
in good and safe operating condition. In addition, private scavengers shall use
packer-type equipment or such other design as the municipal services general
manager may approve and shall carry on each piece of equipment a shovel and a
broom for the purpose of cleaning up any spillage.
SEC. 15-3101.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Private scavengers may establish their hours of operation; however, the
director of public works has the power to investigate complaints concerning
noise from private scavenger operation disturbing the peace and quiet of a
neighborhood and to prescribe the hours of operation of an offending private
scavenger.
SEC. 15-3102.   OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   The parking of private scavenger vehicles on public property and the
overnight parking of loaded private scavenger vehicles on private property is
prohibited.
SEC. 15-3103.   COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Private scavengers shall operate in accordance with this Code, other
ordinances of the City, and with all requirements of any administrative
approval.
SEC. 15-3104.   VEHICLE AND CONTAINER MARKING.
   All vehicles and dumpsters used by licensed scavengers shall be clearly
marked with paint or decal showing the name of the scavenger owning or using
the vehicle or dumpster, and the address and phone number of such person.
ARTICLE IV. SANITARY LANDFILL
SEC. 15-4100.   INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION.
   Since the City of Moline has no available land within its corporate limits
suitable for operation as a sanitary landfill and since there exists a need to
provide a sanitary landfill site to dispose of the refuse generated within the
corporate limits, the City of Moline may purchase and operate, either alone or
in conjunction with another governmental entity, a sanitary landfill and/or a
solid waste transfer station. The City may also contract with a public or
private entity to provide such facilities and services.
References to standing committees changed to "City Council" or "Committee-of-
the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03 – Ord. No. 2003-05-05
Art. I and Art. II repealed; new Art. I and Art. II enacted; 05/09/06 – Ord.
No. 3021-2006
Division 1 repealed in its entirety; new Division 1 enacted; 10/23/07 – Ord.
No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-1100:
Sec. 15-1100 (7) amended; 12-6-22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-1100 (15) - (26) repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1100 (15) - (26)
enacted; 10/23/07 – Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-1100 (14) and (16) repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1100 (14) and (16)
enacted; 09/11/18 – Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-1105 repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1105 enacted; 10/23/07 – Ord.
No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2100(a)(1) repealed; new Sec. 15-2100(a)(1) enacted; 09/11/18 – Ord.
No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2100(a)(4); new Sec. 15-2100(a)(4)(a) enacted; 10/16/18 – Ord. No.
3038-2018
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 03/04/08 – Ord. No.
3017-2008
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 11/15/11 – Ord. No.
3042-2011
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 04/03/12 – Ord. No.
3010-2012
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 10/01/13 – Ord. No.
3024-2013(2)
Sec. 15-2102(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 11/04/14 – Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 04/19/16 – Ord. No.
3009-2016
Sec. 15-2102(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(a) enacted; 09/11/18 – Ord. No.
3034-2018
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 11/13/12 – Ord. No.
3027-2012
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 10/22/13 – Ord. No.
3031-2013
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 11/04/14 – Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(b) enacted; 11/04/14 – Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 09/11/18 – Ord. No.
3034-2018
Sec. 15-2102(b) amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 10/23/07 – Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2200(c)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(c)(2) enacted; 03/04/08 – Ord.
No. 3016-2008
Sec. 15-2200(c)(4) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(c)(4) enacted; 03/25/08 – Ord.
No. 3025-2008
Sec. 15-2200(d) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(d) enacted; 03/04/08 – Ord. No.
3015-2008
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 11/13/12 – Ord. No. 3027-2012
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 10/22/13 – Ord. No. 3031-2013
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 11/04/14 – Ord. No. 3026-2014
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 09/11/18 – Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2200 amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2201 repealed; new Sec. 15-2201 enacted; 10/23/07 – Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2201(d)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(d)(2) enacted; 04/19/16 – Ord.
No. 3009-2016
Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) enacted; 11/15/11 – Ord.
No. 3041-2011
Sec. 15-2201(c)(1), (c)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(c)(1), (c)(2) enacted;
09/11/18 – Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2201(f) repealed; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2203; amended to include location addresses; 12/04/18 – Ord. No. 3050-
2018
Sec. 15-2205; new subsection (b) enacted and consecutively renaming remaining
subsection; 10/16/18 – Ord. No. 3038-2018
 
ARTICLE V. POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITING
SEC. 15-5100.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   "Act" is the Illinois Environmental Protection Act as now enacted or
as hereafter amended (415 ILCS 5/1, et seq.).
   (2)   "Applicant" is any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind submitting an application for
site approval pursuant to §39.2 of the Act or pursuant to this Ordinance.
   (3)   "City" is the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (4)   "City Clerk" is the City Clerk of the City.
   (5)   "City Council" is the City Council of the City.
   (6)   "IEPA" or "Agency" is the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (7)   "Hearing Officer" is a person recommended by the Mayor and appointed
by the City Council to conduct a Public Hearing and make Findings of Fact,
Conclusions of Law, and recommendations to the City Council as provided in this
Ordinance.
   (8)   "Pollution Control Facility" or "Facility" is any waste storage site,
sanitary landfill, waste disposal site, waste transfer station, or a waste
treatment facility, but in no event will a Pollution Control Facility include
any type of hazardous waste facility or waste incinerator facility.
   In addition, all other words used in this ordinance and defined in the Act
shall have the same definitions and meanings as found in said Act.
SEC. 15-5101.   CITY APPROVAL OF POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES.
   No site approval for the development or construction of a new Pollution
Control Facility or expansion of an existing Pollution Control Facility in the
City may be granted by the City Council unless an application is filed for
approval of such a site and is submitted for consideration to the City Council
pursuant to this ordinance.
   In no event, will the City accept applications for any type of hazardous
waste facility or waste incinerator facility.
SEC. 15-5102.   NOTICE OF INTENT TO FILE APPLICATION FOR SITE LOCATION
APPROVAL.
   No later than 14 days prior to a request for location approval, the
Applicant shall cause written notice of such request to be served either in
person or by registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners of all
property within the subject area not solely owned by the Applicant, and on the
owners of all property within 250 feet in each direction of the lot line of the
subject property, said owners being such persons or entities which appear from
the authentic tax records of the County; provided, that the number of feet
occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be
excluded in computing the 250-foot requirement; provided further, that in no
event shall this requirement exceed 400 feet, including public streets, alleys
and other public ways.
   Such written notice shall also be served upon members of the General
Assembly from the legislative district in which the proposed Facility is
located and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation published
in the county in which the site is located.
   Such notice shall state the name and address of the Applicant, the location
of the proposed site, the nature and size of the development, the nature of the
activity proposed, the probable life of the proposed activity, the date when
the request for site approval will be submitted, and a description of the right
of persons to comment on such request as hereafter provided.
SEC. 15-5103.   PROCEDURE FOR FILING AN APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A POLLUTION
CONTROL FACILITY.
   In order to request siting approval for a new Pollution Control Facility as
defined by the Act in the City an Applicant must file an application with the
City Clerk with a minimum of 5 paper copies of the application and 15 complete
copies of the application in digital pdf format. The applicant must supply such
additional copies as the City may reasonably request. In addition, Applicant
shall provide the local public Library with not less than one complete
electronic copy of the application in order for the Library to make available
for public inspection at the Library, should the Library so desire.
SEC. 15-5104.   FILING FEE.
   The Applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk at the time of filing the
application for site approval of a new Pollution Control Facility as defined by
the Act or expansion of an existing Pollution Control Facility, a filing fee
deposit of $75,000 for a solid waste transfer station, a filing fee deposit of
$150,000 for a Pollution Control Facility. If the Applicant elects to file an
amended application for site location approval for any new Pollution Control
Facility as defined by the Act in accordance with this ordinance, such amended
application shall be accompanied by payment ofa supplemental filing fee of 25%
of the initial filing fee.
   The applicable fee shall be used by the City for and is intended to defray
the reasonable and necessary costs of preparing to process and processing the
application (hereinafter collectively referred to as "City costs") including,
but not limited to, costs of site inspection, clerical expenses, copying costs,
Hearing Officer compensation, court reporter expenses, transcript costs, public
notice expenses, professional consultants' fees (i.e. qualified professional
engineers, planners, appraisers, etc.) tests, exhibits and testimony, if any,
and any other relevant costs incident to the consideration of an application,
and all expenses incurred leading up to that consideration not previously
reimbursed, preparing the record on appeal. Costs and expenses incurred by the
City in defending an Applicant’s appeal of the denial of a siting application
are specifically exempted from reimbursement.
   Should the City incur any additional costs in excess of the applicable
filing fee deposit, the Applicant shall bear any and all such additional costs
and shall promptly pay over such additional amount to the City upon request or
demand. In the event that, at any time prior to final approval or the
completion of any appeal, the balance of the initial filing fee deposit shall
be reduced to an amount less than Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000), the Applicant
shall deposit an additional amount of 25% of the initial filing fee with the
City within five (5) days after being notified in writing of the need for such
additional amounts.
SEC. 15-5105.   CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   The application shall contain at least the following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the Applicant, all direct and indirect owners
of such Applicant holding more than a 10% interest, and the ownership interest
held by such owners. The foregoing notwithstanding, this requirement does not
require disclosure of limited partners, Trust beneficiaries, or minority
shareholders of publicly traded companies.
   (b)   The name and address of the owners of the site on which the Facility
is proposed to be located, all direct and indirect owners of such site holding
more than a 10% interest, and the ownership interest held by such owners. The
foregoing notwithstanding, this requirement does not require disclosure of
limited partners, Trust beneficiaries, or minority shareholders of publicly
traded companies.
   (c)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street address or
some other reasonable description of where the proposed site is located.
   (d)   A description of the proposed Facility, its operation and the expected
longevity thereof.
   (e)   A copy of the pre-filing notice required in 415 ILCS 5/39.2(b).
   (f)   The area to be served by the proposed Facility and a statement of the
need for such Facility at that location.
   (g)   For a Pollution Control Facility, a list of the existing and proposed
Pollution Control Facilities located within or serving or reasonably capable of
serving the area proposed to be served and with respect to such Facilities, the
following information shall be provided: location, size, owner and/or operator,
type of Pollution Control Facility, remaining capacity, probable life of the
proposed Facility and types of waste received.
   (h)   The expected types, amounts and methods of treatment, transportation
or storage of all waste proposed for the site and the origin of those wastes.
   (i)   For a Pollution Control Facility, a description of the geologic and
hydrogeologic character of the site including, but not limited to, soil boring
samples obtained, groundwater flow data, identification of the uppermost
aquifer, and groundwater monitoring plans.
   (j)   A site plan showing details of the proposed Facility including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   Cross sections for a Pollution Control Facility.
      (2)   All existing wells within 1,320 feet of the footprint of the site
for a Pollution Control Facility.
      (3)   Roads, entrances and driveways.
      (4)   Soil boring sample locations on or within 200 feet of the site for
a Pollution Control Facility.
   (k)   A detailed topographic survey of the subject site.
   (l)   A map showing land uses within one and a half (1.5) miles of the site.
   (m)   A map showing the boundary of any 100-year floodplain covering all or
any part of the site.
   (n)   All documents submitted as of the date of the application to the
Agency pertaining to the proposed Facility, except trade secrets.
   (o)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed Facility
including, if applicable, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Method of landfilling, incineration, resource recovery or other
process and/or loading and unloading of materials, as may be applicable.
      (2)   Hours of operation.
      (3)   Personnel.
      (4)   Methods for litter, dust, vector and odor control.
      (5)   Plans for surface drainage and erosion control.
      (6)   Methods for fire control.
      (7)   Action plans for collective actions for spills and other
operational accidents.
      (8)   If applicable, the stages of development or use.
      (9)   An end use plan for waste disposal sites.
      (10)   Ground water monitoring, including well monitoring locations, and
sampling and analysis protocol, if applicable.
      (11)   Surface water monitoring, including sampling locations, and
sampling and analysis protocols, if applicable.
      (12)   If applicable, on-site gas control and monitoring protocol.
      (13)   If applicable, leachate control and treatment.
      (14)   If applicable, post-closure care and financial plan.
      (15)   Identification of any on-site wetlands and the corresponding
mitigation plan.
   (p)   A statement or report of traffic information regarding the proposed
site including the anticipated number of vehicles and their size, weight and
direction of movement, and description of the proposed ingress and egress
traffic routes to be used.
   (q)   A statement of compliance with the County Solid Waste Management Plan,
if any.
   (r)   A statement describing the past operating experience of the Applicant
(and any subsidiary, parent corporation or subsidiary of the parent
corporation) in the field of solid waste management.
   (s)   A statement citing the past record of all convictions or admissions of
violations of the Applicant (and any of its subsidiaries) in the field of solid
waste management. In the case of subsidiaries the statement shall be limited to
convictions or admissions of violations occurring after the subsidiary was
acquired. Said statement shall include but not be limited to a citation of the
applicable statute or ordinance violated, a brief written summary of the
violation or conviction and the penalty imposed.
   (t)   All physical evidence (except oral testimony) including, but not
limited to, studies, maps, reports, permits or exhibits which the Applicant
desires the Hearing Officer to consider at the public hearing. It is intended
that the Applicant provide a full and complete disclosure of its case to
facilitate early review and analysis by all parties.
   (u)   The pages of the application submitted to the City shall be numbered
or otherwise identified for easy reference. If an application consists of more
than one binder, the pages within each binder shall be numbered or otherwise
identified, and each binder shall be separately identified by volume.
SEC. 15-5106.   AMENDMENTS TO APPLICATION.
   At any time prior to the completion by the Applicant of the presentation of
the Applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-questioning by
the City Council and any participants, the Applicant may file not more than one
amended application which must be accompanied with the appropriate supplemental
filing fee. Provided, however, that the time limitations for final action by
the City Council on such amended application shall be extended for an
additional period of 90 days.
   Other amendments may be made with the consent of the City Council.
SEC. 15-5107.   PUBLIC HEARING.
   At least one public hearing shall be held no sooner than 90 days but no
later than 120 days from receipt of the request for site approval. Not later
than 14 days prior to said hearing, the Applicant shall publish notice in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the county and provide notice by
certified mail to the IEPA, all members of the General Assembly from the
district in which a proposed site is located; to the governing authority of
every municipality contiguous to the proposed site or contiguous to the City;
and to the county board of the county where the proposed site is to be located.
The notice shall contain the following information, which, except for items (h)
through (m) must be included by the Applicant in its application. The Mayor
shall notify the Applicant in writing of the date and location of the public
hearing at least 45 days prior to such hearing.
   (a)   The name(s) and address(es) of the person(s) requesting site location
approval;
   (b)   The owner(s) of the site, and in case ownership is in a land trust,
the names of the beneficiaries of said trust;
   (c)   The legal description of the site;
   (d)   The street address of the property, and if there is no street address
applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership or occupancy or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
   (e)   The nature and size of the proposed development;
   (f)   The nature of the activity at the proposed site;
   (g)   The probable and proposed (if different from probable) life of the
proposed activity;
   (h)   The time and date of the public hearing(s);
   (i)   The location of the public hearing;
   (j)   A statement that the application and public record is available to the
public in the City Clerk’s office;
   (k)   A statement that all copies of evidence, except rebuttal evidence,
other than testimony to be submitted at the public hearing must be filed in the
City Clerk’s office at least two (2) days before the first public hearing;
provided, however, that the Hearing Officer, in his or her sole and absolute
discretion, may allow for the admission of evidence at the public hearing, or
any continuation thereof, otherwise required to be filed with the City Clerk’s
office in accordance with this Section
15-5107(k);
   (l)   A statement that copies of the application and public record are
available upon payment of the costs and fees requested by the City for such
reproduction and which are not inconsistent with State law, at the City Clerk’s
office; and
   (m)   A statement that any person intending on participating in the public
hearing process (through sworn testimony or unsworn oral comment) must file
written notification of their intent to participate with the City Clerk at
least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
SEC. 15-5108.   APPOINTMENT AND CONDUCT OF THE HEARING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall recommend to the City Council and the City Council shall
appoint a Hearing Officer for the public hearing. The Hearing Officer shall
preside over the public hearing and shall make any decisions concerning the
admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted subject
to this ordinance. The Hearing Officer shall make all decisions and rulings in
accordance with fundamental fairness. The Hearing Officer may exclude
irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent or unduly repetitious testimony or other
evidence. For good cause shown, the Hearing Officer may waive any requirement
of this ordinance except financial requirements. No ruling of the Hearing
Officer shall be appealable to the City Council.
SEC. 15-5109.   PARTICIPANTS AT THE HEARING.
   Any person, group or party who desires to participate in the public hearing
(other than the Applicant and the City, through its representatives) shall file
an appearance, which shall include the address of that party with the City
Clerk at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Any party filing an
appearance in accordance with this section shall be provided an opportunity to
fully participate in the public hearing. Such participation shall include the
opportunity to make statements, cross-examine the Applicant's witnesses,
present evidence including, but not limited to, testimony of witnesses, and
make arguments at the close of the hearing. Full participation as described in
this section shall be in accordance with the rules of fundamental fairness and
procedure, including time limitations, as applied by the Hearing Officer. The
right to full participation under this section shall not be construed to permit
unlimited general comment, or repetitive cross-examination. The rules of
evidence shall not be strictly applied.
   In addition to the filing of a written entry of appearance as specified
above, any party wishing to fully participate in the public hearing shall
submit a list of any witnesses it intends to call and the nature of the
anticipated testimony of each such witness by no later than two days prior to
the hearing. A party shall not be permitted to call any witness, except
rebuttal witnesses, who have not been properly identified in accordance with
this requirement.
   Members of the City Council may appear at the hearing and may ask questions
or otherwise participate, without regard to the written notification required
above. The City Council may appear through its counsel.
SEC. 15-5110.   WRITTEN COMMENT.
   The City Clerk shall receive written comment from any person concerning the
appropriateness of the proposed site. Any written comment received by the City
Clerk either prior to commencement of the hearing or within 30 days after the
date of the last public hearing shall be made part of the record, and the City
Council shall consider any such timely written comments in making its final
determination concerning said request.
SEC. 15-5111.   GENERAL PUBLIC COMMENT AT THE HEARING.
   Any person appearing at the public hearing and signing a register expressing
a desire to address the Hearing Officer at the hearing shall have the right to
make unsworn comment on the application. Opportunity for any person to make
general comment pursuant to this section shall be limited to five minutes per
person. The Hearing Officer in his discretion may permit others in attendance
at the hearing to make comment or may expand an individual's time for comment
if he deems it appropriate. Public comments shall not be given the evidentiary
weight of sworn testimony subject to cross-examination.
SEC. 15-5112.   CONDUCT OF THE HEARING.
   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
   (a)   Call to order.
   (b)   Introduction of the Hearing Officer.
   (c)   Recognition of the Applicant and identification of the request for
site approval.
   (d)   Recognition of the fees, notices and date of filing the request for
site approval.
   (e)   Recognition of parties wishing to testify and any other reports,
exhibits, maps or documents of record filed pursuant to this ordinance.
   (f)   The Applicant, the City's representatives and other parties
participating in the hearing pursuant to
Section 15-5109 o of this ordinance may make an opening statement.
   (g)   The Hearing Officer shall then hear testimony from the Applicant and/
or any witnesses the Applicant may wish to call. The City's representative and
any other party participating in the hearing pursuant to
Section 15-5109 o of this ordinance shall have the right to cross-examine each
of the Applicant's witnesses.
   (h)   Upon the close of the Applicant's testimony, other parties
participating in the hearing pursuant to
Section 15-5109 of this ordinance may present evidence and call witnesses in
support of their position. The Applicant and the City shall have the right to
cross-examine any such witnesses.
   (i)   Upon the close of the Applicant's and other parties' testimony and
evidence, members of the public of record may then present oral comment to the
Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall decide the order of presentation of
testimony subject to this ordinance.
   (j)   Following close of the public comment portion of the hearing, the
Applicant and other parties participating in the hearing pursuant to
Section 15-5109 o of this ordinance shall be permitted to make final summary
statements subject to limitations as imposed by the hearing officer.
   (k)   Hearing closed.
SEC. 15-5113.   COURT REPORTER.
   The Applicant shall ensure that a court reporter shall be present at any
public hearing for purposes of establishing a record and transcript of the
proceeding.
   The transcript of the public hearing shall be made available for public
inspection at the office of the City Clerk. Interested persons may obtain
copies of the transcription in accordance with the City’s Freedom of
Information policies.
SEC. 15-5114.   HEARING OFFICER'S PROPOSED FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (a)   Any party participating pursuant to
Section 15-5109 may file proposed findings of law and fact within 7 days of the
close of the record. Within 15 days of the close of the record, the Hearing
Officer shall provide the City and the Applicant with Proposed Findings of
Fact. The Proposed Findings of Facts, which shall be publicly available, shall
be based upon the record and the criteria the City is required to consider
pursuant to the Act, as follows:
      (1)   The Facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area it is intended to serve;
      (2)   The Facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      (3)   The Facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property;
      (4)   For a Facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal
site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain
or the site is flood-proofed;
      (5)   For a Facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site,
the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain, or if
the Facility is a facility described in subsection (b)(3) of Section 22.19a
(415 ILCS 5/22.19a), the site is floodproofed;
      (6)   The plan of operations for the Facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
      (7)   The traffic patterns to or from the Facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      (8)   If the Facility is to be located in a county where the county board
has adopted a solid waste management plan that is consistent with the planning
requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Solid Waste Planning
and Recycling Act [415 ILCS 10/1 et seq. or 415 ILCS 15/1 et seq.], the
facility is consistent with the solid waste management plan of Marshall County;
for purposes of this subsection, the "solid waste management plan" means the
plan that is in effect as of the date the application for siting approval is
filed; and
      (9)   If the Facility will be located within a regulated recharge area,
any applicable requirements specified by the board for such areas have been
met.
   (b)   The Hearing Officer may also include in his proposed Findings of Fact,
and the City Council may also consider, the previous operating experience and
past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the Applicant (and
subsidiary or parent corporation) in the field of solid waste management when
considering above-referenced criteria (2) and (6).
SEC. 15-5115.   DECISION OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   An Applicant for local siting approval shall submit sufficient testimony and
evidence concerning the proposed Facility to demonstrate compliance with the
following criteria, and local siting approval shall be granted only if the
proposed Facility meets the following criteria:
   (a)   The Facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area
it is intended to serve.
   (b)   The Facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
   (c)   The Facility is compliant with the zoning code of the City and is
located so as to minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding
area and to minimize the effect on the value of the surrounding property.
   (d)   For a Facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site,
the Facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the
site is flood-proofed.
   (e)   For a Facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the
Facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain, or if the
Facility is a facility described in subsection (b)(3) of Section 22.19a (415
ILCS 5/22.19a), the site is floodproofed.
   (f)   The plan of operations for the Facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fires, spills or other operational
accidents.
   (g)   The traffic patterns to or from the Facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
   (h)   The Facility is consistent with the lawful provisions of a solid waste
management plan adopted by Rock Island County in accordance with the planning
requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Solid Waste Planning
and Recycling Act.
   (i)   If the Facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Pollution Control Board for such areas
have been met.
   The City Council may also consider as evidence the previous operating
experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations as
authorized by the Act.
   The decision of the City Council shall be in writing specifying the reasons
for the decision. In granting approval for a site, the City Council may impose
such conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this section and as are not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the
Pollution Control Board. The decision shall be available for public inspection
at the office of the City Clerk and may be copied upon payment of the actual
cost of reproduction. If there is no final action by the City Council within
180 days after the filing of the request for site approval, the Applicant may
deem the request approved.
(Ord. No. 3002-2023; Art. V enacted; 01/24/22)
Note:  Chap. 15 repealed in its entirety; new Chap. 15 enacted; 11/23/10 - Ord.
No. 3042-2010. Amendments effective prior to and following are listed below
sequentially by article, division or section number.
References to standing committees changed to "City Council" or "Committee-of-
the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03 - Ord. No. 2003-05-05
Art. I and Art. II repealed; new Art. I and Art. II enacted; 05/09/06 - Ord.
No. 3021-2006
Division 1 repealed in its entirety; new Division 1 enacted; 10/23/07 - Ord.
No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-1100:
Sec. 15-1100 (7) amended; 12-6-22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-1100 (15) - (26) repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1100 (15) - (26)
enacted; 10/23/07 - Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-1100 (14) and (16) repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1100 (14) and (16)
enacted; 09/11/18 - Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-1105 repealed in entirety; new Sec. 15-1105 enacted; 10/23/07 - Ord.
No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2100(a)(1) repealed; new Sec. 15-2100(a)(1) enacted; 09/11/18 - Ord.
No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2100(a)(4); new Sec. 15-2100(a)(4)(a) enacted; 10/16/18 - Ord. No.
3038-2018
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 03/04/08 - Ord. No.
3017-2008
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 11/15/11 - Ord. No.
3042-2011
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 04/03/12 - Ord. No.
3010-2012
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 10/01/13 - Ord. No.
3024-2013(2)
Sec. 15-2102(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 11/04/14 - Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2101(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2101(a) enacted; 04/19/16 - Ord. No.
3009-2016
Sec. 15-2102(a) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(a) enacted; 09/11/18 - Ord. No.
3034-2018
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 11/13/12 - Ord. No.
3027-2012
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 10/22/13 - Ord. No.
3031-2013
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 11/04/14 - Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 11/04/14 - Ord. No.
3026-2014
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 09/11/18 - Ord. No.
3034-2018
Sec. 15-2102(b) amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2102(b) amended; 12/19/23 - Ord. No. 3059-2023
Sec. 15-2102(b) repealed; new Sec. 15-2102(b) enacted; 10/22/24 - Ord. No.
3036-2024
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 10/23/07 - Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2200(c)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(c)(2) enacted; 03/04/08 - Ord.
No. 3016-2008
Sec. 15-2200(c)(4) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(c)(4) enacted; 03/25/08 - Ord.
No. 3025-2008
Sec. 15-2200(d) repealed; new Sec. 15-2200(d) enacted; 03/04/08 - Ord. No.
3015-2008
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 11/13/12 - Ord. No. 3027-2012
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 10/22/13 - Ord. No. 3031-2013
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 11/04/14 - Ord. No. 3026-2014
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 09/11/18 - Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2200 amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2200 amended; 12/19/23 - Ord. No. 3059-2023
Sec. 15-2200 repealed; new Sec. 15-2200 enacted; 10/22/24 - Ord. No. 3036-2024
Sec. 15-2201 repealed; new Sec. 15-2201 enacted; 10/23/07 - Ord. No. 3036-2007
Sec. 15-2201(d)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(d)(2) enacted; 04/19/16 - Ord.
No. 3009-2016
Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) enacted; 11/15/11 - Ord.
No. 3041-2011
Sec. 15-2201(c)(1), (c)(2) repealed; new Sec. 15-2201(c)(1), (c)(2) enacted;
09/11/18 - Ord. No. 3034-2018
Sec. 15-2201(d)(4) amended; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2201(f) repealed; 12/6/22 - Ord. No. 3053-2022
Sec. 15-2203; amended to include location addresses; 12/04/18 - Ord. No. 3050-
2018
Sec. 15-2205; new subsection (b) enacted and consecutively renaming remaining
subsection; 10/16/18 - Ord. No. 3038-2018
CHAPTER 16
LIBRARIES
   Art. I.   In General, §16-1100 - §16-1103
   Art. II.   Board of Library Directors, §16-2100 - §16-2110
   Art. III.   Moline Compass Program, §16-3100 - §16-3111
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 16-1100.   PUBLIC LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.
   The Moline Public Library now and heretofore existing is hereby established
and shall be maintained in the City as a public library, for the use and
benefit of the residents of the City.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-1101.   LIBRARY TO BE FREE; OBSERVANCE OF RULES.
   The library established under this article shall be forever free for the use
of the residents of the City, always subject to such reasonable rules and
regulations as the board of library directors may adopt in order to render the
use of the library of the greatest benefit to the greatest number; and the
board of library directors may exclude from the use of said library any and all
persons who shall willfully violate such rules. The board of library directors
may extend the privileges and use of the library to persons residing outside of
the City upon such terms and conditions as it may from time to time by its
regulations prescribe.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-1102.   DONATIONS.
   Any person desiring to make donations of money, personal property or real
estate for the benefit of said library, shall have the right to vest the title
to the money or real estate so donated, in the board of library directors
created under this chapter and the state law authorizing the establishment and
maintenance of free public libraries, to be held and controlled by said board,
when accepted, according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise, or bequest of
such property; and as to such property, the board of library directors shall be
held and considered to be special trustees.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
SEC. 16-2100.   ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby established a board of library directors, which shall
consist of nine (9) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with
the consent of the City Council.
SEC. 16-2101.   QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
Members of the board of library directors shall be chosen from the residents of
the City at large, with regard to their fitness for office. Members must remain
residents of the City during their tenure on the board. Not more than one (1)
member shall be a member of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2102.   TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   There shall annually be appointed to the board of library directors, three
(3) members for a term of three (3) years.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2103.   REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   The mayor may, by and with the consent of the City Council, as in case of
other removals from office by said mayor, remove any member of the board of
library directors for any misconduct or neglect of duty.
SEC. 16-2104.   FILLING VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on the board of library directors occasioned by removals,
resignation, or otherwise, shall be reported to the Mayor's office, and be
filled in like manner as original appointments, and no directors shall receive
compensation as such.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2105.   ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.
   The board of library directors shall meet at such times and places as it
shall determine whenever it shall seem necessary. The regular meeting date will
be the second Thursday of every month. The September meeting shall be the
annual meeting at which officers shall be elected in accordance with the by-
laws.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2106.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The board of library directors shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and
regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library as may
be expedient and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2107.   CONTROL OF LIBRARY MONEYS AND PROPERTY; LIBRARY FUNDS.
   The board of library directors shall have the exclusive control of the
expenditure of all moneys collected to the credit of the library fund, and of
the construction of any library building, and of the supervision, care and
custody of the grounds, rooms and buildings constructed, leased or set apart
for that purpose. All moneys received for the library shall be deposited in the
treasury of the City to the credit of the appropriate library fund, and shall
be kept separate and apart from other moneys of the City, and drawn upon by the
proper officers of said City upon the properly authenticated vouchers of the
library board.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2108.   APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF PERSONNEL.
   The board of library directors shall have the power to appoint a suitable
library director and fix the director's compensation, and shall also have power
to remove such appointees; however, said board may choose to use pay plans
adopted by the City Council and may negotiate with employee groups or authorize
the chief negotiator selected by the City to negotiate with employee groups.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
SEC. 16-2109.   ADDITIONAL POWERS, IN GENERAL.
   The board of library directors shall have the power to carry out the intent
and spirit of this chapter.
SEC. 16-2110.   ANNUAL REPORTING.
   By June 30, following the end of each calendar year, the City’s Audited
Financial Statements will be presented to the Library Board & City Council. The
audit will include the following schedules for each of the Library Funds:
   (1)   Balance Sheet – Assets and Liabilities;
   (2)   Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures and Changes in Fund Balance –
Budget and Actual; and
   (3)   Fixed Asset Schedule – additions and deletions.
   Following the release of the previous year audit and in preparation for the
ensuing fiscal year budget, the Library Board, through the Library Director,
will prepare a budget request of the financial requirements of the Library for
inclusion in the annual appropriation of the corporate authority, and of the
amount of money which, in the judgement of the Library Board, is necessary to
levy for library purposes in the next tax levy ordinance. The final levy
distribution will be adopted by City Council resolution.
(Ord. No. 3018-2022; 7/26/22)
ARTICLE III. MOLINE COMPASS PROGRAM
SEC. 16-3100. MOLINE COMPASS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   The City of Moline hereby establishes the Moline Compass Program, an
optional, verifiable, official secondary photo identification card program.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3101. DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (1)   Applicant. A person who applies for a City of Moline ID.
   (2)   Application. The application form to obtain, renew, or replace a City
of Moline ID, which shall be developed by the Moline Public Library, in a form
consistent with this article.
   (3)   Authentic. An original proof of identity or proof of Moline residency
document as issued by the issuing agency, which is not photocopied, mutilated,
altered, or modified in any way; provided, however, that certified copies of
official documents are acceptable.
   (4)   Bank Account Statement. An account statement regularly issued by a
financial institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or
the National Credit Union Administration to its account holders at the account
holders’ residential address located within the City of Moline.
   (5)   City of Moline ID. An identification card issued by the City of Moline
which sets forth an expiration date and displays information concerning an
applicant that includes, but is not limited to, the applicant's name,
photograph, date of birth, and, at the applicant's option, display the
cardholder's self-designated gender. The City of Moline ID shall be designed in
a manner to deter fraud.
   (6)   Library Director. The Library Director of the Moline Public Library,
or their designee(s).
   (7)   Disability. For purposes of this article, means:
      a.   A determinable physical or mental characteristic which may result
from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth or functional disorder
including, but not limited to, a determinable physical characteristic which
necessitates a person’s use of a guide, hearing or support dog; or
      b.   The history of such a characteristic; or
      c.   The perception of such a characteristic by the person complained
against.
   (8)   Foreign Language Documents. Proof of Identity documents that are in a
language other than English.
   (9)   Insurance Bill. A bill or invoice, addressed to the applicant, for
insurance premiums due for homeowner’s, renter’s, health, life, or automobile
insurance.
   (10)   Jury Summons or Court Order. A summons or court order, issued by a
state or federal court, or an administrative agency organized under state or
federal law, addressed to the applicant, and ordering the applicant to
personally appear before such court or administrative agency.
   (11)   Program. The Moline Compass Program to administer and issue the City
of Moline ID.
   (12)   Proof of Identity. The process outlined in §
16-3104.
   (13)   Proof of Moline Residency. The process outlined in §
16-3105.
   (14)   State. Any of the fifty (50) states of the United States, the
District of Columbia, and any territories of the United States.
   (15)   Territories. American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
   (16)   Veteran Designation. A designation on a City of Moline ID that the
applicant is a former or current member of the U.S. military, which designation
is available to applicants that satisfy the Veteran Designation requirements
set forth in §
16-3104 and Table 16-3104.4.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3102. ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The Moline Compass Program shall be administered by the Moline Public
Library, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article. The
Moline Public Library will provide staff, training, and materials for the
administration of the Program.
   (b)   When requiring members of the public to provide identification or
proof of residency, every department of the City of Moline may accept the City
of Moline ID, as defined in §
16-3101, as valid identification and as valid secondary proof of residency in
the City of Moline, unless the department has reason to believe that the City
of Moline ID is counterfeit, altered, improperly issued, or that the person
presenting the City of Moline ID is not the person to whom the card was issued.
A City of Moline ID cannot supersede specific identification required by state
or federal law.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3103. PROGRAM APPLICATION.
   The City of Moline ID shall be available to any applicant regardless of
race, color, sex, gender identity, age, religion, disability, national origin,
ancestry, citizenship or immigration status, sexual orientation, marital
status, partnership status, parental status, military status, source of income,
credit history, status as a justice impacted individual, housing status, or
status as a victim of domestic violence, provided that the applicant completes
an application, and fulfills the requirements for proving identity and
residency in the City of Moline as set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24; Ord. No. 3040-2024; Section 16-3103 repealed; new
Sec. 16-3103 enacted; 10/22/24)
SEC. 16-3104. PROOF OF IDENTITY.
   (a)   Every applicant must meet the proof of identity requirements set forth
in this section in order to qualify for a City of Moline ID. At a minimum, each
applicant must present authentic evidence of his or her legal name and date of
birth, and if the applicant is fourteen (14) years or older, a current
photograph. This evidence shall be subject to electronic and visual inspection
and verification.
   (b)   To prove identity, an applicant must:
      (1)   Provide one (1) or more of the documents listed below that total at
least three (3) points in the aggregate;
      (2)   For applicants fourteen (14) years or older, provide at least one
(1) of the documents listed below that contains a current photograph; and
      (3)   Provide at least one (1) of the documents listed below that sets
forth the applicant’s date of birth.
   TABLE 16-3104.1 DOCUMENTS WORTH THREE (3) POINTS
   TOWARD ESTABLISHING APPLICANT IDENTITY
Document Point Value Acceptable as Photo ID? Acceptable as Proof of Date of
                                             Birth?
Document               Point Value Acceptable as Photo Acceptable as Proof of
                                   ID?                 Date of Birth?
U.S. passport or U.S.  3           Yes                 Yes
passport card
Foreign passport,
issued by a country    3           Yes                 Yes
other than the U.S.
(machine readable)
State driver's license
or learner's permit    3           Yes                 Yes
photo identification
card
Global entry card
issued by the U.S.     3           Yes                 Yes
Customs and Border
Protection
Illinois temporary
visitor's driver's     3           Yes                 Yes
license
Illinois firearms
owners' identification 3           Yes                 Yes
card
U.S. Permanent
Residency Card ("Green
Card") or Alien        3           Yes                 Yes
Registration Receipt
Card (Form 1-551)
U.S. Certificate of
Citizenship (Forms N-  3           Yes                 Yes
560 or N-561)
U.S. Certificate of
Naturalization (Forms  3           Yes                 Yes
N-550, N-570, or N-
568)
Verification of
release form issued by
the U.S. Department of
Health and Human
Services - Office of
Refugee Resettlement,
that includes the
applicant's
photograph, date of    3           Yes                 Yes
birth, name, and the
address of the
applicant's sponsor,
dated within the 12-
month period
immediately prior to
the submission of the
application
Common access card,
issued by the
Department of Defense  3           Yes                 Yes
to active duty,
retiree, or reservist
military personnel
Uniformed services ID
card, issued by the
Department of Defense
to active duty,
retiree, or reservist  3           Yes                 Yes
military personnel,
and to certain family
members of such
personnel
Current Employment
Authorization Document
("EAD") or U.S. work   3           Yes                 Yes
permit, issued by the
U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services
Enhanced tribal card,
Native American tribal
photo identification
card, or other tribal
identification card
issued by a federally  3           Yes                 Yes
recognized tribe (must
include photo,
address, signature,
date of birth, and
expiration date)
U.S. merchant mariner
credential, issued by
the U.S. Coast Guard
National Maritime      3           Yes                 Yes
Center (must include
photo, address, date
of birth, and issue
and expiration dates)
U.S. Department of
State driver's license
or non-driver
identification card    3           Yes                 Yes
(must include photo,
date of birth, and
expiration date)
Current City of Moline
ID, if the applicant
was at least fourteen
(14) years when he or  3           Yes                 Yes
she applied for and
received such City of
Moline ID
 
   TABLE 16-3104.2 DOCUMENTS WORTH TWO (2) POINTS
   TOWARD ESTABLISHING APPLICANT IDENTITY
Document Point Value Acceptable as Photo ID? Acceptable as Proof of Date of
                                             Birth?
                                                                                    Acceptable Acceptable
Document                                                                      Point as Photo   as Proof
                                                                              Value ID?        of Date of
                                                                                               Birth?
Consular identification card ("CID")                                          2     Yes        Yes
VISA, issued by the U.S. State Department (must include photo)                2     Yes        Yes
Foreign passport, issued by a country other than the U.S. (non-machine        2     Yes        Yes
readable)
Expired foreign passport, issued by a country other than the U.S. (machine
readable, expired no more than three (3) years prior to the date the          2     Yes        Yes
applicant submits his or her application)
Expired U.S. passport (expired no more than three (3) years prior to the date 2     Yes        Yes
the applicant submits his or her application)
Veterans identification card, issued by the U.S. Department of Veterans       2     Yes        Yes
Affairs (must include photo and member ID number)
Veterans health identification card, issued by the U.S. Department of         2     Yes        Yes
Veterans Affairs (must include photo and member ID number)
Federal, state, or local government employee identification card (must        2     Yes        Yes
include photo)
If the applicant is fourteen (14) years or older, a U.S. birth certificate of
the applicant, issued by a state or territory, or a political subdivision of
a state or territory, or the U.S. State Department, including consular report 2     No         Yes
of birth abroad (provided that birth certificates issued in Puerto Rico prior
to July 1, 2010 will not be accepted)
Foreign driver's license, issued by a country other than the U.S. (machine    2     Yes        Yes
readable, must include photo, address, date of birth, and expiration date)
Foreign national identification card issued by a country other than the U.S.,                  Yes, if
accepted for purposes of re-entry into the issuing included country (machine  2     Yes        included
readable, must include photo and date of birth or age)
Social Security card, issued by the U.S. Social Security Administration       2     No         No
U.S. individual taxpayer identification number (“ITIN”) authorization and 2     No         No
assignment letter, issued by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
Form I-94 Arrival/Departure Record, issued by the U.S. Department of Homeland 2     Yes        Yes
Security (must include photo, date of birth, and fingerprint)
State temporary driver's license or learner's permit                          2     No         Yes
Approval notice of an immigration benefit, issued by the U.S. Citizenship and 2     No         No
Immigration Services (Forms I-797, I-797A, I-797B, or I-797D)
School enrollment form for the applicant, issued by the Moline-Coal Valley    2     No         Yes
School District
Identification card issued by a private or public Illinois educational
institution (including elementary, middle, secondary, and post-secondary      2     Yes        Yes, if
schools), expired no more than three (3) years prior to the date the                           included
applicant submits his or her application
Software application administered by a private or public Illinois educational                  Yes, if
institution (including elementary, middle, and included secondary schools)    2     Yes        included
that includes the student's name and photograph
Youth work permit issued through the Illinois State Board of Education by: a
high school in Illinois; the Illinois Regional Offices of Education; or the   2     No         Yes
Illinois Department of Labor
Employee identification card issued by the City of Moline, Rock Island County
Government, State of Illinois or its agencies, or the Illinois State Board of 2     Yes        No
Education (must include photo)
Temporary identification card for released offenders, issued by the Illinois  2     Yes        Yes
Department of Corrections
Illinois Department of Corrections identification card verification form
(issued within the thirty (30)-day period immediately prior to the submission 2     Yes        Yes
of the application)
State of Illinois Prisoner Review Board order                                 2     Yes, if    Yes, if
                                                                                    included   included
Released offender identification card (must include photo)                    2     Yes        Yes
 
   TABLE 16-3104.3 DOCUMENTS WORTH ONE (1) POINT
   TOWARD ESTABLISHING APPLICANT IDENTITY
Document Point Value Acceptable as Photo ID? Acceptable as Proof of Date of
                                             Birth?
Document               Point Value Acceptable as Photo Acceptable as Proof of
                                   ID?                 Date of Birth?
Expired consular
identification card
("CID") (expired no
more than three (3)    1           Yes                 Yes
years prior to the
date the applicant
submits their
application)
Expired Illinois
driver's license, or
identification card,
issued by the Illinois
Secretary of State     1           Yes                 Yes
(expired no more than
three (3) years prior
to the date the
applicant submits his
or her application)
If the applicant is a
parent, a U.S. birth
certificate of a child
that lists the
applicant as a parent,
issued by a state or
territory, or a
political subdivision
of a state or          1           No                  Yes
territory, or the U.S.
State Department,
including consular
report of birth abroad
(provided that birth
certificates issued in
Puerto Rico prior to
July 1, 2010 will not
be accepted)
If the applicant is
(fourteen) 14 years or
older, foreign birth
certificate, issued by 1           No                  Yes
a current or former
sovereign nation other
than the U.S.
Foreign driver's
license, issued by a
country other than the
U.S. (non-machine      1           Yes                 Yes
readable, must include
photo, address, date
of birth, and
expiration date)
Foreign national
identification card
issued by a country
other than the U.S.,
accepted for purposes  1           Yes                 Yes, if included
of re-entry into
issuing country (non-
machine readable, must
include photo and date
of birth or age)
Military photo
identification card
issued by a foreign
country, other than    1           Yes                 Yes, if included
the U.S. to active
duty, retiree, or
reservist military
personnel
Official copy of an
academic transcript
issued by a high
school or post-
secondary educational
institution in the
U.S., which includes   1           No                  Yes, if included
the dates and/or
school term attended
by the applicant,
cumulative academic
record, and, if
applicable, the degree
(s) awarded
Diploma issued by a
high school in the
U.S., a high school
equivalency diploma
granted based on the
General Educational
Development Test
("GED") and Test       1           No                  Yes, if included
Assessing Secondary
Completion ("TSAC")
exams, or a diploma
issued by a
postsecondary school,
college, or university
in the U.S.
Official Illinois
Department of Human    1           No                  No
Services
identification letter
Identification card;
license; or other
official federal,
state, county
document, dated within
the twelve (12)-month  1           No                  No
period immediately
prior to the
submission of the
application, related
to Medicare and
Medicaid
Illinois Department of
Human Services
eligibility
determination or
redetermination letter
(for example SNAP,
CCAP, WIC, or the      1           No                  No
like) dated within the
twelve (12)-month
period immediately
prior to the
submission of the
application
Illinois person with a
disability
identification card,   1           Yes, if included    Yes
issued by the Illinois
Secretary of State
Union photo
identification card
that identifies the
applicant as a member
of a union that        1           Yes                 No
represents employees
working in the U.S.,
issued by such union
(must include photo)
Employee
identification card
that identifies the
applicant as an
employee, consultant,
or board member,
issued by an
organization located   1           Yes                 No
in the U.S., including
clergy identification
cards issued by a
religious organization
(must include
organization name and
address)
DD Forms 214/215,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Defense,
indicating the         1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
NA Form 13038, issued
by the U.S. National
Personnel Records
Center, indicating the 1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
NGB Forms 22/22A,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Defense
indicating the         1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
Signed letter from the
Illinois Department of
Veterans Affairs
confirming the         1           No                  No
applicant's military
status (must be
original copy, on
official letterhead)
Certificate of
marriage, domestic
partnership, civil
union. divorce, or     1           No                  Yes, if included
dissolution of
marriage, domestic
partnership, or civil
Voter registration     1           Yes, if included    No
card, state-issued
Foreign voter
registration card,     1           No                  No
issued by a country
other than the U.S.
Selective Service
registration card,
issued by the U.S.     1           No                  Yes
Selective Service
System
U.S. Individual
Taxpayer
Identification
("ITIN") card (IRS
Form 9844), issued by  1           No                  No
the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (must
include the
applicant's signature,
ITIN number, and name)
Criminal record check
(automated fingerprint 1           Yes                 Yes, if included
identification system)
(must include photo)
Illinois Department of
Corrections
identification card
verification form
(issued prior to the   1           Yes                 Yes
thirty (30)-day period
immediately prior to
the submission of the
application)
Parole or mandatory
supervised release     1           Yes, if included    Yes, if included
agreement included
Illinois Department of
Juvenile Justice       1           Yes, if included    Yes, if included
conditions of
aftercare release
Illinois adoption
record of the
applicant or the       1           Yes, if included    Yes, if included
applicant's child
included
 
   TABLE 16-3104.4 ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS ELIGIBLE
   TO ESTABLISH APPLICANT IDENTITY FOR APPLICANTS
   ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE VETERAN DESIGNATION
Document Point Value Acceptable as Photo ID? Acceptable as Proof of Date of
                                             Birth?
Document               Point Value Acceptable as Photo Acceptable as Proof of
                                   ID?                 Date of Birth?
Common access card,
issued by the
Department of Defense  3           Yes                 Yes
to active duty,
retiree, or reservist
military personnel
Uniformed services ID
card, issued by the
Department of Defense  3           Yes                 Yes
to active duty,
retiree, or reservist
military personnel
Illinois driver's
license with a         3           Yes                 Yes
"VETERAN" designation
Illinois
identification card    3           Yes                 Yes
with a "VETERAN"
designation
Current City of Moline
ID that contains the   3           Yes                 Yes
veteran designation
Veterans
identification card,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Veterans 2           Yes                 No
Affairs (must include
photo and member ID
number)
Veterans health
identification card,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Veterans 2           Yes                 No
Affairs (must include
photo and member ID
number)
DD Forms 214/215,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Defense,
indicating the         1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
NA Form 13038, issued
by the U.S. National
Personnel Records
Center, indicating the 1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
NGB Forms 22/22A,
issued by the U.S.
Department of Defense
indicating the         1           No                  Yes
applicant's condition
of discharge from U.S.
military service
Signed letter from the
Illinois Department of
Veterans Affairs
confirming the         1           No                  No
applicant's military
status (must be
original copy, on
official letterhead)
 
   TABLE 16-3104.5 ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS ELIGIBLE TO
   ESTABLISH APPLICANT IDENTITY FOR APPLICANTS UNDER THE AGE OF FOURTEEN (14).
 
                                                                              Acceptable Acceptable
Document                                                                Point as Photo   as Proof
                                                                        Value ID?        of Date of
                                                                                         Birth?
U.S. birth certificate of the applicant, issued by a state or
territory, or a political subdivision of a state or territory, or the
U.S. State Department, including consular report of birth abroad        3     N/A        Yes
(provided that birth certificates issued in Puerto Rico prior to July
1, 2010 will not be accepted)
Foreign birth certificate, issued by a current or former sovereign      3     N/A        Yes
nation other than the U.S.
School enrollment form for the applicant, issued by the Moline-Coal     3     N/A        Yes
Valley School District
Baptismal records from a religious organization on the organization’s
official letterhead, bearing the original signature of an executive-    1     N/A        No
level employee of the organization
Official medical record displaying the applicant's date of birth        1     N/A        Yes
 
   (c)   If library staff is unable to determine whether a foreign language
document qualifies as an acceptable proof of identity document without an
English translation, the applicant shall be responsible for providing a
certified English translation of such foreign language document. Whenever
possible, foreign language documents should be translated into English by
either a translator certified by the American Translators Association or a
court-certified interpreter. The original and/or certified copy of the foreign
language document and the original translation document should be presented
together.
   (d)   The name appearing on the City of Moline ID shall match the legal name
on the applicant’s proof of identity document(s), unless one of the following
exceptions applies:
      (1)   If the applicant presents a legible and unaltered original or
certified copy of a court order or decree (with government seal, stamp, or
other official imprint) issued by a state court showing his or her formal legal
name (matching the name displayed in the proof of identity document(s)) and his
or her new court-ordered legal name, then the applicant may use his or her
current legal name on the City of Moline ID;
      (2)   If the applicant currently uses a name that is different from the
name that appears on his or her proof of identity document(s), then the
applicant may elect to have his or her name appear on their City of Moline ID
in one of the following forms, in lieu of the applicant’s full legal name:
         a.   The first initial of the applicant’s first name and the
applicant’s full legal last name (e.g., “John James Smith” would be listed as
“J. Smith”); or
         b.   The first and middle initial of the applicant’s first and middle
names and the applicant’s full legal last name (e.g., “John James Smith” would
be listed as “J. J. Smith”).
   (e)   Unless otherwise noted, all proof of identity documents must be
current (i.e., unexpired). If a proof of identity document does not contain an
expiration date, it will be accepted as proof of identity for the lesser of:
         a.   The period for which the document is valid, as specified by the
issuing country or agency; or
         b.   Ten (10) years from the date of issuance.
   (f)   Gender identity or expression cannot be the basis for rejecting a
proof of identity document.
   (g)   The following subsections shall apply to applicants aged fourteen (14)
to twenty-one (21) without photo identification:
      (1)   An applicant aged fourteen (14) to twenty-one (21) who lacks photo
identification may apply for a City of Moline ID if accompanied by an eligible
caretaker who can demonstrate proof of a relationship to the applicant. An
“eligible caretaker” for purposes of this subsection is a birth parent,
adoptive parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, foster parent, Illinois
Department of Children and Family Services (“DCFS”) official, caseworker from a
DCFS foster care program/agency, a case manager from a facility licensed by
DCFS as a Youth Transitional Housing Program (“YTHP”), or a homeless youth
caretaker from a facility licensed by DCFS as a Youth Emergency Shelter
(“YES”). The applicant must provide documents providing identity that total at
least two (2) points in the aggregate and the eligible caretaker must provide
documents proving their own identity, including photo identification, that
total at least three (3) points in the aggregate.
      (2)   The following documents can be used to prove relationship between
an eligible caretaker and applicant aged fourteen (14) to twenty-one (21):
         a.   Applicant’s birth certificate listing the caretaker as a parent;
         b.   Adoption decree or certificate of adoption listing the caretaker
as an adoptive parent;
         c.   Letter from DCFS or DCFS foster care program/agency including the
caretaker’s name and title dated within one (1) year;
         d.   Court order of paternity or an administrative paternity order
entered by Illinois Department of Health and Family Services (“DHFS”), listing
the caretaker’s name;
         e.   Court order or decree establishing a legal guardianship or
custodianship;
         f.   Applicant’s birth certificate and stepparent’s marriage or civil
union certificate;
         g.   Letter from the Social Security Administration establishing the
individual caretaker as the applicant’s representative payee dated within the
one (1)-year period immediately prior to the applicant’s submission of the
application; and
         h.   Letter from a YTHP or YES facility that indicates that the case
manager or homeless youth caretaker accompanying the applicant is both a valid
representative of the facility and authorized to serve as the applicant’s case
manager or caretaker dated within the thirty (30)-day period immediately prior
to the applicant’s submission of the application.
   (h)   The following subsections shall apply to applicants over age twenty-
one (21) with a disability or applicants sixty-five (65) years of age or older
without photo identification.
      (1)   An applicant over the age of twenty-one (21) with a disability or
an applicant sixty-five (65) years or older who lacks photo identification may
apply if accompanied by an eligible caretaker who can demonstrate proof of a
relationship to the applicant. The applicant must provide documents proving
identity that total at least two (2) points in the aggregate and the eligible
caretaker must provide documents proving their own identity, including photo
identification, that total at least three (3) points in the aggregate. An
eligible caretaker for purposes of this section is any of the following:
         a.   A Social Security representative individual payee;
         b.   A Social Security representative organization payee;
         c.   An authorized case worker or attendant from a residential
facility operated by the State of Illinois or the City of Moline, or a licensed
housing provider of the state or city;
         d.   An authorized case worker or attendant from a State of Illinois
or City of Moline agency that provides services to the applicant, or a
designated service provider of the State of Illinois or City of Moline; or
         e.   A court-ordered legal guardian, custodian, or conservator.
      (2)   The following documents can be used to prove relationship between
an eligible caretaker and an applicant over the age of twenty-one (21) with a
disability or an applicant sixty-five (65) years or older:
         a.   Letter from the Social Security Administration establishing the
individual caretaker as the applicant's representative payee, dated within one
(1) year;
         b.   Letter from the Social Security Administration establishing an
organization as the applicant's representative payee, dated within one (1)
year;
         c.   Letter from a residential facility where the applicant resides,
dated within thirty (30) days;
         d.   Letter from an agency or organization that provides services to
the applicant, dated within thirty (30) days; or
         e.   Court order appointing the caretaker as the applicant's legal
guardian, custodian, or conservator.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3105. PROOF OF MOLINE RESIDENCY.
   (a)   Every applicant must meet the proof of Moline residency requirements
as set forth in this section in order to qualify for a City of Moline ID. Each
proof of Moline residency document must be authentic and list a residential
address located within the City of Moline. This evidence is subject to
electronic and visual inspection and verification.
   (b)   To prove residency, an applicant must submit one (1) of the following
documents, which, unless otherwise noted, must be current or dated within the
thirty (30)-day period immediately prior to the applicant’s submission of the
application.
      (1)   Unexpired Illinois driver's license or learner's permit;
      (2)   Unexpired Illinois identification card;
      (3)   Unexpired U.S. Department of State driver's license or non-driver
identification card;
      (4)   Unexpired Illinois temporary visitor's driver's license;
      (5)   Unexpired City of Moline ID;
      (6)   Unexpired consular identification card, must include full address;
      (7)   Utility (i.e., gas, electric, garbage, water, internet, cable,
landline telephone services) bill;
      (8)   Current Illinois vehicle title or registration;
      (9)   Local property tax statement or mortgage payment receipt, dated
within the twelve (12)-month period immediately prior to the submission of the
application;
      (10)   Bank account statement (including checking, savings, certificate
of deposit, and investment accounts);
      (11)   Proof of the applicant's (if a minor) or the applicant's minor
child's current enrollment in an educational institution located within the
City of Moline (e.g., Moline-Coal Valley Public Schools School Enrollment Form,
letter on school's letterhead, report card, and the like), dated within the
current school year;
      (12)   Proof of the applicant's (if a minor) or the applicant's minor
child's current enrollment in a program administered by the Moline Department
of Family and Support Services ("DFSS") or Illinois Department of Human
Services, including Head Start, Early Head Start, and a licensed child care,
dated within the current school year;
      (13)   Letter or record addressed to the applicant at an address within
the City of Moline from a school, college, or university located in Illinois
that the applicant or the applicant's child attends, dated within the current
school year;
      (14)   Unexpired photo identification issued by a college, university, or
technical college, if accompanied by a tuition/fee receipt addressed to a
residence located within the City of Moline;
      (15)   Employment record, including paystub, paycheck, or earnings
statement issued with the name and address of the employer;
      (16)   IRS Forms W-2, W-4, 1099-MISC, 1095-A, 1095-8, or 1095-C, provided
such form is submitted on or before April 15 of the year following the tax year
indicated on the form;
      (17)   Letter or document issued by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service,
the Illinois Department of Revenue, or the City of Moline Finance Department,
addressed to the applicant regarding the applicant's personal tax status, dated
within the twelve (12)-month period immediately prior to the submission of the
application;
      (18)   Jury summons or court order;
      (19)   Insurance bill;
      (20)   Current lease or sublease that includes term/length, rent amount,
terms regarding utilities, and lessor/sublessor contact information;
      (21)   Current lease or sublease (that includes term/length, rent amount,
terms regarding utilities, and lessor/sublessor contract information), lease
addendum, rent notice, or other document issued by the Moline Housing Authority
listing the applicant as lessee and/or authorized tenant of a residential unit
under the Housing Choice Voucher ("HCV") Program, dated within the twelve (12)-
month period immediately prior to the submission of the application;
      (22)   Signed letter on official letterhead from a landlord under the HCV
Program or the Moline Housing Authority indicating that the applicant either is
listed on a lease pursuant to the HCV Program, or is otherwise authorized to
reside at the address indicated on the lease, dated within the twelve (12)-
month period immediately prior to the submission of the application;
      (23)   United States Postal Service change of address confirmation dated
within the sixty (60)-day period immediately prior to the submission of the
application;
      (24)   Verification of release document from the United States Department
of Health and Human Service - Office of Refugee Resettlement, that includes
photo, date of birth, name, and address of the applicant's sponsor, dated
within the twelve (12)-month period immediately prior to the submission of the
application;
      (25)   Written verification on official letterhead issued by a public
government agency, hospital, health clinic, social services agency (including
domestic violence shelter), homeless shelter, or religious institution located
within the City of Moline confirming at least fifteen (15) days of residency by
the applicant within the thirty (30)-day period immediately prior to the
submission of the application, and including the direct phone number of the
organization/agency for verification;
      (26)   Letter of record on official letterhead signed by an executive-
level employee from a religious organization, social services agency (including
domestic violence shelter), or homeless shelter located within the City of
Moline confirming services provided to the applicant within the thirty (30)-day
period immediately prior to the submission of the application, and including
the direct phone number of the organization/agency for verification;
      (27)   Written verification on official letterhead signed by an
executive-level employee from the Rock Island County Sheriff’s Office, Illinois
Department of Corrections, or Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice verifying
the applicant's residency prior to or upon release, dated within forty-five
(45) days immediately prior to the submission of the application;
      (28)   Unemployment and/or disability checks issued by the State of
Illinois;
      (29)   Letter of record on official letterhead signed by the applicant's
appointed guardian through the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services ("DCFS"), confirming that the applicant is in the care of the DCFS and
has resided within the City of Moline for at least fifteen (15) days within the
thirty (30)-day period immediately prior to the submission of the application;
      (30)   Order of supervision (Form I-220B) issued by the U.S. Citizenship
and Immigration Services, dated within the last twelve (12)-month period
immediately prior to the submission of the application; or
      (31)   Verification of release form issued by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services Office of Refugee Resettlement, that includes the
applicant's photograph, date of birth, name, and the address of the applicant's
sponsor, dated within the twelve (12)-month period immediately prior to the
submission of the application.
   (c)   Proof of Moline residency documents must appear in the applicant’s
name (as presented on his or her proof of identity document(s), except that:
      (1)   A parent or legal guardian submitting an application on behalf of a
minor applicant may verify such minor's residency (if the parent or legal
guardian meets all proof of Moline residency criteria), in accordance with §
16-3105(e) of this Code;
      (2)   An eligible caretaker, as defined by §
16-3104(g) of this Code, accompanying an applicant age fourteen (14) to twenty-
one (21) may verify such applicant's residency (if the eligible caretaker meets
all proof of Moline residency criteria) and submit the caretaker residency
attestation form;
      (3)   An eligible caretaker, as defined by §
16-3104(h) of this Code, accompanying an applicant over age twenty-one (21)
with a disability or an applicant sixty-five (65) years or older, may verify
such applicant's residency (if the eligible caretaker meets all proof of Moline
residency criteria) and submit the caretaker residency attestation twenty-one
(21)+ and senior citizen form;
      (4)   An applicant may use proof of Moline residency documents in his or
her spouse's or domestic partner's name if the applicant submits a certified
marriage or domestic partnership certificate issued by a state; or
      (5)   An applicant may use proof of Moline residency documents that
appear in the applicant's former legal name if the applicant presents an
original or certified, legible, and unaltered copy of a court order or decree
(with a government seal, stamp, or other official imprint) issued by a state
court showing that his or her former legal name was changed and matches the
name displayed in the proof of Moline residency document(s).
   (d)   Documents that do not meet the proof of Moline residency requirements
and will not be accepted as proof of Moline residency include:
      (1)   Documents addressed to post office (P.O.) boxes;
      (2)   Cellular, mobile, or wireless phone bills and/or long distance
communications bills;
      (3)   Hospital appointment reminders, letters, or postcards;
      (4)   Insurance cancellation, renewal, or acceptance letters/notices, or
insurance applications;
      (5)   Child support letters or bills;
      (6)   Business licenses or permits;
      (7)   Business tax registration certificates;
      (8)   Wired money transfer receipts;
      (9)   Deposit slips and ATM receipts; and
      (10)   Personal letters from a bank and customer profile printouts (which
are not considered bank account statements).
   (e)   A minor applicant’s parent or legal guardian who submits an
application on behalf of the applicant may verify that the minor applicant
resides in the City of Moline, provided that the following requirements are
met:
      (1)   The minor applicant resides with the parent or legal guardian;
      (2)   The parent or legal guardian meets the proof of Moline residency
criteria set forth herein;
      (3)   The parent or legal guardian certifies under penalty of perjury on
the minor's application that:
         a.   He or she is the parent or legal guardian of the applicant; and
         b.   Both the applicant and the parent or legal guardian meet the
residency requirements; and
      (4)   The parent or legal guardian submits one (1) of the following
documents with the minor's application to prove that the person submitting the
application on behalf of the minor applicant is the minor applicant's parent or
legal guardian:
         a.   The minor applicant's birth certificate that lists the person
submitting the application as a parent;
         b.   An adoption decree for the minor applicant that lists the person
submitting the application as parent or legal guardian;
         c.   A court order or decree establishing the person submitting the
application as the legal guardian or parent of the minor applicant; or
         d.   A signed letter of record on official letterhead signed by an
executive-level official at the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services establishing that the person submitting the application is either the
parent or legal guardian of the applicant.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3106. EXPIRATION, RENEWAL, AND REPLACEMENT.
   (a)   Each City of Moline ID expires upon the earlier of:
      (1)   Three (3) years from issuance of the City of Moline ID; and
      (2)   The cardholder no longer residing in the City of Moline.
   (b)   Applicants renewing their City of Moline IDs must meet both the proof
of identity and proof of Moline residency requirements set forth in §§
16-3104 and
16-3105; provided that an applicant seeking to renew a City of Moline ID that
was at least fourteen (14) years when he or she applied for and received such
City of Moline ID may satisfy the proof of identity requirements by
surrendering his or her current City of Moline ID at the time of renewal.
   (c)   Cardholders are responsible for the safekeeping of their City of
Moline ID. Lost or stolen Moline IDs should be reported to the Moline Library
within ten (10) days of the cardholder becoming aware of the loss/theft.
   (d)   Applicants must meet all stated proof of identity and proof of Moline
residency requirements at the time of applying for a new City of Moline ID or
to replace an existing, lost, or stolen City of Moline ID, or to make a change
of City of Moline address; provided that an applicant seeking to replace a City
of Moline ID that was at least fourteen (14) years when he or she applied for
and received such City of Moline ID may satisfy the proof of identity
requirements by surrendering his or her current City of Moline ID at the time
of replacement.
   (e)   A City of Moline ID cardholder must surrender his or her City of
Moline ID to the Moline Public Library no later than ten (10) days after he or
she moves out of the City of Moline or otherwise ceases to reside in the City
of Moline. A surrendering cardholder will not receive any refund or credit.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3107. FEES.
   There are no fees associated with the application for or receipt of a City
of Moline ID.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24; Ord. No. 3040-2024; Sec. 16-3107(a) repealed; new
Sec. 16-3107(a) enacted; 10/22/24; Ord. No. 3021-2025; Sec. 16-3107(a)-(c)
repealed; new 16-3107 enacted; 5/6/25)
SEC. 16-3108. REVIEW OF DENIAL.
   An applicant who has been denied a City of Moline ID may seek review of the
denial determination by submitting a review request, on a form and in a format
established by the City Administrator within thirty (30) days of the denial.
The City Administrator shall review and may respond in writing to all review
requests within thirty (30) days of receipt. The City Administrator shall have
the power to reverse or uphold the determination under review. An applicant may
appeal the City Administrator’s written decision to the City Council within 30
days of the City Administrator’s decision being issued, which shall have the
power to reverse or uphold the decision under review, and such decision shall
be considered a final administrative decision. If the City Council does not
issue a response to the review request within thirty (30) days of receipt of
such review request, then the determination under review shall become the final
decision on the application.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3109. CONFIDENTIALITY.
   The Moline Director of Library Services and their designees responsible for
reviewing applications shall keep all information submitted by an applicant for
a City of Moline ID confidential to the maximum extent permitted by law. The
Director of Library Services and his or her designees responsible for reviewing
applications shall review, but not collect, documents provided by an applicant
as proof of identity and residence. In relation to an application for a City of
Moline ID, the Moline Public Library shall not maintain a record of an
applicant's address or telephone number.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3110. PENALTIES.
   Any applicant who knowingly makes a false statement of material fact in
connection with the application for or the use of a City of Moline ID may be
liable to the City of Moline for a civil penalty pursuant to §
1-1107 of this Code. Additionally, any such actions will result in denial of an
application or automatic forfeiture of the City of Moline ID, as applicable.
Individuals that produce or use an inauthentic replica of the City of Moline
ID, provide or use falsified documentation in connection with an application
for a City of Moline ID (including documentation other than an applicant's in
connection with an application), or otherwise violate this section, may be
reported to the Rock Island County's Attorney, the United States Attorney for
the United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, or other
applicable authorities, and prosecuted to the fullest extent permissible under
local, state, and federal law.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
SEC. 16-3111. BUSINESS APPLICATION TO OFFER DISCOUNTS OR BENEFITS TO CITY OF
MOLINE ID HOLDERS.
Any business or cultural institution may submit an application to the Director
of Library Services to offer discounts or any other type of benefit to City of
Moline ID cardholders. The Director of Library Services shall furnish all such
applications to the City Administrator for consideration, and the City
Administrator reserves the right to deny the application of any business or
cultural institution that:
   (1)   Promotes anything that is contrary to the City of Moline's missions,
initiatives, or policies;
   (2)   Promotes the violation of any federal, state, or municipal law;
   (3)   Encourages unsafe practices; or
   (4)   That would diminish the integrity, character, or brand of the City of
Moline.
(Ord. No. 3005-2024; 2/27/24)
CHAPTER 17
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Art. I.   In General, §17-1100 - §17-1102
   Art. II.   Sales Regulations, Itinerant Vendors and Transient Merchants,
      Div. 1. In General, §17-2100 - §17-2101
      Div. 2. Licenses, §17-2200 - §17-2215
   Art. III.   Junk and Secondhand Dealers
      Div. 1. In General, §17-3100 - §17-3101
      Div. 2. Licenses, §17-3200 - §17-3205
   Art. IV.   Reserved.
   Art. V.   Regulations For Sexually Oriented Business Activities, §17-5100 -
§17-5126
   Art. VI.    Pawnbrokers, §17-6100 - §17-6111
   Art. VII.   Motor Vehicle Towing Services, §17-7100 - §17-7116
   Art. VIIA.   Reserved.
   Art. VIII.   Burglar, Hold-up and Fire Alarm Systems and Users, §17-8100 -
§17-8124
   Art. IX.   Raffles, §17-9100 - §17-9108
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 17-1100.   SERVICE FEES IN ADDITION TO LICENSE FEES; IMPOSITION; AMOUNT.
   All licensees of the City of Moline, Illinois, except as otherwise
specifically provided in the Moline Code of Ordinances, shall, in addition to
their annual or semi-annual license fees, pay the following service fees:
   (1)   In those cases where more than seven (7) days elapse after they are
given notice to pay their renewal license fees in writing by the accounts and
finance officer, a service fee of five dollars ($5.00);
   (2)   In those cases where a notice from the mayor has been served upon them
advising them that there will be an administrative hearing to revoke their
license for failure to pay fees, which has been personally served at the
licensed premises, an additional service charge of ten dollars ($10.00);
   (3)   In those cases where an administrative proceeding has in fact been
held and the license has in fact been revoked by written order of the mayor, an
additional fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), which fee shall cover stenographic
costs and personal service of said order.
SEC. 17-1101.   SAME - COLLECTION.
   The accounts and finance officer shall collect the above service fees at the
time the renewal license fees are paid. No license shall be renewed where any
such service fees are payable, until they are paid in full together with the
license fee.
SEC. 17-1102.   SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS - PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Whenever this Code provides for licensing, registration, or penal
bond, in order to engage in an occupation and no procedure is set forth for
suspension or revocation thereof, or, if the procedure set forth does not
specify at a minimum written notice of charges and hearing to receive evidence
on charges with the right of confrontation, then the provisions of this section
shall apply. In addition, if a procedure described as a minimum herein is set
forth elsewhere in this Code but if no time frames are established for the
conduct of said procedure, then the time periods set forth herein shall be
controlling.
   (b)   Whenever a person holding a license or registration from the City has
filed a penal bond with the City for the purpose of engaging in an occupation
within the City violates a provision of this Code relating to said person's
conduct of said occupation or has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor
involving fraud or other dishonesty since the said license or registration was
issued or penal bond was filed, then the issuing authority or official with
whom a penal bond was filed may issue in writing administrative charges to said
person setting forth in substance the nature of the offense or grounds for
administrative action alleged against said person and shall provide in writing
notice of hearing to be held no earlier than ten (10) days after service of
same setting forth the name of the hearing officer; the date, time, and place
of hearing; that the person charged may appear and confront witnesses against
the person charged and present evidence in said person's own behalf but that
the matter will be heard in said person's absence; and that the hearing officer
may order any license or registration suspended or revoked or penal bond
forfeited.
   (c)   Any charge and notice of hearing shall be served by mailing same,
postage prepaid, by certified mail to the address of the person charged as
shown on the license, registration, or penal bond or any application therefor
and, in the case of a penal bond, to any surety listed thereon. Service shall
be complete when the charge and notice of hearing are deposited for mailing.
   (d)   The issuing authority or official with whom the penal bond was filed
shall conduct the hearing. The rules of evidence pertaining to actions at
common law shall not govern said proceedings, and the hearing officer shall
receive and consider any evidence that is relevant, reliable, and not unduly
prejudicial; however, testimony shall be under oath which the hearing officer
is hereby authorized to administer and shall be preserved by means of
mechanical recording or video tape.
   (e)   The hearing officer may determine, after hearing, that the charges are
unfounded; that the charges are valid but that suspension, revocation, or
forfeiture is not necessary because the party charged can and has agreed to
correct any offending matter within thirty (30) days, in which case the matter
will be continued to allow for same; that the charges are valid and suspension,
revocation, or forfeiture is necessary, but in no case shall revocation or
forfeiture be the remedy if the offending matter is correctable within thirty
(30) days, unless the charges determined valid constitute a pattern of non-
compliance. For purpose hereof "a pattern of non-compliance" shall mean three
(3) or more instances in a period of two (2) years where the person charged has
had charges determined valid.
   (f)   Within fifteen (15) days after the close of a hearing the hearing
officer shall serve the person charged and any other party entitled to notice
of hearing a written decision setting forth the hearing officer's finding of
facts, conclusions of law, and order. Service of the decision shall be as
provided in (c) above.
   (g)   The decision of the hearing officer is a final decision unless within
ten (10) days after service of same the party charged appeals same in writing
to the mayor. If an appeal is filed, the mayor shall review the record and
issue a decision in writing within thirty (30) days. It is the intent of this
provision to provide an election to appeal to the mayor and not a requirement
to do so.
ARTICLE II. SALES REGULATIONS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 17-2100.   PURPOSE.
   That the public interest generally, and the interest of the public and
convenience and necessity requires the protection of the people from the
various dangers of transient merchants or vendors or solicitors, and requires
the regulation of said transient merchants, vendors, or solicitors, and to that
end, the purposes of this ordinance are specifically declared to be as follows:
   (1)   To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of
dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as
solicitors, by requiring the registration and monitoring of all such
solicitors, and by regulating the business of itinerant or transient merchants
or vendors through the imposition of reasonable registration fees.
   (2)   To protect residents against trespassing by solicitors, itinerant or
transient merchants or vendors upon the private property of such residents if
they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such
persons or do not wish to be sold any such merchandise, wares, goods, or
services.
   (3)   To protect the right of persons to engage in interstate commerce by
requiring all those so engaged who go door-to-door to register for the purposes
heretofore stated.
   (4)   To delineate specifically the information to be requested from persons
required to register hereunder, standardizing registration requirements and
qualifications and fixing the time frame within which registration is to be had
and establishing the parameters of administrative discretion over the
registration of any transient or itinerant merchants, vendors or solicitors.
SEC. 17-2101.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this
ordinance:
   (1)   City shall mean the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (2)   Person shall mean an individual person, firm, corporation, partnership
or association.
   (3)   Residence shall mean every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes, by one or more persons and contained within any type of
building or structure.
   (4)   Transient Merchant, Itinerant Vendor, or Solicitor shall mean:
      a.   Any person who transports tangible personal property for retail sale
into or within this City who does not maintain in the City an established
office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center or
reside   nce from which such business is conducted. To determine appropriate
application of this ordinance, whether any office, distributions house, sales
house, warehouse, service center, or residence is established or not within the
meaning of this ordinance, the accounts and finance officer and any appropriate
judicial entity shall first take into consideration Section
17-2214, infra. However, this act does not apply to any person who delivers
tangible personal property within the City who is fulfilling an order for such
property which was solicited or placed by mail or other means;
      b.   Otherwise offers for sale any tangible personal property or personal
services, while not maintaining any established office, distribution house,
sales house, warehouse, service center or residence within the City; or,
      c.   Accepts or attempts to accept orders for the sale of tangible
personal property or services, including but not limited to advertising or
subscriptions which are to be furnished in the future or where such services
are to be performed in the future or where the person offering said services or
tangible personal property for sale does not maintain in the City an
established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center
or residence within the City.
DIVISION 2. LICENSES
SEC. 17-2200.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
SEC. 17-2201.   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each transient merchant shall at all times while doing business in this City
keep in the possession of such person, the license required by this chapter and
shall, upon request, display the license as evidence of compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance. This section will be satisfied by complying
with the requirements of Section
17-2207, if applicable.
SEC. 17-2202.   SALES REGULATIONS.
   (a)   No person shall engage in activities regulated under this ordinance on
public property without first procuring special authorization and appropriate
license from the accounts and finance officer.
   (b)   No person shall shout or use any sound device upon any of the public
places of the City or upon any private premises in said City where sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being
plainly heard from the public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares, merchandise or services which such person proposes to
sell.
   (c)   No person shall engage in business as a transient merchant in defiance
of any notice exhibited at a residence or business indicating that peddlers or
solicitors are not welcome or invited.
   (d)   No person shall engage in the activities regulated under this
ordinance from door to door prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. of any
weekday or Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or on a State or National
holiday.
   (e)   No transient merchant using any vehicle or conveyance of any
description shall cause or permit the vehicle or conveyance to park or stand on
the public streets for the purpose of selling or dispensing therefrom said
transient merchant's merchandise.
   (f)   It shall be a violation of this article for any owner of, or person in
possession or control of, any real property located within the City of Moline,
to permit, encourage, or otherwise allow any transient merchant subject to
regulation hereunder, to engage in business on such real property unless such
transient merchant is licensed either individually or pursuant to a blanket
license under Division 2 of this article. Each such transient merchant so
permitted, encouraged or otherwise allowed to engage in business by such owner
or person in possession or control of real estate in violation of the
requirements imposed in this article shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense by such owner or person in possession or control of real estate.
SEC. 17-2203.   FIXED LOCATION TRANSIENT MERCHANTS.
   (a)   No transient merchant shall engage in business at a fixed location
without the written permission, by lease or otherwise, of the owner or person
in control of the property. This written agreement shall be signed by the
parties and shall include the dates the transient merchant shall be conducting
business. This agreement shall be displayed by the transient merchant at such
fixed location whenever said transient merchant is transacting business.
   (b)   A transient merchant doing business at a fixed location shall provide
sufficient off-street parking spaces for all employees and customers.
   (c)   Any display of tangible personal property shall be at least fifteen
(15) feet from the curb line. All signs and advertisements used in connection
with the business licensed herein shall comply with the appropriate sections of
the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 17-2204.   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An application for a transient merchant license shall give the following
information:
   (1)   The name or names of the persons or person having the management or
supervision of applicant's business during the time such business will be
transacted in the City and the local address or addresses of such person or
persons while engaged in such business.
   (2)   The permanent address or addresses of the persons referred to in
Section
17-2204(a); whether such person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or
employee, and the credentials establishing such relationship; the name and
address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will
be transacted, if any; and if a corporation, the state in which it is
incorporated.
   (3)   The social security and/or driver's license number of applicant.
   (4)   The tax ID number or employer ID number of the applicant.
   (5)   The place or places in the City where the applicant proposes to
transact business and the length of time during which said business shall be
conducted.
   (6)   The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, where applicant within two (2) years preceding the date of said
application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office box number and street address of any building or office
in which said business was conducted.
   (7)   A statement of the nature and character of the tangible personal
property or service to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the
City; whether the goods are new, damaged or rejects; whether the same are
proposed to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, or at auction or by
direct sale or by taking orders for future delivery; the location where the
goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and the
location of goods or products at the time said application is filed.
   (8)   A statement as to whether or not any person or persons in the employ
of applicant's business (including any independent contractor) has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or of the violation of any law or ordinance
relating to the same or similar business to be conducted by applicant, the
nature of such offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
   (9)   Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under this
ordinance, which application has been denied.
   (10)   Whether the applicant has ever held a license under this ordinance,
which license has been revoked.
SEC. 17-2205.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   If the application contains a complete statement of the information required
and all material required to be submitted therewith is filed with the accounts
and finance office, the accounts and finance officer, subject to the provisions
of Section
17-2211 shall issue the license within five (5) working days. The license
issued hereunder shall be non-transferable and non-assignable. There shall be
no refund of the license fee.
SEC. 17-2206.   FEES.
   Before a license shall be issued, applicant shall pay a license fee
according to the following schedule:
   (1)      Blanket license:
      a.   Single event blanket license (event not to exceed seven (7)
consecutive days)   $ 50.00;
      b.    Annual blanket license          $ 150.00.
   (2)   Transient Merchant’s License:
      a.   Two (2) Day (per site)          $ 25.00 plus $10.00 each add’l
employee;
      b.   Each additional day (per site)       $ 5.00;
      c.   Up to One (1) Month (per site)       $ 100.00, plus $10.00 each
add’l employee;
      d.   Up to Three (3) Month (per site)       $ 125.00, plus $10.00 each
add’l employee;
      e.   Up to Six (6) Month (per site)       $ 150.00, plus $10.00 each
add’l employee;
      f.   Seven (7) to Twelve (12) Month (per site)    $ 200.00, plus $10.00
each add’l employee.
   (3)   Seasonal Outdoor License:
      a.   Limited to operation of seven (7) hours per week during the period
of May 15th through    October 15th,  both inclusive, annually   $ 75.00.
   (4)   Duplicate License:            $ 5.00.
(Ord. No. 3046-2006; Sec. 17-2206 repealed; new Sec. 17-2206 enacted; 10/17/06;
Ord. No. 3007-2008; Sec. 17-2206 repealed; new Sec. 17-2206 enacted; 02/26/08;
Ord. No. 3025-2013; Sec. 17-2206(2) repealed; new Sec. 17-2206(2) enacted; 10/
01/13)
SEC. 17-2207.   DUPLICATE AND INDIVIDUAL LICENSES; WHEN EACH REQUIRED.
   A duplicate transient merchant license may be issued to the employees of a
licensed person when such employees transact business on behalf of such
licensed person at multiple location(s). Such employees shall carry any
duplicate license issued, which license shall be obtained at the accounts and
finance office. If the business of transient merchant in this City is
transacted through agents who are not employees or by consignees, or by an
unincorporated firm or association, each person so conducting the business of
transient merchant in this City shall be required to have a separate license.
SEC. 17-2208.   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   A religious, charitable, patriotic, social service, civic, or
political nonprofit organization shall receive a license for activities
regulated under this ordinance where its authorized representatives undertake
such activities without remuneration and where the entire proceeds of the
activities will go to the organization and not for private profit. The
organization shall file the information required for a transient merchant
license in the accounts and finance office. The accounts and finance officer or
designee thereof shall issue, free of charge, a license for the requested
activity. The license shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, and may be
renewed on or before the expiration date.
   (b)   Where such organizations receive only rents or other charges for the
use of their premises by transient merchants, such organizations shall require
each transient merchant to possess and display its separate license required
under this ordinance, unless the organization has obtained a blanket license
pursuant to the provisions of Section
17-2209.
SEC. 17-2209.   BLANKET LICENSES.
   Whenever any individual transient merchant license would otherwise be
required under this ordinance, a blanket annual license in lieu thereof may be
requested by an owner or person in control of premises (hereinafter owner) upon
which transient merchant activities are proposed to be held, subject to the
following conditions:
   (1)   The owner or person in control of any real property located in the
City, upon which a permanent business and building is located, who conducts
events regulated and required to be licensed under this ordinance, or who
leases the premises to transient merchants for such regulated events, may
procure a blanket annual license, and the individuals conducting the various
concessions there will not be required to obtain individual licenses, under the
following conditions:
      a.   The owner of such real property shall be required to submit in
writing to the accounts and finance officer of the City, on forms provided by
the accounts and finance officer, the locations of the premises upon which such
activities are to be conducted, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors or other governing body of the transient merchant, the name and
address of the owner of the premises, and the name, permanent address and
business address of the person in charge of managing such property. Said owner
shall also sign a statement that, in the event the license is granted, said
owner will comply with all the provisions of this ordinance and guarantees that
the transient merchant leasing property from said owner shall also comply with
all the provisions of this ordinance.
      b.   The owner shall make the provisions of this ordinance a part of any
agreement for the use of the premises for any purpose to which the provisions
of this ordinance are applicable.
      c.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to prevent any person
from operating or conducting business on the premises as a transient merchant
who is otherwise ineligible to be licensed hereunder.
   (2)   Any person conducting or sponsoring an activity described in sub-
paragraph (a) of this Section
17-2209 may secure a single event blanket license for the same uses and
purposes and on the same terms and conditions as the annual blanket license. No
event authorized under a single event blanket license shall continue for more
than seven (7) consecutive days.
   (3)   No duplicate license may be issued under the provisions of this
Section
17-2209 relating to blanket licenses which permits the transaction of business
away from the premises covered by said blanket license, and such practice is
specifically prohibited pursuant to this subsection.
SEC. 17-2210.   EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the
duty of applying for a transient merchant license:
   (1)   Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of resale.
   (2)   Persons selling or distributing newspapers.
   (3)   Persons selling tangible personal property or services to business
enterprises.
   (4)   Persons who sell at their permanent residence in the City, works of
art or craft made by such person or a member of such person's immediate family.
   (5)   Persons licensed by the State of Illinois to sell real estate or
insurance or licensed as a transient vendor of drugs.
   (6)   Persons selling or distributing livestock feeds as defined by the laws
of the State of Illinois.
   (7)   Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or services
through a permanent business licensed through the City.
   (8)   Persons selling at events for which a blanket license has been
obtained.
   (9)   Persons selling or distributing fresh fruit or vegetables cultivated
by such person.
   (10)   Persons selling tangible personal property at a garage, basement or
yard sale held at one of the persons' premises.
   (11)   Persons conducting and selling admissions to or for theatricals,
shows, rides, sports and games, concerts, circuses, carnivals or any other
public amusement where no sales of other products are involved and such sales
are made on the premises where the event is to be conducted.
   (12)   Persons selling food and beverages at a food service establishment or
from a mobile vehicle as regulated pursuant to the Health Code of the City of
Moline.
SEC. 17-2211.   DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Denial of License - within five (5) working days after receipt of a
license application hereunder, the accounts and finance officer may deny a
license to any applicant for any of the following reasons:
   (1)   Applicant held a license under this ordinance that has been revoked
within two (2) years of the date of the present application.
   (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
   (3)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on applicant's business.
   (4)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or
commission of a felony, whether involving moral turpitude or not.
   (5)   Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (6)   Misrepresentation of the quality of merchandise or services offered
for sale.
   (b)   Revocation of License - The accounts and finance officer may revoke
any license issued under the provisions of this ordinance by sending a Notice
of Revocation by certified mail to the license holder at said license holder's
last known address, return receipt requested, or by personal service on the
license holder or its officers for any of the following reasons:
   (1)   Information showing that the license was erroneously issued initially.
   (2)   For any violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
   (3)   For any violation of any City or State law regulating the sales
activities of the license holder.
   (c)   The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five (5) days
after denial or receipt of the Notice of Revocation from the accounts and
finance officer the license applicant or holder files a written request for a
public hearing on the account and finance officer's action. Public hearing
shall be conducted before the city administrator on whether a license should be
denied, reinstated or revoked, as the case may be. The city administrator may
order the license issued or reinstated either conditionally or unconditionally,
or revoke the license.
   Ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be
given to the license holder, who shall have an opportunity to appear before the
city administrator and present any evidence or arguments the license holder may
have why the action taken by the accounts and finance officer should not be
approved by the city administrator.
SEC. 17-2212.   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All annual transient merchant or itinerant vendor licenses shall expire 365
days following issuance.
SEC. 17-2213.   PENALTY.
   (a)   Penalty . Any person violating Section
17-2200, as a first offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating Section
17-2200, as a second offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating Section
17-2200 as a third or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
   (b)   Except for violations of Section
17-2200, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished
as prescribed in Section
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; Sec. 7-10213 repealed; new Sec. 17-10213 enacted; 09/10/
02) (Ord. No. 3100-2004; renumbered to Art. II; 12/14/04)
SEC. 17-2214.   PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor under this ordinance if the person does not transact business
from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or lease for a term of at
least twelve (12) months, the property from which the business is conducted.
SEC. 17-2215.   WAIVER OF BOND.
   The City does not require and does hereby waive the requirement of posting a
surety bond or cash deposit which may otherwise be required by law, and no such
bond is required nor shall money for same be accepted.
(Ord. No. 3100-2004; Article. X, “SALES REGULATIONS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,” renumbered to Art. II; 12/14/04)
ARTICLE III. JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 17-3100.   REGISTER.
   Each licensee under this article shall keep a book in which shall be fairly
written, at the time of purchase of any article or thing in the way of the
licensee's business, an accurate account and description of the article or
thing so purchased, including any markings, serial numbers or any other
identifiable descriptors of the product and the name and residence of the
person from whom such purchase was made, and the date. The entries in this book
shall be retained for a period of six (6) months beginning with the date of
each individual purchase.
(Ord. No. 3027-2005; Sec. 17-3100 repealed; new Sec. 17-3100 enacted; 04/12/05)
SEC. 17-3101.   PARENTAL CONSENT REQUIRED TO DEAL WITH MINOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this article to
purchase or receive property from a minor without the written consent of the
minor's parent or guardian. If said property is valued under five (5) dollars,
the licensee may purchase from minor at licensee’s own risk; provided that
Licensee must return either the property or, if the property has already been
sold or removed from the premises, an amount of money equal to the purchase
price for the property to parent or guardian, upon such parent or guardian’s
request. Property purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to avoid
the limits of this Section.
(Ord. No. 3027-2005; Sec. 17-3101 repealed; new Sec. 17-3101 enacted; 04/12/05)
DIVISION 2. LICENSES
SEC. 17-3200   REQUIRED.
   No person shall use, exercise or carryon the trade or business of a dealer
in secondhand clothing, furniture, household goods, computer games, compact
discs (CDs), digital versatile disc or digital video disc (DVDs), CD or DVD
players, computers, other computer accessories or other articles, exercise or
carry on the business of a keeper of a junk shop, for the purpose of and sale
of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, tin, empty bottles,
slush or lead within the City, without first being licensed by the finance
director of the City.
(Ord. No. 3026-2009; Sec. 17-3200 repealed; new Sec. 17-3200 enacted; 10/13/09)
SEC. 17-3201.   TRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable from one
premise to another or from one person to another.
(Ord. No. 3026-2009; Sec. 17-3201 repealed; new Sec. 17-3201 enacted; 10/13/09)
SEC. 17-3202   ANNUAL FEES.
   Any person desiring a license required by this article shall pay a license
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. 
(Ord. No. 3027-2005; Sec. 17-3202 repealed; new Sec. 17-3102 enacted; 04/12/05;
Ord. No. 3026-2009; Sec. 17-3202 repealed; new Sec. 17-3202 enacted; 10/13/09)
SEC. 17-3203.   BOND REQUIRED OF CLASS B DEALERS.
   Each person licensed as a “ junk shop or secondhand dealer," at the time of
receiving said person's license, shall enter a penal bond to the City, with a
sufficient surety, in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00),
conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this Code or other City
ordinances, as may be in force or passed, respecting dealers in secondhand
articles, at any time during the continuance of such license, or, in lieu
thereof, post a cash bond in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. No. 3027-2005; Sec. 17-3203 repealed; new Sec. 17-3203 enacted; 04/12/05;
Ord. No. 3026-2009; Sec. 17-3203 repealed; new Sec. 17-3203 enacted; 10/13/09)
SEC. 17-3204.   REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by
the mayor for cause, after hearing upon written notice, or the bond may be
forfeited, or both.
SEC. 17-3205.   EXTENSION OF LICENSE FOR WEEKLY AUCTION SALES; FEE.
   (a)   Any person licensed pursuant to this division may conduct, one (1) day
a week only, on any day of the week, an auction sale of the items listed in
Section
17-3200 by paying an annual license fee to the accounts and finance officer in
the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as an annual license fee, which fee
shall be in addition to the regular fee for a license required by this
division.
   (b)   This section shall not conflict with any provisions of this chapter
relating to auctions and auctioneers, nor supersede such provisions.
ARTICLE IV. RESERVED
(Ord. No. 2000-12-04; Article IV, “AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS,” repealed; Article
IV reserved for future use; 12/05/00)
ARTICLE V. REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
SEC. 17-5100.   RECITALS.
   The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as the City Council’s
findings and determinations.
SEC. 17-5101.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as, and may be referred to as, the “Moline
Sexually Oriented Business Activities Licensing Ordinance.”
SEC. 17-5102.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words
shall have the meanings set forth herein.
   (a)   Adult Booth . Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set off
from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other dividers
or partitions and used to show, play or otherwise demonstrate any adult
materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities.
   (b)   Adult Entertainment Establishment . Any of the following commercial
establishments as defined herein.
   (1)   Adult Cabaret. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or a
significant portion of its business provides any of the following:
      a.   Persons who appears nude or semi-nude;
      b.   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities;
      c.   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities.
   (2)   Adult Store.   Any commercial establishment that (a) contains one or
more adult booths; or (b) as a substantial or significant portion of its
business, offers for sale, rental, exchange or viewing any adult materials.
Adult stores do not include commercial establishments which offer for sale,
rental materials. Adult stores do not include commercial establishments which
offer for sale, rental exchange or viewing any adult materials as a sideline or
adjunct to sales, rentals, exchanges or viewing of materials other than adult
materials.
   (3)   Adult Theater. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion
pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or
recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or the
conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   (4)   Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude or
in a state of nudity is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by any persons who pay money or
any form of consideration. This definition of nude model studio does not apply
to public or private junior colleges, colleges or universities licensed by the
State of Illinois and offering art or modeling classes or anatomical drawing
classes.
   (5)   Sexual Encounter Center. Any business or commercial establishment
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration: (a) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or (b) activities between female and male
persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a
state of nudity or is semi-nude.
   (c)   Adult Establishment Employee . Any individual, including any
entertainer, who works in or at, or renders any services directly related to
the operation of, an adult entertainment establishment; provided, however, that
this definition shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other
than adult materials), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs
to the licensed premises.
   (d)   Adult Establishment License . A license issued for an adult
entertainment establishment pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   (e)   Adult Establishment Patron . Any individual, other than an adult
establishment employee, present in or at any adult entertainment establishment
open for business; provided, however, that this definition shall not include
persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult materials), food and
beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the licensed premises.
   (f)   Adult Material . Any of the following, whether new or used:
   (1)   a.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or
digitally stored materials; or
      b.   Films, motion pictures, video or audiocassettes, slides, computer
displays or other visual or audio representations or recordings of any kind
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
   (2)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with specified sexual activities (except for those items
used for birth control or for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases),
or that depict or describe specified anatomical areas.
   (g)   Adult Use Commission . The mayor of the City of Moline and the two
members of the City Council having the most seniority, pursuant to Section
17-5103 of this article.
   (h)   Adult Motel . Any hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
   (1)   offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, phones, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way which advertises the availability of such adult type
photographic reproductions; or
   (2)   offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or
   (3)   allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
   (i)   Moline Zoning Ordinance . That part of the Moline Code of Ordinances
referred to as the Moline Zoning Ordinance (
Chapter 35), as it will be amended from time to time.
   (j)   Commercial Establishment . Any place where admission, services,
performances or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of
consideration.
   (k)   Days . Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this
article.
   (l)   Escort . A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease dance or
otherwise perform or appear before the other person while nude or semi-nude.
   (m)   Escort Agency . Any person or business association furnishing,
offering to furnish, or advertising to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes, for a fee, tip, or any other form of consideration.
   (n)   Licensed Premises . The place or location described in an adult
establishment license wherein an adult entertainment establishment is
authorized to operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-
way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within
the licensed premises.
   (o)   Effective Date . The effective date of this article shall be deemed to
be February 9, 2000.
   (p)   Licensee . Any person or entity that has been issued an adult
establishment license pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   (q)   Nude or State of Nudity . The state of dress or undress that exposes
to view (a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areolae is not exposed; or (b) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any
device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   (r)   Semi-nude . A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no
more than the human genitals, pubic region, anus, and areolae of the female
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices
or by other minor accessory apparel including, without limitation, hats,
gloves, and socks.
   (s)   Specified Anatomical Areas . Any of the following:
   (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae but not including any portion of the cleavage of a female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel providing the areolae is not exposed; or
   (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered or any device or covering that when worn, simulates human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   (t)   Specified Criminal Act. Any unlawful lewd, indecent or immoral
conduct, including, without limitation, any of the lewd, indecent or immoral
criminal acts specified in any of the following statutes or ordinances:
   (1)   Article II of the Illinois Criminal Code (Sex Offenses).
   (2)   Section
26-4 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/330 (Unauthorized Videotaping).
   (3)   Section 33D-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/330-1
(Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency of a Juvenile).
   (4)   The Obscene Phone Call Act, 720 ILCS 135/0.01 et seq.
   (5)   The Wrongs to Children Act, 720 ILCS 150/0.01 et seq.
   (6)   The Improper Supervision of Children Act, 720 ILCS 640/0.01 et seq.
   (7)   The Sale of Immoral Publications to Children Act, 720 ILCS 670/0.01
et. seq.
   (8)   The Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
   (9)   The Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   (10)   
Chapter 22, Article VII, Division 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances
(Obscenity).
   (u)   Specified Sexual Activities . Any of the following:
   (1)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
   (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including without
limitation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, bestiality, intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy.
   (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
   (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition of
specified sexual activities.
   (v)   Straddle Dance . The use by any person, including specifically, but
without limitation, an adult establishment employee, of any part of his or her
body, to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast of
any adult establishment patron or person, or the touching of the genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast of any person by any adult
establishment patron. Conduct shall be a “straddle dance” regardless of whether
the “touch” or “touching” occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any
specified anatomical area. Conduct shall also be a “straddle dance” regardless
of whether the “touch” or “touching” is direct or through a medium. Conduct
commonly referred to by the slang terms “lap dance,” “table dance,” and “face
dance” shall be included within this definition of “straddle dance.”
SEC. 17-5103.   ADULT USE COMMISSION.
   The mayor of the City of Moline, along with the two City Council members
having the most seniority, are hereby designated as the adult use commission
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this article. The adult use commission
shall have the following powers and duties:
   (1)   To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance,
renewal, suspension, and revocation of, adult establishment licenses as set
forth in this article;
   (2)   To conduct or provide for such inspection of adult entertainment
establishments as shall be necessary to determine and ensure compliance with
the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of law;
   (3)   To periodically review the provisions of this article and the conduct
and operation of adult entertainment establishments and adult establishment
licensees, and to make such related reports and recommendations to the City
Council as the adult use commission shall deem necessary;
   (4)   To conduct such hearings, studies, and reports on adult entertainment
establishments, and the regulations relating thereto, as the adult use
commission shall deem necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the suspension
or revocation of an adult establishment license as required pursuant to Section
17-5119 of this article with the mayor to preside at any such hearing;
   (5)   To take such further action as the adult use commission shall deem
necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article and to exercise
such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are implied or incident to
those powers and duties expressly set forth in this article.
SEC. 17-5104.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (a)   Adult Establishment License Required . An adult establishment license
shall be required to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the City.
   (b)   Operation Without License Prohibited . Except as provided in
subsection (f) of this section with regard to adult entertainment
establishments existing prior to the effective date of this article, it shall
be unlawful for any person not having a current and valid adult establishment
license to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment establishment
within the City at any time after the effective date of this article.
   (c)   Operation in Violation of License Prohibited . It shall be unlawful
for any licensee to establish, operate, or maintain an adult entertainment
establishment within the City except in the manner authorized by, and in
compliance with, the provisions of this article, and the licensee’s adult
establishment license.
   (d)   Content and Display of License . Every adult establishment license
shall be provided by the City, and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on
its face the name of the licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the
adult entertainment establishment. Every licensee shall cause the licensee’s
adult establishment license to be framed, covered by glass, and hung at all
times in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises so that it
can be easily seen and read at any time by any person entering the licensed
premises.
   (e)   License Term . Except as hereinafter provided, adult establishment
licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended, or
revoked, for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of the year following
the year of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that same year. Adult
establishment licenses issued after January 1 of any year for operations to
commence in that year shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated,
suspended, or revoked, for a term commencing on the date of issuance and
terminating on December 31 of that same year.
   (f)   Existing Establishments .
   (1)   Application Generally. An adult entertainment establishment existing
or operating on or prior to the effective date (“existing establishment”) may
continue to exist and operate, provided, however, that the existing
establishment (1) shall submit an application for an adult establishment
license not later than sixty (60) days after the effective date; (2) shall
cease operations not later than two hundred forty (240) days after the
effective date (the licensure date), unless it has secured an adult
establishment license by the licensure date; and (3) shall comply with and
continue at all times to comply with, the requirements of paragraph 2 of this
subsection (f).
   (2)   Required Compliance on Effective Date. An existing entertainment
establishment shall, as of the effective date, be subject to the provisions of
Sections
17-5108;
17-5110(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j); and
17-5111(a), (b), and (f);
17-5112(c), (d) and (e);
17-5114;
17-5115, and
17-5116(c), (d) and (e) and shall at all times continue with said compliance.
   (g)   Renewal . An adult establishment license may be renewed only by making
application as required for an initial license pursuant to Section
17-5105 of this article. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration of the then-current licensed term. The
expiration of the license shall not be affected or extended by a renewal
application that is made less than thirty (30) days before expiration.
SEC. 17-5105.   FORM AND SUBMITTAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   Required Form . An application for an adult establishment license, or
the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the adult use commission on a
form prescribed by the adult use commission and shall be signed (1) by the
applicant, if the applicant is an individual; (2) by at least one of the
persons entitled to share in the profits of the organization and having
unlimited personal liability for the obligations of the organization, and the
right to bind all such other persons, if the applicant is a partnership
(general or limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization where
two or more persons share in the organization’s profits and liabilities; (3) by
a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation; or (4) by the
trustee, if the applicant is a land trust. The application shall be verified by
oath or affidavit as to the veracity of all statements made on or in connection
with the application and any attachments thereto. Each application shall
specifically identify the applicant and the licensed premises for which an
adult establishment license is sought. Each initial or renewal application
shall be accompanied by seven (7) identical copies.
   (b)   Administrative Processing Fee and Security .
   (1)   Administrative Processing Fee. Every applicant for an adult
establishment license, or for the renewal of an existing adult establishment
license shall pay an administrative processing fee in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
individual disclosed in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(14) and (c)(15) of this article, by certified check
to the City at the time of filing such application. The administrative
processing fee shall in all cases be non-refundable and shall be deposited in
the General Corporate Fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 3004-2004; Sec. 17-5105 (b)(1) repealed; new Sec. 17-5105 (b)(1)
enacted; 02/03/04)
   (2)   Bond or Other Security. Each adult establishment license, and any
renewals thereof, shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in
good standing by the applicant and licensee of a surety bond or other similar
security in favor of the City in the amount of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) to the City. Before an adult establishment license may be
issued, the applicant shall furnish such bond or security, and before an adult
establishment license is renewed or reinstated following revocation or
suspension, the licensee shall submit evidence that the bond or other security,
in the amount required pursuant hereto, remains in full force and effect. The
bond or other security, or part thereof, for an adult entertainment
establishment, shall be forfeited automatically pursuant to Section
17-5119 of this article in order to reimburse the City for the City’s cost in
association with the proceedings related to any license suspension or
revocation.
   (c)   Required Information and Documents . Each application shall include
the following information and documents:
   (1)   
      a.   Individuals: The applicant’s legal name, all of the applicant’s
aliases, the applicant’s residence and business address and social security
number, written proof of the applicant’s age, the citizenship and place of
birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the
applicant’s naturalization;
      b.   Corporations: The applicant corporation’s complete name and official
business address; the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, residence and
business addresses, and social security numbers of all directors, officers, and
managers of the corporation, and of every person owning or controlling more
than fifty percent (50%) of the voting shares of the corporation; the
corporation’s date and place of incorporation and the objects for which it was
formed; proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing and
authorized to conduct business in the State of Illinois; and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service
of process;
      c.   Partnerships (general or limited), joint ventures, or any other type
of organization where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities
of the organization: The applicant organization’s complete name and official
business address, the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, residences and
business addresses and social security numbers of each partner (other than
limited partners), or any other person entitled to share in the profits of the
organization, whether or not any such person is also obligated to share in the
liabilities of the organization;
      d.   Land trusts: The applicant land trust’s complete name; the legal
name, all aliases and the business address of the trustee of the land trust;
the legal name, all aliases, and the ages, residence and business addresses and
social security numbers of each beneficiary of the land trust and the specific
interest of each such beneficiary in the land trust; and the interest, if any,
that the land trust holds in the licensed premises.
   (2)   If a corporation or a partnership is an interest holder that must be
disclosed pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1)(b) or (c)(1)(c) above, then such interest holders shall disclose
the information required in said sections with respect to their interest
holders.
   (3)   The general character and nature of the business of the applicant.
   (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the
character specified in response to Section
17-5105(c) (3) above.
   (5)   The location, including street address and legal description, and
telephone number, of the premises for which the adult establishment license is
sought.
   (6)   The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the
adult establishment license.
   (7)   The identity of the each fee simple owner of the licensed premises.
   (8)   A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the
licensed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms
(identifying the use to which each such room will be put), walls, partitions,
stages, performance areas, and restrooms. The diagram shall also designate the
precise location in the licensed premises where the license will be posted as
required by Section
17-5104(d). A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; provided, that each diagram shall
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be
drawn to its designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus
or minus six (6) inches and sufficient to show clearly the various interior
dimensions of all areas of the licensed premises and to demonstrate compliance
with the provisions of this article. The requirements of this subsection shall
not apply for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and if the licensee
certifies that the licensed premises has not been altered since the immediately
preceding issuance of the license and that the previous diagram continues to
accurately depict the exterior and interior layout of the licensed premises.
The approval or use of the diagram required pursuant to this paragraph shall
not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to constitute,
any other City approval otherwise required pursuant to applicable City
ordinances and regulations.
   (9)   The names of each governmental body from which, within five (5) years
immediately prior to the date of the present application, the applicant, or any
of the individuals identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1) and (c)(2) above, has received a license or other authorization
to conduct or operate a business (a) substantially the same as an adult
entertainment establishment, and the names and addresses of each such business;
(b) requiring a federal, state, or local liquor license; or (c) requiring a
federal, state or local gaming license.
   (10)   The specific type or types of adult entertainment establishment that
the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises.
   (11)   A copy of each adult establishment license, liquor license and gaming
license currently held by the applicant, or any of the individuals identified
in the application pursuant to Section
17-5105(c)(1) above.
   (12)   Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1) or (c)(2) above, within five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the application, has been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere to, or is
currently charged with committing, by indictment or information, any specified
criminal act. As to each conviction, plea, or charge, the applicant or other
individual shall provide the conviction or plea date if applicable, the case
number, the nature of the misdemeanor or felony violation or offense, and the
name and location of the court.
   (13)   Whether the applicant, or any of the individuals identified in the
application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1) or (c) (2) above, has had a license or other authorization to
conduct or operate a business substantially the same as an adult entertainment
establishment or any business requiring a liquor or gaming license, revoked or
suspended, and, if so, the date and grounds for each such revocation or
suspension, and the name and location of the establishment at issue.
   (14)   The name and residence address or address of the individual or
individuals who shall be the day-to-day on-site managers of the proposed adult
entertainment establishment. If the manager is other than the applicant, the
applicant shall provide, for each manager, all of the information required
pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(9), (c) (11), (c)(12) and (c)(13) above.
   (15)   For the individual or individuals executing the application pursuant
to subsection
17-5105 of this article, and the individual or individuals identified pursuant
to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)(14) above, and for each adult establishment
employee, a fully executed waiver on a form prescribed by the City to obtain
criminal conviction information based upon fingerprint identification pursuant
to the Illinois Uniform Conviction Information Act (20 ILCS 2635/1 et seq.) and
Section
17-5105(d) below.
   (d)   PHOTOGRAPHING AND FINGERPRINTING OF APPLICANTS . Each application
shall include the following information and documents:
   (1)   Prior to filing an application for a license required by this article,
the applicant and all persons required to be named in Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14), along with each adult establishment
employee, shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Moline Police
Department, said fingerprinting to be used in connection with obtaining the
person’s criminal history information from the Illinois Department of State
Police pursuant to Section
17-5105(c)(15) and the Illinois Uniform Conviction Information Act (20 ILCS
2635/1 et seq.).
   (2)   No application for license required by this article shall be
considered, and no license shall be issued until such time as the photographing
and fingerprinting have been completed.
   (3)   If at any time after the issuance of a license pursuant to this
article, or during the course of the consideration by the adult use commission
of an application filed pursuant to this article, the composition of a
partnership or corporation changes from that stated in Sections
17-5105(c)(1)(b) or
17-5105(c)(1)(c), or if a new manager or other adult establishment employee is
employed, the applicant or licensee shall cause the new persons to be
photographed and fingerprinted within five (5) days, and such fingerprints and
photographs submitted to the adult use commission.
   (4)   Notice of any change contemplated by Section
17-5105(d)(3) above, after the issuance of a license, shall be given in writing
to the adult use commission within five (5) days of the change. Failure to give
the notice shall be grounds for revoking or suspending the license.
   (5)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be cause
for revoking or suspending a license issued pursuant to this article, or if
such a license has not yet been issued, to refuse the issuance of the license.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall also be cause to
refuse to renew a license.
   (e)   Incomplete Applications Returned . Any application for an adult
establishment license that does not include all of the information and
documents required pursuant to Section
17-5105(c), as well as the administrative processing fee and bond or other
security required pursuant to Sections
17-5105 (b)(1) and (b)(2) above, shall be deemed to be incomplete and shall not
be acted on or processed by the City. The adult use commission shall, within
five (5) days of such submittal, return the incomplete application to the
applicant, along with a written explanation of the reasons why the application
is incomplete.
SEC. 17-5106.   PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (a)   Reviewing Departments . Within three (3) days after receipt of a
completed application for an adult establishment license that includes all
information and documents required pursuant to Sections
17-5105(a), (c) and (d) of this article, as well as the administrative
processing fee and bond or other security required pursuant to Section
17-5105(b) of this article, the adult use commission shall transmit a copy of
the application to the reviewing departments.
   (b)   Reviewing Departments Reports . Each reviewing department shall,
within twenty-five (25) days after transmittal of the application thereto, or
within such other period of time as the City and the applicant may otherwise
agree:
   (1)   Review the application;
   (2)   Conduct such inspections of the proposed licensed premises and the
background and criminal history investigations of the applicant and any
individuals identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2), (c)(14) and (c)(15) of this article regarding matters
within their respective jurisdictions, as shall be reasonably necessary to
verify the information set forth in the application and to determine whether
the proposed adult entertainment establishment and licensed premises comply
with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations; and
   (3)   Prepare and submit to the adult use commission a written report
regarding the results and findings of such reviews, inspections and
investigations, including an explanation of the specific reasons and applicable
laws or regulations if the report recommends disapproving the license
application.
   (c)   Adult Use Commission Review . The adult use commission shall also
conduct such inspections and investigations as the adult use commission shall
deem reasonably necessary to verify the information set forth in the
application, and to determine whether the adult entertainment establishment and
licensed premises comply with the requirements of this article and other
applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   (d)   Reliance on Submitted Diagram . In the event that the licensed
premises has not yet been constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the
proposed adult entertainment establishment, the adult use commission and the
reviewing departments shall base their respective written reports,
investigations, and inspections to the extent necessary, on the diagrams
submitted pursuant to Section
17-5105(c)(8) of this article. Any adult entertainment license issued prior to
the construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed adult
entertainment establishment shall contain a condition that the adult
entertainment establishment shall not open for business until the licensed
premises has been inspected and determined to be in substantial compliance with
the diagram submitted with the application. Such inspections shall take place
by the reviewing departments within one (1) week following receipt of a written
request for such inspections.
   (e)   Applicant Cooperation Required . An applicant for an adult
establishment license shall cooperate fully in the inspections and
investigations conducted by the adult use commission and the reviewing
departments. The applicant’s failure or refusal (1) to give any information
reasonably relevant to the investigation of the application; (2) to allow the
licensed premises to be inspected; (3) to appear at any reasonable time and
place for examination under oath regarding the application; or (4) to otherwise
cooperate with the investigation and inspections required by this article,
shall constitute an admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible
for an adult establishment license and shall be grounds for denial of the
license by the adult use commission.
   (f)   Time for Issuance or Denial . The adult use commission shall, within
thirty (30) days after submittal of a properly completed application, or within
such other period of time as the City and the applicant shall otherwise agree,
either issue an adult establishment license pursuant to the provisions of
Section
17-5107(a) of this article or deny issuance of the adult establishment license
pursuant to the provisions of Section
17-5107(b) of this article. The adult use commission shall issue or deny the
license within said thirty (30) day period, or such other period of time as
shall have been agreed to by the City and the applicant, regardless of whether
or not the adult use commission has received all of the reviewing department
reports.
   (g)   Decision Final . The action taken by the adult use commission to issue
or deny an adult establishment license pursuant, respectively, to Sections
17-5107(a) or
17-5107(b) of this article, shall be final and shall be subject to judicial
review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/
3-101 et seq.
SEC. 17-5107.   STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Issuance . The adult use commission shall issue an adult establishment
license to an applicant, if, but only if, the adult use commission finds and
determines all of the following based upon the reports, investigations, and
inspections conducted by the adult use commission and reviewing departments and
on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for the adult use
commission to rely:
   (1)   All information and documents required by Section
17-5105 of this article for issuance of an adult establishment license have
been properly provided and the material statements in the application are true
and correct.
   (2)   All persons identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14) of this article are at least twenty-one (21)
years of age and not under any legal disability.
   (3)   No person identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14) of this article has been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contendere to any specified criminal act within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (4)   No person identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14) of this article has been convicted of, or
pleaded nolo contendere to, any violation of a provision of this article within
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (5)   No person identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14) of this article is overdue on payment to the
City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on, any
such individual in connection to any adult entertainment establishment,
including without limitation, any fines owed to the City of Moline for an
ordinance violation conviction through the Moline Division of the Circuit Court
for the Fourteenth Judicial Circuit in and for Rock Island County.
   (6)   No person identified in the application pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(14) of this article is residing with, or married
to, a person (1) who has been denied an adult establishment license within
twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application; (2) whose
adult establishment license has been revoked within twelve (12) months
immediately preceding the date of the application; or (3) whose adult
establishment license is under suspension at the time of the application.
   (7)   The adult entertainment establishment and the licensed premises, and
the proposed operation of the adult entertainment establishment, comply with
all then-applicable building, health, and life safety codes and regulations and
have received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the then-
applicable provisions of the Moline Zoning Ordinance.
   (8)   The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of the
application that the applicant has read this article and all provisions of the
Moline Zoning Ordinance applicable to adult entertainment establishments, that
the applicant is familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the
licensed premises and the proposed adult entertainment establishment are and
shall be in compliance therewith.
   (9)   The applicant owner or at least one of the day-to-day on-site managers
resides within the City of Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
   (b)   Denial . If the adult use commission determines that the applicant has
not met any one or more of the conditions set forth in section
17-5107(a) above, then the adult use commission shall deny issuance of the
adult establishment license and shall give the applicant a written notification
and explanation of such denial. The adult use commission’s notice of denial
shall be delivered in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the applicant’s address as set forth in the
application. The adult establishment license shall be deemed denied on the day
that the notice of denial is delivered in person or three (3) days after it is
placed in the U.S. mail as provided by this subsection.
   (c)   License Deemed To Be Issued . If the adult use commission does not
issue or deny the adult establishment license within thirty (30) days after the
properly completed application is submitted, then the adult establishment
license applied for shall be deemed to have been issued.
SEC. 17-5108.   INSPECTIONS BY THE CITY.
   (a)   Authority . The adult use commission and other City representatives
and departments with jurisdiction, including without limitation reviewing
departments, shall periodically inspect all adult entertainment establishments
as shall be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this
article and all other applicable laws.
   (b)   Licensee Corporation . The licensee shall permit City representatives
to inspect the licensed premises and the adult entertainment establishment for
the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article and
all other applicable laws at any time during which the licensed premises is
occupied or the adult entertainment establishment is open for business.
   (c)   Interference or Refusal Illegal . It shall be unlawful for the
licensee, any adult establishment employee, or any other person to prohibit,
interfere with, or refuse to allow, any lawful inspection conducted by the City
pursuant to this article or any other authority.
   (d)   Suspension or Revocation . Any such prohibition, interference or
refusal as set forth in subsection (c) of this Section
17-5108(c) above shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult
establishment license pursuant to Section
17-5119 of this article.
   (e)   Warning Device Use Illegal . It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any kind of warning device or system for the purpose of warning or
aiding and abetting the warning of any adult establishment employee, adult
establishment patron, or other person that members of the adult use commission
or other City representatives or public officials are approaching or have
entered the premises.
SEC. 17-5109.   CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   During the pendency of any application for, or during the term of, any adult
establishment license, the applicant or licensee shall promptly notify the
adult use commission in writing (1) of any change in any material information
given by the applicant or licensee in the application for such license,
specifically, but without limitation, any change in managers of the adult
entertainment establishment, or any individuals identified in the application
pursuant to Sections
17-5105(c)(1), (c)(2) or (c)(14) of this article; or (2) if the events
constituting grounds for suspension or revocation pursuant to Section
17-5119 of this article occur.
SEC. 17-5110.   REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (a)   General Compliance . All licensed premises and adult entertainment
establishments shall comply with the provisions of this article, all other
applicable City ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, and all other
applicable Federal, state, and local laws.
   (b)   Hours of Operation .
   (1)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business at any
time on any City of Moline holiday, Rock Island County holiday, State of
Illinois holiday or Federal holiday.
   (2)   No adult cabaret, adult theater, adult motel, or sexual encounter
center shall be open for business at any time after 2:00 a.m. on any Sunday.
   (3)   No adult store or nude model studio shall be open for business between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any Sunday.
   (4)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for business
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
or Thursday, or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on any Friday or
Saturday.
   (c)   Animals . No adult establishment patron or adult establishment
employee or other person shall permit any animal to be present at or in any
adult entertainment establishment or licensed premises. This prohibition does
not apply to patrol dogs accompanying police officers or to support animals
such as canines and primates trained to assist and accompanying disabled
persons.
   (d)   Restrooms . Separate male and female restrooms shall be provided for
and used by adult establishment employees and adult establishment patrons.
   (e)   Restricted Access . No adult establishment patron shall be permitted
at any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of any adult
entertainment establishment, including without limitation, any storage areas or
dressing rooms or other rooms provided for the benefit of adult establishment
employees. This subsection shall not apply to persons delivering goods and
materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance and repairs to the
licensed premises, provided, however, that any such persons shall remain in
such non-public areas only for the purposes and to the extent and time
necessary to perform their job duties.
   (f)   Specific Prohibited Acts .
   (1)   No adult establishment patron or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment, other than an adult establishment employee
employed to provide adult entertainment in accordance with the regulations of
this article, shall appear, be present, or perform while nude or semi-nude;
provided, however, that no such adult entertainment employee shall appear, be
present, or perform while nude at any adult entertainment establishment that
otherwise serves alcoholic liquor pursuant to a license issued under 
Chapter 4 (Alcoholic Beverages) of the Moline Code of Ordinances (a “Liquor
License”).
   (2)   No adult establishment employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual
activities with or for any adult establishment patron or any other adult
establishment employee or any other person. No adult establishment patron or
any other person at any adult entertainment establishment shall perform or
conduct any specified sexual activities with or for any adult establishment
employee or any other adult establishment patron or any other person.
   (3)   Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all adult entertainment
establishments.
   (g)   Exterior Display . No adult entertainment establishment shall be
maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public
viewing of any adult material, or any entertainment depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any
sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property other than the lot on
which the licensed premises is located. No portion of the exterior of an adult
entertainment establishment shall utilize or contain any flashing lights,
search lights, or spotlights, or any other similar lighting systems, or any
words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner except to the extent specifically allowed
pursuant to subsection (h) of this section with regard to signs. This
subsection shall apply to any advertisement, display, promotional material,
decoration, or sign, and to any performance or show, and to any window, door or
other opening to the adult entertainment establishment.
   (h)   Signage Limitations . All signs for adult entertainment establishments
shall be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square
foot of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event
exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one
per lot frontage. Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this section shall
contain only 1) the name of the adult entertainment establishment, and/or 2)
the specific type of adult entertainment establishment conducted on the
licensed premises. Temporary signage shall not be permitted in connection with
any adult entertainment establishment.
   (i)   Noise . No loudspeakers or sound amplification equipment audible
beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time.
   (j)   Gambling and Related Devices Prohibited . No adult entertainment
establishment shall contain any video, pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeon-hole,
pool, or any other games, machines, tables or implements.
   (k)   Manager’s Station . Each adult entertainment establishment shall have
one or more manager’s stations which shall be occupied by a manager at all
times during business hours of operation. The interior of each adult
entertainment establishment shall be configured in such a manner that there is
a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at least one manager’s
station to every part of each area, except restrooms, of the adult
entertainment establishment to which any adult establishment patron is
permitted access for any purpose.
   (l)   Alcohol Prohibition . No adult entertainment establishment that serves
or otherwise provides alcoholic liquor pursuant to a liquor license shall
provide or allow adult establishment employees that appear, are present, or
perform while nude.
   (m)   Age Limitations .
   (1)   No adult establishment employee or adult establishment patron at an
adult booth or at a licensed premises that includes an adult booth shall be
under the age of twenty-one (21).
   (2)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be admitted to any
adult booth or any licensed premises that includes an adult booth.
   (3)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed or
permitted to remain at any adult booth or any licensed premises that includes
an adult booth.
   (4)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed or
permitted to purchase or receive, whether for consideration or not, any adult
material or any goods or services at or from any adult entertainment
establishment or any licensed premises.
   (n)   Outdoor and Off-Street Parking Areas . All outdoor and off-street
parking areas of the adult entertainment establishment shall be illuminated
from dusk to closing hours of operation, and any time that any adult
establishment patron is present, with a light system which provides an average
minimum maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the
parking surfaces and walkways.
SEC. 17-5111.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT BOOTHS.
   (a)   Prohibited Except in Adult Stores . Adult booths shall be prohibited
in all adult entertainment establishments except in adult stores.
   (b)   Occupancy and Prohibited Acts . Only one (1) adult entertainment
patron or other individual shall occupy an adult booth at any one time. No
adult entertainment patron or other individual occupying an adult booth shall
engage in any specified sexual activities. No adult entertainment patron or any
other individual shall damage or deface any portion of an adult booth.
   (c)   Open Booth Requirement . In addition to satisfying the manager’s
station requirements of Section
17-5110(k) of this article, all adult stores containing adult booths shall be
physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of each
adult booth shall be visible from the common area of the adult store. To
satisfy this requirement, there shall be a permanently open and unobstructed
entranceway for each adult booth and for the entranceway from the area of the
adult store that provides other adult materials to the area of the adult store
containing the adult booths. Each of these entranceways shall not be capable of
being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door, curtain,
partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would be capable of
wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult store containing the adult
booths or any adult establishment patron or other individual situated in or
occupying an adult booth. It shall be unlawful to install adult booths within
an adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of providing secluded and/
or private viewing of adult materials or live performances.
   (d)   Aisle Required . There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle
alongside the adult booths provided in any adult store. Each adult
establishment patron or other individual situated in a booth shall be visible
at all times from the aisle.
   (e)   Booth Construction Requirements . Except for open booth entranceways
and ventilation devices, the walls and partitions of each adult booth shall be
constructed and maintained of solid walls or partitions without any holes or
openings whatsoever, including, without limitation, “glory” holes, which are
commonly found in adult booths and which allow for anonymous sexual activity to
occur between persons occupying adjacent adult booths. The wall and ceiling
surfaces of an adult booth shall be constructed, or permanently covered by non-
porous, easily cleanable material and shall not consist of wood, plywood,
composition wood or other porous material within forty-eight (48) inches of the
floor. All ventilation devices in adult booths must be covered by a permanently
affixed ventilation cover. Ventilation holes may only be located one foot from
the top of the adult booth walls or one foot from the bottom of the adult booth
walls.
   (f)   Signage . A sign consisting of letters at least one inch high shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway to each adult booth
that states (1) that only one adult establishment patron or other individual is
allowed in an adult booth at any one time; (2) that it is unlawful to engage in
any specified sexual activities while in an adult booth; and (3) that it is
unlawful to damage or deface any portion of an adult booth.
SEC. 17-5112.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT CABARETS.
   (a)   Performance Area . The performance area of an adult cabaret shall be
limited to one or more stages or platforms not less than three (3) feet in
height measuring from floor level and permanently anchored to the floor (a
“cabaret stage”). No adult establishment employee may appear nude or semi-nude
in any part of the licensed premises open to the view of adult establishment
patrons except on a cabaret stage, and no adult establishment employee may
perform anywhere on the licensed premises except on a cabaret stage. Each
cabaret stage shall be separated by a distance of at least six (6) feet from
all areas of the premises to which adult establishment patrons have access. A
continuous barrier at least three (3) feet in height and located at least six
(6) feet from all points of each cabaret stage shall separate each cabaret
stage from all adult establishment patron seating. No adult establishment
patron shall be on or be allowed at any time on any cabaret stage.
   (b)   Lighting . Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally
distributed throughout the public areas of the adult cabaret so that all
objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less
than thirty (30) lux horizontal, measured at thirty (30) inches from the floor
and on ten-foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of the
adult cabaret where adult establishment patrons are admitted.
   (c)   Tipping . No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult
establishment employee having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, any
form of gratuity or tip offered directly or personally to the adult
establishment employee by the adult establishment patron. Rather, all
gratuities and tips to adult establishment employees performing on any cabaret
stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips and
gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment.
   (d)   Notice of Rules . A sign measuring at least two (2) feet by two (2)
feet with letters at least one inch high, shall be conspicuously displayed on
or adjacent to every cabaret stage, stating the following:
      THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF MOLINE. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
      1)   NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
      2)   NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF PHYSICAL CONTACT WITH
PATRONS.
      3)   NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY FROM
PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY
MANAGEMENT.
   For adult cabarets with a liquor license, the following fourth rule shall
also be included in the sign required by this subsection:
      4)   NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY.
   (e)   Doors Unlocked . Doors to areas on the premises of adult cabarets
which are lawfully available for use by persons other than adult establishment
employees may not be locked during the hours the adult cabaret is open for
business.
   (f)   Employment Duty Limitation . Within six (6) hours after an adult
establishment employee has performed adult entertainment on a cabaret stage,
such employee shall not serve the adult entertainment establishment in any
other capacity requiring such employee’s presence in the public areas of the
premises to which adult entertainment patrons have access, including without
limitation, serving as a manger or a waitperson.
SEC. 17-5113.   REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (a)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in
Section
17-5102(h).
   (b)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping
room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have
an adult entertainment license, he or she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to
a person and, within ten (10) hours from when the room is rented, he or she
rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
   (c)   For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or
“sub-rent” mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
SEC. 17-5114.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT STORES.
   (a)   Windows . Window areas for adult stores shall not be covered or
obstructed in any way.
   (b)   Signs . No signs or other obstructions shall be placed in the windows
of an adult store.
SEC. 17-5115.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS.
   (a)   Seating . Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual
chairs with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and
not on couches, benches, or other multiple-person seating structures. The
number of seats shall equal the maximum number of individuals who may occupy
the adult theater.
   (b)   Aisle . Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle
alongside the seating area in order that each person seated in the adult
theater shall be visible from the aisle at all times.
   (c)   Sign . Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous
place at or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists
the maximum number of individuals who may occupy the auditorium area, which
number shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
SEC. 17-5116.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.
   (a)   Modeling Area . The modeling area of a nude model studio shall be
limited to one or more platforms permanently anchored to the floor (a “modeling
platform”). No adult establishment employee may appear nude or semi-nude in any
part of the licensed premises open to the view of adult establishment patrons
except on a modeling platform, and no adult establishment employee may model
anywhere on the licensed premises except on a modeling platform. Each modeling
platform shall be separated by a distance of at least eighteen (18) inches from
all areas of the premises to which adult establishment patrons have access. No
adult establishment patron shall be on or be allowed at any time on any
modeling platform.
   (b)   Lighting . Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally
distributed throughout the public areas of the nude model studio so that all
objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of not less
than thirty (30) lux horizontal, measured at thirty (30) inches from the floor
and on ten (10) foot centers shall be maintained at all times for all areas of
the nude model studio where adult establishment patrons are admitted.
   (c)   Tipping . No adult establishment patron shall offer, and no adult
establishment employee having modeled on any modeling platform shall accept,
any form of gratuity or tip offered directly or personally to the adult
establishment employee by the adult establishment patron. Rather, all
gratuities and tips to adult establishment employees modeling on any modeling
platform shall be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of such tips
and gratuities by the adult entertainment establishment.
   (d)   Notice of Rules . A sign measuring at least two (2) feet by two (2)
feet with letters at least one (1) inch high, shall be conspicuously displayed
on or adjacent to every modeling platform, stating the following:
      THIS NUDE MODEL STUDIO IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF MOLINE. ENTERTAINERS
ARE:
      1)   NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
      2)   NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF PHYSICAL CONTACT WITH
PATRONS.
      3)   NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY FROM
PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY
MANAGEMENT.
   For nude model studios with a liquor license, the following fourth rule
shall also be included in the sign required by this subsection:
      4)   NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR IN A STATE OF NUDITY.
   (e)   Doors Unlocked . Doors to areas on the premises of nude model studios
which are lawfully available for use by persons other than adult establishment
employees may not be locked during the hours the nude model studio is open for
business.
   (f)   Employment Duty Limitation . Within six (6) hours after an adult
establishment employee has performed adult entertainment on a modeling
platform, such employee shall not serve the adult entertainment establishment
in any other capacity requiring such employee’s presence in the public areas of
the premises to which adult entertainment patrons have access, including
without limitation, serving as a manger or a waitperson.
SEC. 17-5117.   SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
   (a)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) years, and no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall act
as an escort or agree to act as an escort.
   (b)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
SEC. 17-5118.   LICENSEE RESPONSIBILITY FOR EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission by an adult establishment employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be the act or
omission of the licensee if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, or as a result of the
licensee’s negligent failure to supervise the adult establishment employee. The
licensee shall be subject to punishment for any such act or omission in the
same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
Accordingly, any such act or omission by any such adult establishment employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed, for
the purposes of determining whether the licensee’s adult establishment license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed, to be the act or omission of the
licensee.
SEC. 17-5119.   LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (a)   Grounds . Pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 17-5119(b)
below, the adult use commission may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days,
or revoke, any adult establishment license if the adult use commission, based
on credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that
any one or more of the following have occurred:
   (1)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions or requirements of
this article or the adult establishment license issued pursuant thereto, or the
provisions of the Moline Zoning Ordinance applicable to the licensed premises
or the adult entertainment establishment.
   (2)   The licensee (1) knowingly or negligently furnished false or
misleading information or withheld information on any application or other
document submitted to the City for the issuance or renewal of any adult
establishment license; or (2) knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any
other person to furnish or withhold any such information on the licensee’s
behalf.
   (3)   The licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the
licensed premises.
   (4)   The licensee authorizes, approves, or as a result of the licensee’s
negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the adult entertainment
establishment, allows an adult establishment employee, an adult establishment
patron, or any other person to (1) violate any of the provisions or
requirements of this article, or of the provisions or requirements of the adult
establishment license issued pursuant hereto; or (2) commit any felony of
specified criminal act on the licensed premises.
   (5)   The licensee, or any person identified pursuant to Sections 5105(c)
(1), (c)(2) or (c)(14) of this article becomes disqualified for the issuance of
an adult establishment license at any time during the term of the license at
issue.
   (b)   Procedure . An adult establishment license may be suspended for not
more than thirty (30) days or revoked pursuant to the terms and conditions set
forth in this subsection (b).
   (1)   Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for
suspension or revocation under Section
17-5119(a) above may exist, the adult use commission shall serve a written
notice on the licensee in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee’s address as set forth in
the licensee’s application. The notice shall, at a minimum, (1) state that the
adult use commission has determined that the adult establishment license may be
subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Section
17-5119(a) of this article; (2) identify the specific grounds for the adult use
commission’s determination; and (3) set a date for hearing regarding the adult
use commission’s determination as to the suspension or revocation of the adult
establishment license. The hearing date shall be no less than five (5) days
after service of the adult use commission’s notice unless an earlier or later
date is agreed to by the licensee and the adult use commission. For purposes of
calculating a hearing date under this subsection, notice shall be deemed to be
given three (3) days after placing the notice in the mail as provided by this
subsection when certified mail is used.
   (2)   Hearing and Appeal. The hearing shall be conducted by the adult use
commission and presided over by the mayor. The hearing shall be recorded by a
certified court reporter; however, no transcription of such record shall be
made unless requested in writing by an interested party who shall also order a
copy of said transcription for all other interested parties and one official
transcript for filing with a reviewing court, if judicial review is sought. At
the hearing, the licensee may present and submit evidence to refute the grounds
cited by the adult use commission for suspending or revoking the license and
the City and any other persons may submit evidence to sustain such grounds. The
administrative record compiled on the adult entertainment establishment
pursuant to Section
17-5120 of this article shall be made part of the hearing record. Within three
(3) days after the close of the hearing, the adult use commission shall, having
considered the record made at the hearing, render a decision in writing,
setting forth the reasons for the decision. The actions taken by the adult use
commission shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to
the provisions of the “Administrative Review Act,” 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq. A
request for judicial review properly and timely taken shall stay the imposition
of any administrative punishment rendered by the adult use commission.
   (3)   Notice and Effective Date of Suspension or Revocation. The adult use
commission’s written decision shall be posted at the office of the adult use
commission and shall be served on the licensee in person or by certified U.S.
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s application. Any suspension
or revocation shall take effect on the day that the adult use commission’s
written decision is delivered in person or three (3) days after it is placed in
the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection.
   (4)   Surrender of License and Security. Upon the suspension or revocation
of an adult establishment license pursuant to this article, (1) the adult use
commission shall take custody of the suspended or revoked license, and (2) such
part or all of the bond or other security submitted for the adult entertainment
establishment pursuant to Section
17-5105(b)(2) of this article shall be forfeited as the adult use commission
shall deem necessary to reimburse the City for the costs associated with the
proceedings related to the suspension or revocation at issue. Such bond or
other security shall be replenished to equal the amount required pursuant to
Section
17-5105(b)(2) of this article, prior to the issuance of any new adult
establishment license for the licensed premises or for the reinstatement of any
suspended license.
SEC. 17-5120.   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD.
   The adult use commission shall cause to be kept in the adult use
commission’s office an accurate record of every adult establishment license
application received and acted on, together with all relevant information and
materials pertaining to such application, any adult establishment license
issued pursuant thereto, and any adult entertainment establishment operated
pursuant to such adult establishment license.
SEC. 17-5121.   RECORD KEEPING BY LICENSEE.
   The licensee of every adult entertainment establishment shall maintain a
register of all of its adult establishment employees. For each such employee,
the register shall include the following information:
   (1)   Legal name;
   (2)   Any and all aliases;
   (3)   Date of birth;
   (4)   Gender;
   (5)   Social Security Number;
   (6)   Date of commencement of employment;
   (7)   Date of employment termination if applicable; and
   (8)   Specific job or employment duties.
   The register shall be maintained for all current adult establishment
employees and all adult establishment employees employed at any time during the
preceding thirty-six (36) months. The licensee shall make the register of its
adult establishment employees available for inspection by the City immediately
upon demand at all reasonable times.
SEC. 17-5122.   PENALTY.
   Any person who commits an offense, violates, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or assists or participates in any way in the violation of, any of the
provisions or the requirements of this article, or any of the provisions or
requirements of any adult establishment license, shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The adult use commission shall give written
notice to any such person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving
a citation in person or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, addressed to the licensee’s address as set forth in the licensee’s
application.
SEC. 17-5123.   NUISANCE DECLARED.
   An adult entertainment establishment established, operated, or maintained in
violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of any
adult establishment license shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance. The City may, in addition to, or in lieu of any other
remedy set forth in this article, in accordance with
Chapter 21 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, commence an action to enjoin,
remove, or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take
such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to
grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain
and enjoin any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining an adult
entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article.
SEC. 17-5124.   COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this article, the time within
which any act required by this article is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is
Saturday, Sunday, or a federal or State of Illinois holiday, in which case it
shall also be excluded.
SEC. 17-5125.   SEVERABILITY.
   In the event that any provision of this article, or any part thereof, or any
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is found otherwise invalid
or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction on its face or as
applied, such holding shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining
provisions or any application thereof to any person, or circumstance, or of
said provision, as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the City that this article would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective provision not
been included herein.
SEC. 17-5126.   CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   In the event that any provision of this article, or any part thereof, or any
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is found to conflict with
any other provisions of any other federal, state or local law, rule, statute,
ordinance or regulation, then the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2000-02-04; new Article XI “REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS ACTIVITIES” enacted; 02/08/00). (Ord. No. 3100-2004; Article V,
“MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND PERSONNEL,” repealed in its entirety; Article XI,
“REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ACTIVITIES,” renumbered to Article
V; 12/14/04)
ARTICLE VI. PAWNBROKERS.
SEC. 17-6100.   DEFINED.
   Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or
other valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or
other valuable thing on condition of selling the property back again at a
stipulated price, is hereby defined and declared to be a "pawnbroker."
SEC. 17-6101.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall exercise or carry on the business of a pawnbroker within the
City without being duly licensed as provided in this article.
SEC. 17-6102.   ANNUAL LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) payable on May 1 of each year; however, beginning May
1, 1993, said fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and beginning
May 1, 1994, said fee shall be five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00).
SEC. 17-6103.   BOND.
   Each person licensed pursuant to this article shall, at the time of
receiving the license, enter into a joint and several bond to the City, with
two (2) sufficient sureties, in the penal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this Code
and other ordinances of the City as may be passed or enforced respecting
pawnbrokers, at any time during the continuance of the license. In lieu of the
bond required by this section, the licensee may post a two hundred dollar
($200.00) cash bond.
SEC. 17-6104.   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the accounts
and finance officer any failure of any person licensed pursuant to this article
to comply with any of the provisions of this article, and the accounts and
finance officer may revoke the license of such person.
   (b)   The accounts and finance officer may for cause revoke or suspend the
license issued pursuant to this article, or forfeit the bond, or both.
SEC. 17-6105.   REGISTER.
   Each pawnbroker shall maintain in the English language a book or register in
which an accurate account and description shall be made of every transaction at
the time of the transaction. Said register shall be on forms provided by the
Moline Police Department and shall contain the date of pawn, time of pawn,
amount pawned for, complete description of the article pawned (including serial
numbers where applicable), the name and address of the person pledging or
pawning each article, complete description and thumbprint of the person
pledging or pawning each article, and rate of interest to be charged on the
loan or pawn. No entry made in such register shall be erased, obliterated, or
defaced.
SEC. 17-6106.   MEMORANDUM OF TRANSACTION.
   Each pawnbroker shall, at the time of each pledge or deposit, deliver to the
person pawning or pledging any goods, article or thing, a memorandum or note,
signed by the pawnbroker, which memorandum shall contain the substance of the
entry required to be made in the business register; and no charge shall be made
or received by any pawnbroker or keeper of a pawnbroker's office for any such
entry, memorandum or note.
SEC. 17-6107.   INSPECTION.
   The register required by this article, as well as each article or thing of
value pawned or pledged, shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection
by the accounts and finance officer or any member of the police force.
   In addition to being subject to inspection as provided above, each
pawnbroker, on or before noon of Friday of each week, shall cause to be
delivered to the chief of police, or designee thereof, of the Moline Police
Department a copy of the register for the prior week's (Friday through
Thursday, inclusive) transactions. Should any pawnbroker fail to submit such
register, the chief of police shall report such failure to the accounts and
finance officer; and the accounts and finance officer shall suspend the license
granted hereunder for thirty (30) days or until submission, whichever is
sooner. If the failure has not been corrected at the end of thirty (30) days,
the accounts and finance officer shall issue a show cause order to the licensee
ordering said licensee's appearance to show cause why the license should not be
revoked. After hearing on said show cause order, the accounts and finance
officer may revoke, reinstate, or extend suspension of the license granted
hereunder as is warranted by the facts deduced at the hearing.
SEC. 17-6108.   BUYING CERTAIN ARTICLES PROHIBITED.
   No pawnbroker shall, under any pretense whatever, purchase or buy any
secondhand furniture, metals or clothes, or any other article or thing whatever
offered to the pawnbroker as a pawn or pledge.
SEC. 17-6109.   TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS.
   No person licensed pursuant to this article shall take or receive in pawn or
pledge for money loaned, any property, bonds, notes, securities or other
article of value, or valuable thing, from any minor, or the ownership of which
is in or which is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession or
control of any minor.
SEC. 17-6110.   TRANSACTIONS WITH INTOXICATED PERSONS OR THIEVES.
   No person licensed pursuant to this article shall take any article from any
person intoxicated, nor from any person known to be a notorious thief, or to
have been convicted of larceny or burglary.
SEC. 17-6111.   EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER SIXTEEN.
   No person licensed pursuant to this article shall employ any person under
the age of sixteen (16) years to take pledges in pawn.
ARTICLE VII. MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING SERVICES
SEC. 17-7100.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise noted, all terms used herein are used as defined
in the Illinois Vehicle Code, Chapter 625, Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (b)   The term "law" means the Illinois Commercial Relocation of Trespassing
Vehicles Law, as amended.
SEC. 17-7101.   OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT.
   (a)   A relocator must, within thirty (30) days, notify the office of the
chief of police or designee thereof of any change in the names and telephone
numbers of officers and managers of this company.
   (b)   A relocator must, within forty-eight (48) hours, notify the office of
the chief of police or designee thereof of any change in locations and
telephone numbers of the places where the relocator's company transacts
business.
SEC. 17-7102.   PROHIBITED FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
   (a)   Any payment of any kind to a property owner, lessee, or property
manager for permission to tow any vehicle is prohibited.
   (b)   Any payment of any kind or for any purposes to any peace officer or
law enforcement official is prohibited.
SEC. 17-7103.   PREMISES FROM AND CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH UNAUTHORIZED
VEHICLES MAY OR MAY NOT BE TOWED.
   (a)   No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator from any public street or
way, public alley or other public property except pursuant to explicit
authorization from a peace officer, law enforcement officer, owner of said
vehicle or duly authorized driver of said vehicle.
   (b)   No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator if it is parked in the
space in which it is authorized to park.
   (c)   Before a relocator may remove an unauthorized vehicle from private
property, a request must first be obtained from the owner, authorized agent
thereof or the lessee of the private property to remove the specific vehicle in
question, unless the relocator has been given authorization to remove all
unauthorized vehicles from said private property.
   (d)   When any owner, authorized agent or lessee of private property gives
authorization to a relocator to remove all unauthorized vehicles from a private
parking area, signs shall be posted pursuant to Section
17-7110.
   (e)   No vehicle may be towed by any person from private property if the
owner or other person entitled to possession of the vehicle is present, or
arrives at the scene prior to the vehicle's removal from such private property,
exhibits the ignition key of said vehicle, and offers to remove such vehicle
voluntarily prior to the time such person attempting to tow actually removes
such vehicle from the private property in question, provided that such owner or
such other person so removes such vehicle immediately, however, the owner must
pay half of the towing fee. If the owner refuses to pay half the towing fee,
the relocator may proceed to tow the vehicle.
SEC. 17-7104.   RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLES FROM CUSTODY OF RELOCATORS.
   (a)   Prior to release of towed motor vehicles, the relocator shall permit
the owner or authorized agent thereof of the vehicle towed to inspect the
interior and exterior of said vehicle and its content.
   (b)   The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the towed vehicle shall
be identified by a valid driver's license or valid driver's license for the
state of issuance of the license plates of the vehicle towed, and an ignition
key which operates the vehicle towed; or in the instance of rented vehicles,
identification may be accomplished by presentation of a rental contract and the
driver's license of the renting party named in the rental contract.
   (c)   Should the relocator claim fees and charges for towing, it shall base
the fees and charges on rates as stated in Section
17-7113.
   (d)   The relocator shall accept any of the following methods of payment for
such fees and charges:
   (1)   United States currency;
   (2)   Regularly recognized traveler's checks;
   (3)   Money order;
   (4)   Cashier's or certified checks; or
   (5)   Authorized bank credit card.
   (e)   The relocator may accept any regularly recognized personal check or
similar means of payment for fees and charges.
SEC. 17-7105.   NOTIFICATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
   Whenever an unauthorized vehicle is towed from private property, the
relocator, or agent or employee thereof, shall notify the Moline Police
Department. Such notification shall be by telephone no later than one-half (1/
2) hour after the tow is made and shall include the name of the relocator, an
accurate description of the vehicle and the location to which it was towed.
SEC. 17-7106.   SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Relocators shall comply with the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/18a-301
concerning security to meet liability coverages provided therein through bonds
or insurance.
   (b)   In the event any relocator's license has been suspended by reason of
failure to meet these requirements and should said relocator thereafter file a
bond or insurance policy or certificates in lieu thereof with the City of
Moline within twenty (20) days after the suspension, the chief of police or
designee thereof is authorized and hereby directed to reinstate the license of
such relocator and shall by notice to such relocator certify such
reinstatement. Upon good cause shown, the City of Moline may reinstate any
license which has been in suspension for more than twenty (20) days.
   (c)   In the event any relocator's license shall be in suspension for thirty
(30) days by reason of failure to have satisfactory security on file, the chief
of police or designee thereof will institute a proceeding against such
relocator to show cause why the suspension should not be permanent and the
relocator's license revoked.
SEC. 17-7107.   INVESTIGATIONS, HEARINGS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   The rules governing investigations, hearings and proceedings pursuant to the
authority vested in the chief of police or designee thereof by this article
shall be the same as contained in the Rules of Practice of the Illinois
Commerce Commission, as amended, with the exception of Rule XII.
SEC. 17-7108.   LICENSE; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (a)   Basis for revocation or suspension of a relocator license. The chief
of police or designee thereof may revoke or suspend a relocator license for any
one or more of the following reasons:
   (1)   If the holder thereof has obtained said license by fraud or
misrepresentation; or
   (2)   If the holder has committed substantial or repeated violations of this
article.
   (b)   The procedure provided in the Illinois Commerce Commission's Rules of
Practice, with the exception of Rule XII, concerning complaints, hearings, etc.
shall govern all proceedings wherein a relocator license may be suspended or
revoked.
SEC. 17-7109.   VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   (a)   The vehicles of a relocator shall be identified in a color or colors
vividly contrasting to the color of the unit, and the relocator's name, address
and telephone number, using letters and figures not less than two (2) inches in
height.
   (b)   The above requirement shall be waived where the vehicle has painted or
otherwise firmly affixed to it a seal or trademark which clearly identifies the
relocator.
SEC. 17-7110.   CONSTRUCTION, ERECTION, PLACEMENT, DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION OF
SIGNS.
   (a)   When any owner, authorized agent or lessee of private property gives
authorization to a relocator to remove all unauthorized vehicles from a private
parking area, the notice:
   (1)   Must be prominently placed at each driveway access or curb cut
allowing vehicular access to the property within five (5) feet from the public
right-of-way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the sign must be
posted not less than one (1) sign each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage.
   (2)   Must indicate clearly, in not less than two-inch high letters on a
contrasting background, with either the letters or contrasting background being
light reflectorized that unauthorized vehicles will be towed at the owner's
expense.
   (3)   Must also provide the name and current telephone number of the towing
service towing or removing the vehicle.
   (4)   Must also provide a general statement indicating who is allowed to
park in the area. Said statement may use classes of persons as well as
individuals.
   (5)   Must also provide the exact fee, if any, charged by the relocator to
recover the vehicle and the acceptable methods of payment of such fee.
   (6)   The sign structure containing the required notices must be permanently
installed with the bottom of the sign not less than four (4) feet above ground
level, and must be continuously maintained on the property for not less than
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.
   (b)   In cases where said sign(s) are absent or are not clearly visible for
whatever reason, at the time the vehicle is parked without authorization,
towing shall not be permitted.
   (c)   Subsections (a) and (b) above shall not apply to driveways of parking
areas which serve three (3) cars or fewer.
SEC. 17-7111.   APPLICATIONS FOR RELOCATOR'S LICENSES.
   (a)   Licenses for relocators shall be required and the method of
application for the relocator's licenses shall be in conformity with forms
provided in the accounts and finance office. The relocator’s license fee shall
be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year due May 1.
   (b)   With regard to criminal records, should any relocator or employee(s),
officers or manager thereof be convicted of a criminal offense, such
information shall be reported to the chief of police or designee thereof within
thirty (30) days.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-01; Sec. 17-7111 (a) repealed; new Sec. 17-7111 (a) enacted;
5/06/03)
(Ord. No. 3019-2008; Sec. 17-7111 repealed; new Sec. 17-7111 enacted; 03/04/08)
(Ord. No. 3033-2009; Sec. 17-7111(a) repealed; new Sec. 17-7111(a) enacted; 10/
27/09)
(Ord. No. 3030-2017; Sec. 17-7111(a) repealed; new Sec. 17-7111(a) enacted; 10/
17/17)
SEC. 17-7112.   APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL OF RELOCATOR'S LICENSES.
   The method of application for renewal of relocator's licenses shall be in
conformity with that supplied by the accounts and finance office.
SEC. 17-7113.   POSTING OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and proposes to require the
owner, operator, or person in control of the vehicle to pay the costs of towing
and storage prior to redemption of the vehicle must file and keep on record
with the accounts and finance office of the City a complete copy of the current
rates to be charged for such services, and post at the storage site an
identical rate schedule and any written contracts with property owners,
lessors, or persons in control of property which authorize them to remove
vehicles as provided in this article. In no event shall such rates be greater
than the rate or rates established in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/18a-200(3). In
no event shall such rate be increased or altered to reflect any charge for
services or materials rendered in addition to those authorized by said statute.
SEC. 17-7114.   ILLEGAL PARKING.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle owner or operator to park a vehicle
in an off-street parking place where signs are posted pursuant to Section
17-7110 of this article and where the owner has not received permission to park
in that space.
   (b)   The penalty for conviction of this section is twenty-five dollars
($25.00).
SEC. 17-7115.   POST TOW HEARING.
   (a)   Any vehicular owner or operator whose vehicle is towed pursuant to
this article may, within thirty (30) days of the towing, in lieu of paying the
relocator for storage and towing, post a bond equal to the storage and towing
fees with the accounts and finance office. Upon posting said bond, the
relocator shall release the vehicle towed.
   (b)   Within ninety-six (96) hours of the posting of the bond, the chief of
police or designee thereof shall preside over an administrative hearing at
which time the vehicle owner or operator may plead facts indicating by a
preponderance of the evidence that:
   (1)   The signs required in Section
17-7110 were not posted or were not readable at the time the owner left the
vehicle; or
   (2)   The vehicle was mistakenly towed, i.e., the owner or operator had the
permission of the property owner to park.
   (c)   Notice of said hearing shall be given to the property owner and
relocator as well as to the vehicle owner or operator.
   (d)   If the chief of police or designee thereof determines that the vehicle
owner or operator has met the burden of proof, then the chief of police or
designee thereof shall order the bond to be returned to the vehicle owner or
operator.
   (e)   If the chief of police or designee thereof determines that the vehicle
owner or operator has not met the burden of proof, then the chief of police or
designee thereof shall order the bond to be sent to the towing company.
SEC. 17-7116.   SEVERABILITY.
   It is the intention of the City Council of the City of Moline, Illinois,
that the several provisions of this Article VII on commercial relocation of
vehicles are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
any provision of this article to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this article not specifically included in such judgment
order.
ARTICLE VIIA. RESERVED
(Ord. No. 2000-12-06; Article VIIA, “USED VEHICLE LICENSE,” repealed; Article
VIIA reserved for future use; 12/05/00)
ARTICLE VIII. BURGLAR, HOLD-UP AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS AND USERS.
SEC. 17-8100.   TITLE.
   The short title of this article shall be the "Alarm Licensing Ordinance."
SEC. 17-8101.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to burglary, hold-up and fire alarm systems, and alarm users;
require permits and establish fees therefor; and provide for punishment of
violation of provisions as defined in this article.
SEC. 17-8102.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
   (1)   Alarm agent means any person who is employed by an alarm business
either directly or indirectly whose duties include any of the following:
Selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm
system. However, it shall not mean a person who engages from a fixed location
in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system and who neither visits the
location where the alarm system is to be installed nor designs the scheme for
physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
   (2)   Alarm business means the business by any individual, partnership or
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, inspecting,
servicing, repairing, moving or installing any alarm system, answering service,
central or modified central station system or direct alarm system in or on any
building, structure or facility. However, it does not mean the business by
persons engaged from a fixed location solely in the manufacture or sale of
alarm system components and who do not install, alter, maintain, service, or
plan the alarm systems for a specific location.
   (3)   Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device which is
designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful
act within a building, structure or facility or for detecting and signaling the
presence of smoke, heat or fire on a protected premises or any combination
thereof; and which emits a sound and transmits a signal or message when
actuated to which police or fire services are expected to respond. In this
article the term "alarm system" shall include the terms audible alarm,
automatic dialing device, burglar alarm system, and fire alarm system.
   (4)   Answering service means a telephone answering business providing among
its services receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees,
emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately relaying the
message by live voice to the communications center of the Moline Emergency
Center.
   (5)   Appellant means a person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this
article.
   (6)   Applicant means a person, firm or corporation, who or which, files an
application for a new or renewal license or permit as provided in this article.
   (7)   Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of
unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises
when it is actuated. This audible alarm may or may not be combined with a
method of transmitting a signal to a remote point. However, "audible alarm"
shall not include audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
   (8)   Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically
sends, over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
   (9)   Burglar alarm system means a method of detecting and signaling the
presence, entry or attempted entry of an intruder into or onto protected
premises.
   (10)   Central station system means a system or group of systems usually
operated from its customers by a person in which the operation of protected
circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and supervised
from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all
times and whose operators and guards have the duty to take appropriate action
upon receipt of a signal or message including the relaying of messages by
signal channel circuit to the communications center of the Moline Emergency
Center.
   (11)   False alarm means the intentional or unintentional activation of an
alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or
the negligence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of said owner's or
lessee's employees or agents which necessitates response by the Moline police
department or fire department when an attempted or actual burglary or holdup or
fire does not exist. Such terminology does not include, however, alarms caused
by tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent conditions.
   (12)   Fire alarm system means a method of detecting and signaling the
presence of smoke, heat or fire on a protected premises.
   (13)   Modified central station means an office to which remote alarm and
supervisory signaling devices are connected where operators supervise the
circuits and relay the messages by a signal channel circuit to the
communications center of the Moline Emergency Center.
   (14)   Protected premises means that part of a building, structure or
facility to which protection is afforded by an alarm system.
   (15)   Primary trunk line means a telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Moline Emergency Center that is for the purpose of
handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is
identified by a specific listing among the emergency numbers in a telephone
directory issued by the telephone company serving the City of Moline.
   (16)   Signal channel circuit means a telephone service that only provides a
two-way telephone service from one location to another location. In the Moline
Emergency Center it will be used to report emergency signals from an answering
service, a central station or from a modified central station to the Moline
Emergency Center on a person-to-person basis.
   (17)   Subscriber means a person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains
an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm
business to monitor and/or service the alarm device.
(Ord. No. 96-1-2; §17-8102 (11) deleted; remaining subsections renumbered; 01/
02/96)
SEC. 17-8103.   STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (a)   The police and fire chiefs may prescribe reasonable minimum standards
and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems. Said
standards shall require use of Underwriter's Laboratory or Factory Mutual
approved equipment and shall follow industry standards and accepted practice.
   (b)   The respective chief shall require inspection and approval of all
alarm systems installed within the City, and all devices shall meet or exceed
such standards or regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this
article.
   (c)   Every subscriber or other person maintaining an alarm system shall
provide the respective chief with the names and telephone numbers of the person
or persons to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises
during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system is activated. It is
the responsibility of such subscriber or person to assure that the names and
telephone numbers recorded with the respective chiefs are kept current.
SEC. 17-8104.   AUDIBLE ALARM REQUIREMENTS.
   All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons
outside the protected building, structure, or facility shall conform to the
following requirements:
   (1)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which creates a sound
similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning
system.
   (2)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not
automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within one-half (1/2) hour
after it is activated.
   (3)   With respect to systems in existence prior to the adoption of this
article, the owner thereof shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date
of this article to effect the necessary modifications to comply with the
foregoing requirements, except that, in cases where a specified alarm causes
recurring difficulty, the respective chief may require that the modifications
shall be made within five (5) days or the permit may be revoked.
SEC. 17-8105.   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
   No alarm system using an automatic dialing device will be allowed to send a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal over a primary trunkline or direct
line into the communications center of the Moline Emergency Center.
SEC. 17-8106.   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE, INTERMEDIARY SERVICES.
   (a)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the
device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
   (1)   A central station;
   (2)   A modified central station; or
   (3)   A licensed answering service.
   (b)   The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the Moline
Emergency Center shall be over a signal channel circuit on a person-to-person
basis.
   (c)   The respective chief may limit the number of "signal channel circuits"
that come into the communications center of the Moline Emergency Center.
SEC. 17-8107.   RADIO ALARMS.
   Within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this article, all alarm
system equipment designed to transmit a message on the emergency base radio
frequency shall be disconnected by the owner thereof at the owner's expense.
SEC. 17-8108.   EXEMPTION.
   This article is not applicable to City-owned and operated equipment used
over the emergency radio frequency.
SEC. 17-8109.   ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall possess or use an alarm system without first applying for
and receiving an alarm permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
   Applications for all permits under this article shall be on a form
prescribed by the fire or police chief who may request such information as is
necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. Applications shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable application/permit fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) and shall be paid to the accounts and finance officer.
(Ord. No. 96-1-2; §17-8109 (b) deleted; 01/02/96; Ord. No. 3026-2008; Sec. 17-
8109 repealed; new Sec. 17-8109 enacted; 03/25/08)
SEC. 17-8110.   RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 3026-2008; Sec. 17-8110 repealed; new Sec. 17-8110 enacted, “ALARM
AGENT LICENSE REQUIRED;” 03/26/08)
Ord. No. 3037-2008; Sec. 17-8110 repealed & reserved for future use; 06/03/08)
SEC. 17-8111.   NOTICE OF APPLICATION/INFORMATION CHANGE.
   Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information requested by
this article, the applicant, licensee or permittee shall give written notice
thereof to the respective chief and the accounts and finance officer within
fifteen (15) days after such change or at any hearing conducted before the
notice has been given.
SEC. 17-8112.   RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 3026-2008; Sec. 17-8112 repealed; new Sec. 17-8112 enacted, “ALARM
AGENT RECORDS;” 03/25/08)
(Ord. No. 3037-2008; Sec. 17-8112, “ALARM AGENT RECORDS,” repealed and returned
to that which existed immediately prior to the enactment of Ord. No. 3026-2008
on 03/25/08, which was and shall read as follows: “RESERVED;” 06/03/08)
SEC. 17-8113.   PERMIT RENEWAL.
   Alarm system permits need not be renewed. Any modifications of or additions
to an alarm system shall require a new permit and may require an inspection as
determined by the respective chief.
SEC. 17-8114.   ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   The accounts and finance officer, upon receipt of written approval of the
respective chief and upon receipt of application fee and license or permit fee,
shall issue or renew permits or licenses.
SEC. 17-8115.   APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION AND DENIAL.
   Alarm systems. The permit shall be denied by the respective chief if the
alarm system does not comply with the standards and regulations adopted
pursuant to this article. The permit shall be issued to the person owning,
using or possessing the alarm system. If the permit is denied, the reasons for
denial shall be set forth in writing and provided to the applicant. The notice
of denial shall inform the applicant that said applicant may appeal the denial
and set forth procedure for appeal.
(Ord. No. 96-1-2; §17-8115 repealed; new subsection enacted; 01/02/96)
SEC. 17-8116.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; GROUNDS.
   The following shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a
permit:
   (1)   The violation of any of the provisions of this article; or
   (2)   Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a permittee, employee
or agent thereof in a situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in
progress; or
   (3)   Where the permittee, employee or agent thereof has knowingly made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application
for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any City
agency; or
   (4)   Where the permittee has had a similar-type permit previously revoked
for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant can show a material
change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or
   (5)   Where an alarm system actuates an excessive number of false alarms and
thereby constitutes a public nuisance, the permittee will be subject to a
service charge for each such false alarm. Regardless of the status of an alarm
system permit, however, the City of Moline emergency services will respond as
promptly and effectively as possible to any received alarm actuations.
      a.   False alarms occurring within the two (2) week period immediately
following the installation date of an alarm system will not be considered
excessive and shall be exempt from the false alarm service charge.
      b.   False alarms determined to have been caused by acts of nature will
not be considered excessive and shall be exempt from the false alarm service
charge.
      c.   Said service charges are hereby established to be as follows:
         1.   With a valid permit, for each new alarm system, the first false
alarm fee for police or fire will be not be charged; thereafter, the fee will
be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per false alarm.
         2.   When no permit has been obtained or while a permit is under
revocation, the first alarm fee for police or fire will not be charged;
thereafter, the fee will be two hundred dollars ($200) per false alarm.
            Additionally, when no permit has been obtained, the following
action will be taken against the individual owning, using or possessing the
alarm system:
            i.   The City will notify the individual of the permit requirement
by mailing written notice to the individual’s mailing address, and he/she shall
have ten (10) business days from the notice date to submit a completed permit
application and pay the nonrefundable application/permit fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) to the accounts and finance officer.
            ii.   If the individual does not complete the application process
by the ten (10) business days provided in the notice, a second notice will be
mailed to the individual advising of the permit requirement, and he/she shall
have ten (10) business days from the notice date to submit a completed
application and pay an increased nonrefundable application/permit fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to the accounts and finance officer.
            iii.   If the individual fails to respond and/or complete the
application process following the ten (10) business days provided in the second
notice, he/she will be found in violation of this article and subject to the
penalty provision of Sec.
17-8124.
      d.   Said service charges shall not exempt the permittee from the
violation penalty provision of Sec.
17-8124, adopted pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 2000-07-04; Sec. 17-8116 repealed; new Sec. 17-8116 enacted; 07/18/
00)
(Ord. No. 2002-06-14; Sec. 17-8116 repealed; new Sec. 17-8116 enacted; 06/25/
02)
(Ord. No. 3071-2004; Sec. 17-8116 repealed; new Sec. 17-8116 enacted; 09/14/04)
(Ord. No. 3014-2006; Sec. 17-8116(b) repealed; new Sec. 17-8116(b) enacted; 04/
04/06)
(Ord. No. 3010-2008; Sec. 17-8116(5)(b) repealed; new Sec. 17-8116(5)(b)
enacted; 02/26/08)
(Ord. No. 3031-2017; Sec. 17-8116(5) repealed; new Sec. 17-8116(5) enacted; 10/
17/17)
(Ord. No. 3017-2019; Sec. 17-8116 repealed; new Sec. 17-8116 enacted; 06/25/19)
SEC. 17-8117.   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; PROCEDURE.
   The respective chief, in the case of suspension, shall serve the licensee or
permittee with a written order of suspension which shall state the reasons for
such suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served,
or forty-eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in the course of
transmission in the United States Postal Service. Immediately upon such an
order becoming effective, the licensee or permittee shall discontinue the use
of any alarm system requiring a permit under this article and cease all
operations conducted under the authority of any license or permit issued
pursuant to this article.
SEC. 17-8118.   REVOCATION.
   (a)   The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the
order of suspension becomes effective unless the licensee or permittee files an
appeal of the order of suspension in the manner set forth in this article.
   (b)   Where an appeal is filed, the order of suspension shall be stayed,
pending a final determination of the appeal. The suspension shall become a
revocation if the decision of the city administrator upholds the suspension,
unless said decision is overruled by the City Council. The suspension shall be
dissolved immediately if the decision of the city administrator reverses the
suspension.
SEC. 17-8119.   SURRENDER OF LICENSE/PERMIT.
   If any license or permit is revoked pursuant to this article, the licensee
or permittee shall surrender the license or permit to the accounts and finance
officer.
SEC. 17-8120.   APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the respective chief with reference
to the denial of an application for a permit, revocation of a permit, or
renewal thereof shall have the right of appeal. An appeal must be perfected
within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision of denial or order of
suspension by filing with the city administrator a letter of appeal, briefly
stating therein the basis for the appeal.
   Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days shall
constitute a waiver of appellant's right to review; but the city administrator,
in the administrator's discretion, may, nevertheless, grant such a review. If
the city administrator affirms the decision of the respective chief, the
appealing party may have a hearing before the City Council on said matter. If
the city administrator does not approve the decision of the chief, said
administrator shall transmit this decision to the said chief, who will comply
with same.
(Ord. No. 3017-2019; Sec. 17-8120 repealed; new Sec. 17-8120 enacted; 06/25/19)
SEC. 17-8121.   REINSTATEMENT OF ALARM PRIVILEGE.
   Whenever an alarm system, for which suspension, revocation or renewal denial
is in effect, has been repaired so as to be able to function properly and
reliably and the respective chief has received from an alarm business or agent
in good standing written certification that repairs have been made to the
alarm, that it is functioning properly, and that a reasonable maintenance
schedule has been established, said chief may reinstate the alarm permit.
SEC. 17-8122.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALARM RESPONSE.
   Every person who has, on premises under said person's control or ownership,
an alarm system, audible or silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm
system is giving a signal, proceed immediately to the premises and render all
necessary service. Provided, however, that the owner or person in control of
the premises may enter into an agreement with an alarm business to respond in
said owner or person's stead.
SEC. 17-8123.   LIABILITY OF CITY LIMITED.
   The City shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals
received by the City are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with
dispatch. Nevertheless, the City shall not be liable for any defects in
operation of any alarm devices or signal lines system, for any failure or
neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source,
nor for the failure or neglect of any person with a permit issued pursuant to
this article, in connection with the installation and operation of equipment,
the transmission of alarm signals, or the delaying of such signals. In the
event the City finds it necessary to disconnect a defective automatic
protective device or signaling device, the City shall incur no liability by
such action.
SEC. 17-8124.   VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
ARTICLE IX. RAFFLES
SEC. 17-9100.   TITLE.
   The short title of this article shall be the “Raffle Ordinance.”
SEC. 17-9101.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out herein:
   (1)   Rock Island County Model Raffle Ordinance means an ordinance in
substantially the same form, and containing the same provisions and limitations
as is set forth in this subject ordinance to be enacted by any municipality
located within Rock Island County, Illinois, and intended to regulate the
conduct of raffles within the jurisdiction of the respective municipality.
   (2)   Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles,
less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   (3)   Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in Section
28-2(b) of the "Criminal Code of 1961" conducted by an organization licensed
under this act, in which:
      a.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one (1) or more of which chances is to be designated the
winning chance;
      b.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   (4)   Nonprofit, charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, veterans,
labor, and political committee shall have the same meaning ascribed to them as
in 230 ILCS 15/2.
SEC. 17-9102.   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct
raffle chances in the City without having first obtained a license therefor
pursuant to this article or in violation of the terms of such license.
   (b)   Any person, firm or corporation who is in immediate possession of a
valid license issued to the person, firm or corporation by another municipality
or political subdivision located in Rock Island County, Illinois, which
municipality or political subdivision has enacted the Rock Island County Model
Raffle Ordinance, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section to have
obtained a license from the City.
   (c)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which have had during that entire five-year period, a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives.
SEC. 17-9103.   APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Applications for raffle licenses shall be made to the finance director
no later than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of sales or
advertisement of sale of raffle chances.
   (b)   The application for license must specify the area or areas within the
City in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination
of winning chances and the locations at which the winning chances will be
determined.
   (c)   The application for license must contain a sworn statement attesting
to the not-for-profit character of the prospective license organization, and
shall be signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the organization.
   (d)   The application for license must state the residence of the applicant
and all addresses of offices within the licensing municipality and, if the
raffle drawing is to be conducted within the licensing municipality, the
address of the location of the drawing.
   (e)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in the
ordinance. A raffle license shall be valid for one (1) raffle only. Additional
raffles shall require a raffle license and corresponding application and fee.
   (f)   A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for the making
of application and the issuance of a raffle license. No fee shall be collected
when the aggregate value of prizes to be awarded in a single raffle is less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (g)   Prior to approval, any application which indicates that the sale of
raffle chances would be in an area outside the corporate limits of the City, or
which indicates that the location or locations of determining winning chances
is outside the corporate limits of the City, shall be referred to the licensing
authority of such jurisdiction for comment as to zoning status, licensed status
of location, and compliance with licensing regulations.
   (h)   The Finance Director shall act on a license application within thirty
(30) days from the date of application and shall notify all jurisdictions
affected thereby of said action.
(Ord. No. 3008-2008; Sec. 17-1103 repealed; new Sec. 17-1103 enacted; 02/26/08)
SEC. 17-9104.   RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES.
   No such licenses shall be issued to:
   (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (3)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (1) or
(2) above, has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a
person is active or employed;
   (4)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1) or (2)
above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
   (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1) or (2)
above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined
in this act.
SEC. 17-9105.   CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles licensed under this article is subject to the
following restrictions:
   (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game;
   (2)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle;
   (3)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle; however, this shall not prohibit the
payment of rent or fee for use of facilities to hold a raffle if said rent or
fee is not dependent upon the raffle proceeds and is binding upon the parties
at the time made;
   (4)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license;
   (5)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by said person's parent or guardian.
SEC. 17-9106.   RAFFLES; MANAGER; BOND.
   All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision
of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the licensing
authority in favor of the organization conditioned upon said manager's honesty
in the performance of said manager's duties. Terms of the bond shall provide
that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than
thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The City Council may waive this
bond requirement upon the request of the organization, by directing the
accounts and finance officer to include a waiver provision in the license
issued to an organization under this article, provided that a license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the
members of the licensed organization.
SEC. 17-9107.   RECORDS.
   (a)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose,
amount, and date of payment.
   (b)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor, issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (c)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the licensing local unit or government, its receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds
itemized as required in this section.
   (d)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and the organizations shall make available their records relating to the
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
SEC. 17-9108.   VIOLATION.
   Violation of any provision of this article shall subject the person, firm,
or organization to a fine in a sum not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. No. 98-2-6; §17-9108 repealed; new §17-9108 enacted; 02/03/98)
CHAPTER 18
SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSES AND EVENTS
   Art. I   Youth Club/Dance License, §18-1100 - §18-1114
   Art. II   Special Events, §18-2100
ARTICLE I. YOUTH CLUB/DANCE LICENSE
SEC. 18-1100.   DEFINITION; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or
agent, shall operate or permit to be operated on any premises in the City a
club/dance where an admission is charged and where any of the participants are
under the age of twenty-one (21) without first obtaining a license for use of
said premises or said purposes.
SEC. 18-1101.   APPLICATION.
   To obtain a youth club/dance license, the applicant shall file an
application with the accounts and finance officer upon a form provided by said
officer, which shall contain, among other information, a petition signed by a
majority of the property owners within one hundred fifty (150) feet in radius
from the center of the front of the premises for which the license is sought.
If any portion of any property falls within the one hundred fifty (150) foot
radius, that property owner shall be included in obtaining the consent required
herein.
(Ord. No. 3034-2017; Sec. 18-1101 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 18-1101
enacted; 10/17/17)
SEC. 18-1102.   INVESTIGATION.
   The accounts and finance officer, upon receipt of such application, shall
cause the police department to investigate all the statements contained in each
application, to include a criminal background check, and if upon investigation
the accounts and finance officer shall be satisfied that the matters and things
therein contained are true, and that the applicant has complied with all the
requirements of this ordinance, said officer shall approve the same and upon
receipt by said officer of the required license fee, issue a license in
accordance with the provisions herein.
SEC. 18-1103.   FEE.
   An annual license fee for such license shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) which shall be paid to the finance director; provided, however, that
no fee need be paid from any licensee which is a non-profit organization once
the non-profit organization has provided proof of federal non-profit tax status
satisfactory to said director.
(Ord. No. 3011-2008; Sec. 18-1103 repealed; new Sec. 18-1103 enacted; 02/26/08)
SEC. 18-1104.   TERM OF LICENSE.
   Youth club/dance licenses shall be in effect for a term of one year and
issued on May 1 of each year, expiring April 30th of the next year.
SEC. 18-1105.   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any person receiving a youth club/dance license under the provisions of this
section shall display said license prominently in the licensed premises.
SEC. 18-1106.   ENFORCEMENT.
   The licensee or agent shall permit any police officer or other official of
the City free and unrestricted access to the licensed premises for the purposes
of inspecting the same.
SEC. 18-1107.   SUSPENSION/REVOCATION.
   The chief of police may suspend or revoke any youth club/dance license
granted hereunder if the operation of the licensed premises is found to be
detrimental to the health or safety of the neighborhood, for failure of the
licensee to comply with the requirements of this article, or if the licensee
has been found to be guilty of the violation of any City ordinance or state law
in the operation of the licensed premises. Said suspension or revocation shall
occur after notice and an opportunity for hearing, as provided in Sec.
18-1108 herein below.
SEC. 18-1108.   NOTICE; HEARING.
   (a)   Licenses issued pursuant to this article may be suspended temporarily
by the chief of police, for failure of the licensee to comply with the
requirements of this article.
   Whenever a licensee under this article has failed to comply with any
provision of this article, the licensee shall be notified in writing that said
licensee's license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended, or
that the suspension shall be effective on a specific future date and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided, if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the chief of police by the licensee within five (5) days after
service of the notice.
   (b)   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
article, or for interference with any police officer or City official in the
performance of said authority's duties, a license issued pursuant to this
article may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for hearing has been
provided by the chief of police, or designee. Prior to such action, the chief
of police, or designee, shall notify the licensee in writing, stating the
reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and advising that the
permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) days following
service of the notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed with the chief
of police by the licensee within the five (5) day period.
   (c)   All notices required by this article to be served by the chief of
police, or designee, may be served by the chief of police, or designee, on a
licensee under this article personally, or by United States mail directed to
the address of the youth club/dance establishment as the address appears on the
license issued pursuant to this article.
SEC. 18-1109.   APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to revoke a
license under this article shall have the right of appeal. An appeal must be
filed within fifteen (15) days after notice of revocation by filing with the
city Administrator a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for the
appeal. Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days
shall constitute a waiver of the appellant's right to review. If the city
administrator does not approve the decision of the chief of police, said
official shall transmit that decision to the chief, who will comply with same.
SEC. 18-1110.   JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city administrator pursuant to
Sec.
18-1109 hereof, may appeal to the circuit court. Said appeal shall be subject
to the Administrative Review Act.
SEC. 18-1111.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All premises licensed under the provisions of this section shall be closed
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day. It shall be the
obligation of the owner or operator of said youth club/dance facility to clear
all patrons from the premises fifteen (15) minutes after closing.
SEC. 18-1112.   SUPERVISION.
   It shall be the obligation of the owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent
of said youth club/dance facility offering a dance to minors under the age of
twenty-one (21) to provide one person twenty-one (21) years or older per each
twenty-five (25) patrons to ensure proper supervision of said premises. The
person or persons provided for supervision shall not be inclusive of anyone
employed to dispense food, beverages, or other operational duties.
SEC. 18-1113.   CURFEW.
   The owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent of any youth club/dance
facility shall cause any minor patrons to be removed from said premises one-
half hour prior to curfew hours regulated by State law or City Code. For the
purposes of this section, "curfew" shall be defined as in Section
22-1102, Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 18-1114.   PENALTY.
   Any licensee or agent thereof violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in Section
1-1107 of the City Code and/or the revocation of the operator's license.
(Ord. No. 2000-05-05; new Chapter 18 "SPECIAL BUSINESS LICENSES" adopted,
including adoption of new Article I "YOUTH CLUB/DANCE LICENSE"; 05/09/00)
ARTICLE II. SPECIAL EVENTS
SEC. 18-2100.   FEES.
   A non-refundable fee will be charged for special event applications. The fee
schedule is as follows:
   (1)   Parades, Runs and Races and Other Events……..………………….$50.00.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-23; new Article II, “SPECIAL EVENTS,” enacted; 06/25/02; Ord.
No. 3048-2005; new Sec. 18-2100(3) enacted; 08/16/05; Ord. No. 3016-2006; Sec.
18-2100 repealed; new Sec. 18-2100 enacted; 04/04/06; Ord. No. 3040-2011; Sec.
18-2100 repealed; new Sec. 18-2100 enacted; 11/15/11 )
CHAPTER 19
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
   Art. I.   In General, § 19-1100 - § 19-1105
   Art. II.   Mobile Home Parks
      Div. 1.   Licenses; permits, § 19-2100 - § 19-2105
      Div. 2.   Enforcement, § 19-2200 - § 19-2208
      Div. 3.   Design Standards, § 19-2300 - § 19-2315
      Div. 4.   Water Supply; Sewage Disposal, § 19-2400 - § 19-2408
      Div. 5.   Refuse Disposal; Vermin and Weed Control, § 19-2500 - § 19-2506
      Div. 6.   Service Buildings and Other Service Facilities, § 19-2600 - §
19-2604
      Div. 7.   Fire Protection, § 19-2700 - § 19-2703
      Div. 8.   Miscellaneous Facilities, § 19-2800 - § 19-2803
      Div. 9.   Operation, § 19-2900 - § 19-2904
   Art. III. Abandoned Mobile Homes, § 19-3100 - § 19-3103
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 19-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Accessory structure shall mean a building subordinate to and smaller
than a principal building or mobile home, that contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile
home.
   (2)   Building official shall mean the officer appointed pursuant to Section
8-1101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, or his designee.
   (3)   Federal standards shall mean the Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
   (4)   License shall mean permission to operate a mobile home park granted
pursuant to this chapter.
   (5)   Manufactured home shall mean a residential dwelling for one family,
fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building
site, bearing a HUD label or insignia certifying that it is built in compliance
with the Federal Standards and built after June 14, 1976, but does not include
modular homes which meet all of the requirements of the Moline Residential Code
applicable to other residential construction and do not bear a HUD label or
insignia certifying compliance with the Federal Standards.
   (6)   Mobile home shall mean a manufactured home or trailer home.
   (7)   Mobile home lot shall mean a parcel of land designed for the exclusive
use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
   (8)   Mobile home park shall mean an area of land upon which two (2) or more
occupied mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile
home park.
   (9)   Permit shall mean a written permission issued by the building official
authorizing the owner to construct or alter a mobile home park under this
chapter.
   (10)   Safety code shall mean the Code promulgated for motor homes by the
American National Standards Institute and identified as ANSI A119.1, Edition of
1973.
   (11)   Service building shall mean a building housing a manager's office,
laundry facilities, maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for employees, and
emergency sanitary accommodations.
   (12)   Trailer home shall mean a transportable factory-built structure,
designed for long term occupancy by one family and built prior to June 15,
1976, the effective date of the Federal Standards.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-1100 repealed; new Sec. 19-1100 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-1101.   EXEMPTIONS FROM THIS CHAPTER.
      Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include the state parks;
and the term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include buildings,
tents or other structures maintained by any individual or company on their own
premises and used exclusively to house their own farm labor; or any military
establishment of the United States or of the state where a mobile home may be
located or harbored; or any park on state or county fairgrounds for a period
during, immediately prior to and immediately subsequent to the holding of the
fair not to exceed a total of two (2) weeks in all; or the area or premises on
any farm upon which are harbored mobile homes occupied by persons employed upon
the farm for not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year in the
production, harvesting or processing of agricultural or horticultural products
produced on such farm. (
Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-1101 repealed; new Sec. 19-1101 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-1102.   PROHIBITIONS.
   (a)   No trailer home shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the
City. Any trailer home located in the City legally, prior to effective date of
the 2020 amendment to this Chapter and used and occupied as a residential
dwelling shall be allowed to remain if it is and remains in compliance with the
Safety code, but shall not be replaced with another trailer home, or relocated
to another place within the City. Ordinary maintenance, repairs and alterations
may be made to an existing trailer home; provided, that no structural
alterations shall be made in or to such trailer home.
   (b)   A trailer home legally located in the City, or portion thereof, which
is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent
that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the
occurrence will exceed fifty percent (50%) of its fair market value, based on
the valuation of the township assessor or a market appraisal performed by a
certified appraiser, shall not be restored. If such damage or destruction is
less than fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the trailer home, it
may be repaired if such repairs or restored if such work is started within one
year from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to
completion.
   (c)   No manufactured home shall be permitted within the corporate limits of
the City unless it is located in a mobile home park in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (d)   No manufactured home shall be permitted within the corporate limits of
the City unless it complies with the Federal standards.
   (e)   No manufactured home shall be placed into a mobile home park in the
City without first being subjected to inspections and remediation of
shortcomings identified by those inspections. Inspections and repairs must
occur before the manufactured home is brought to the City.
   (f)   No trailers, travel trailers, campers, or recreational vehicles shall
be parked in any mobile home park in the City.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-1102 repealed; new Sec. 19-1102 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-1103.   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (1)   No trailer home shall be permitted to remain in the City unless it
complies with the Safety code.
   (2)   All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
alterations or repairs to trailer homes shall be made in compliance with the
Safety code.
   (3)   No person shall park in the City any manufactured home unless it
complies with the Federal standards.
   (4)   All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
alterations or repairs to manufactured homes shall be made in compliance with
the Federal standards and applicable codes of the City of Moline.
   (5)   No permanent additions shall be built onto or become a part of any
mobile home.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-1103 repealed; new Sec. 19-1103 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-1104.   MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY.
   Consistent with standards of the Fair Housing Act, occupancy of a mobile
home shall be limited to the design capacity of the mobile home as established
by the number of sleeping spaces provided in the mobile home.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; new Sec. 19-1104 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-1105.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or participates
in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter commits an offense, and upon being found guilty of thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), for each separate offense; each day during
which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue
shall be a separate offense. The City may also seek injunctive relief and the
appointment of a receiver to take corrective action.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; new Sec. 19-1105 enacted; 10/6/20)
ARTICLE II. MOBILE HOME PARKS
DIVISION 1. LICENSES; PERMITS
SEC. 19-2100.   LICENSES AND PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES.
   (a)   No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home
park in the City without first obtaining a license therefor. No license
required by this division shall be issued if the mobile home park is, at such
time, in violation of any ordinance of the county.
   (b)   No person shall construct a mobile home park in the City, or make a
change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewerage, drainage,
garbage or waste disposal, or make a change in the plot plan for an existing
mobile home park without first obtaining a permit therefor.
   (c)   A single application may be submitted for an initial license and
permit to construct a mobile home park. Such application shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each ten
(10) acres of land, or fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a mobile home
park. The initial mobile home park license shall expire on the next following
May 1, and the license shall be renewed from year to year upon payment of the
annual license fee.
   (d)   The annual license renewal fee for a mobile home park license shall be
five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus three dollars ($3.00) for each mobile home
lot. All fees shall be made payable to the City. Annual licenses shall run from
May 1 of each year and expire on April 30 of the following year.
   (e)   An application to alter an existing mobile home park shall be
accompanied by an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each ten (10)
acres or fraction thereof used to harbor mobile homes thereon; however, no
application fee shall be required to accompany an application for a permit to
alter a park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of
mobile home lots to a number less than that for which the park is currently
licensed.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2100 repealed; new Sec. 19-2100 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2101.   APPLICATIONS; SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS.
   An applicant for an original mobile home park license shall file a written
application therefor with the City setting forth:
   (1)   The full name and address of the applicant, or the names and addresses
of the partners if the applicant is a partnership or the names and addresses of
the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last
occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the application. The
application shall also designate an agent with an address in Rock Island
County, Illinois for purposes of receiving all notices and the applicant shall
have a continuing duty to keep the information concerning the designated agent
current.
   (2)   The location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on
a plat of a survey by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, drawn to scale of
one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or larger.
   (3)   The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply,
sewerage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and for a sanitary
community building which will include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks,
wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the proposed
alterations therein and the maintenance thereof.
   (4)   The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the
park is to be located.
   (5)   All corner and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or
wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen (18) inches in length
and not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar
is to be set level with the established grade of the ground.
   (6)   The plat plans of the park drawn on a scale of one hundred (100) feet
to an inch or larger, building plans and specifications for existing buildings
and facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and
facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all showing
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The plot plans shall be drawn
on a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or larger, and shall
contain, among other things, the following:
      a.   The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
      b.   An arrow indicating north.
      c.   All mobile home sites shall be properly numbered on the plot plans.
      d.   Complete information regarding storm sewers.
      e.   Stormwater runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
      f.   Contour lines at one (1) foot intervals shall be shown on a separate
plat, and United States Geological Survey data shall be used for the
preparation of such plat.
      g.   Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate
plat.
   (7)   A statement of the fire-fighting facilities, public or private, which
are available to the mobile home park.
   (8)   An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained
in the application shall be attached thereto.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2101 repealed; new Sec. 19- 2101 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2102.   APPROVAL OF APPLICATION BY BUILDING OFFICIAL; ISSUANCE OR
DENIAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit required by this
division, the building official shall examine the application within a
reasonable time. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
this chapter, the building official shall reject the application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the objections can be corrected, the
application may be amended and resubmitted for approval. If the application
conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the City shall issue the license
or permit, provided, however, if the application requests both a license and
permit, the license shall not be issued until the work under the permit is
completed, inspected by the building official, and determined by the building
official to be in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2102 repealed; new Sec. 19-2102 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2103.   TRANSFERABILITY AS TO PERSONS AND PREMISES.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter apply only to the premises
described in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one
(1) location shall be so described in each license. A license which has been
issued to a person may not be transferred to any other person without the
written approval of the building official; which shall not be unreasonably
withheld. A license which has been issued for a particular premises shall not
be transferred to any other premises.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2103 repealed; new Sec. 19-2103 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2104.   COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   (a)   A permit issued pursuant to this division does not relieve the
permittee from securing any other permit required or from complying with any
other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City.
   (b)   All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
alterations or repairs, or other development in a mobile home park shall be
made in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code or other ordinances
of the City.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2104 repealed; new Sec. 19-2104 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2105.   DISPLAY.
   Each license issued pursuant to this division shall be prominently displayed
in the office of the mobile home park for which it was issued.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2105 repealed; new Sec. 19-2105 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 19-2200.   BUILDING OFFICIAL TO ENFORCE CHAPTER; INSPECTIONS.
   The building official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and
shall inspect, at least once each year, each mobile home park and all the
accommodations and facilities therein. The building official may also conduct
inspections at additional times in response to a complaint received from a
resident of the mobile home park. The building official is hereby granted the
power and authority to enter upon the premises of a mobile home or a mobile
home park at any reasonable time for the purposes of this section.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2200 repealed; new Sec. 19-2200 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2201.   NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; SERVICE.
   Whenever the building official determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or
of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the building official shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person designated in the application to
receive notice, which notice shall:
   (1)   Be in writing.
   (2)   Include a statement of the specific violation or violations of this
chapter or other applicable codes, and the remedial actions required to result
in compliance.
   (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the required remedial
actions.
   (4)   Be served upon the owner or designated agent thereof as the case may
require; however, the notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly
served upon such owner or designated agent when a copy thereof has been sent by
certified mail to owner or designated agent's address on file with the City, or
when such owner or agent has been served with the notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this state.
   If the licensee or permittee fails to complete the required remedial actions
within the time specified, or any extension thereof granted by the building
official, the building official may revoke or suspend such license or permit,
seek injunctive relief and the appointment of a receiver, or refer the
violation for prosecution under Section
19-1105.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2201 repealed; new Sec. 19-2201 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2202.   EMERGENCY ORDERS.
   Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the building official
may, without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as said officer may deem
necessary to meet the emergency including suspension of the license.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the building official, shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of this division
shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued thereafter.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2202 repealed; new Sec. 19-2202 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2203.   RIGHT TO HEARING BEFORE THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE APPEALS BOARD.
   Any person affected by a notice of violation which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or whose application for a license or
permit required by this article has been denied, or whose license or permit has
been suspended or revoked, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Property Maintenance Appeals Board.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2203 repealed; new Sec. 19-2203 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2204.   PETITION FOR HEARING.
   A person desiring a hearing before the Property Maintenance Appeals Board
pursuant to this division shall file a written petition with the building
official requesting the hearing and setting forth a statement of the grounds
therefor, within ten (10) days after the day the notice of violation was
served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the
notice of violation except in the case of an order issued pursuant to Section
19-2205.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2204 repealed; new Sec. 19-2204 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2205.   SETTING DATE FOR HEARING.
   Upon receipt of a petition for a hearing, the building official shall set a
time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten (10) days after the
day on which the petition was filed; however, at the request of the petitioner,
the building official may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable
time beyond the ten-day period when in said officer's judgment, the petitioner
has shown good cause for such postponement.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2205 repealed; new Sec. 19-2205 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2206.   FINDINGS OF THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE APPEALS BOARD; FINAL
ORDER.
   After a hearing held pursuant to this division, the Property Maintenance
Appeals Board shall make its findings and shall issue an order in writing
sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as
provided for notices of violations. Upon a failure to comply with any order
sustaining or modifying a notice, the City may seek the suspension or
revocation of the license or permit for the mobile home park and the
appointment of a receiver.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2206 repealed; new Sec. 19-2206 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2207.   RECORDS OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (a)   The proceedings at a hearing held pursuant to this division, including
the findings and decision of the Property Maintenance Appeals Board and,
together with a copy of every notice of violation and final order related
thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
building official, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be
transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought. The cost of
transcribing the transcript of the proceedings shall be born by the person
seeking judicial review.
   (b)   The Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall keep minutes of the
proceedings showing its determination and shall also keep records of its other
official actions.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2207 repealed; new Sec. 19-2207 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2208.   JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Property Maintenance Appeals
Board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by law.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2208 repealed; new Sec. 19-2208 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 3. DESIGN STANDARDS
SEC. 19-2300.   ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of
this article shall provide for the following, in the manner hereafter
specified:
   (1)   All land proposed for mobile home parks lying in any floodplain shall
be adequately protected against flooding. Engineering data shall be submitted
to show protection against flood water rising to the base flood elevation.
   (2)   The mobile home park shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance
such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat or
glare.
   (3)   The mobile home park shall not be subject to any source of pollution,
such as drainage from garbage disposal areas.
   (4)   The mobile home park shall not be subject to any adverse influence
from adjoining streets and areas.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2300 repealed; new Sec. 19-2300 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2301.   SITE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each mobile home park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this article
shall meet the following site drainage requirements:
   (1)   The ground surface in all parts of each mobile home park shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
   (2)   No mobile home park shall be so located that the drainage of the park
area will endanger any water supply.
   (3)   Waste water from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall be
deposited directly into the City sanitary sewerage system.
   (4)   All mobile home park developments shall comply with Article IV of
Chapter 34 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2301 repealed; new Sec. 19- 2301 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2302.   SOIL AND GROUND COVER REQUIREMENTS.
   Each mobile home park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this article
shall meet the following soil and ground cover requirements:
   (1)   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of each mobile home park shall be
paved, covered with stone screenings or other solid material, or protected with
a vegetable growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation
of dust during dry weather.
   (2)   Where the topography has a slope of twenty-five percent (25%) or more,
a rip wall cribbing or other approved system of soil and slope stabilization
shall be installed and maintained.
   (3)   Mobile home park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetative growth
and trees which are poisonous or may harbor rodents or pests or other insects
harmful to persons when disturbed.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2302 repealed; new Sec. 19-2302 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2303.   PROTECTION AGAINST PHYSICAL HAZARDS.
   Each mobile home park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this article
shall meet the following requirements for protection against physical hazards:
   (1)   Adequate protective barriers shall be provided and maintained where
there is a slope in excess of forty-five (45) degrees and a change in elevation
of six (6) feet. Such barriers may include, but are not limited to, continuous
shrubs or fences.
   (2)   Swimming pools shall be fenced.
   (3)   Swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
the requirements of the state department of public health.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2303 repealed; new Sec. 19-2303 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2304.   MINIMUM SEPARATION.
   Each mobile home park sought to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this
article shall meet the following requirements for separation between mobile
homes:
   (1)   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures, including free-standing accessory structures, by at
least fifteen (15) feet, except each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of
thirty-two hundred (3200) square feet.
   (2)   An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding twenty-
five (25) square feet, attached to a mobile home, and which has an opaque top
or roof that is higher than adjacent window sills of the mobile home, shall,
for purposes of the requirements of subsection (1), be considered to be part of
the mobile home. Roofed-over patios, stairs, carports and individual storage
facilities or other like additions/structures shall be included as part of the
mobile home in determining yard widths between mobile homes.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2304 repealed; new Sec. 19-2304 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2305.   SETBACK, BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   Each mobile home park shall meet the following setback and screening
requirements:
   (1)   All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from
any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at
least fifteen (15) feet from other park property boundary lines. There shall be
a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet between an individual mobile home,
including any accessory structures and adjoining pavement of a park street, or
common parking area, or other common areas accessible to park residents.
   (2)   All mobile home parks shall be provided with a screening buffer strip
at least five (5) feet wide along all property boundary lines. Where effective
visual barriers do not already exist along such property boundary lines, the
buffer strip shall be furnished with screening at least five (5) feet high and
consisting of fences (other than chain-link), freestanding walls or natural
growth. Natural growth shall consist of a compact growth of shrubbery, hedges,
evergreens or other suitable planting sufficient to serve as an effective
visual screen. Fences or walls shall not contain electrical charges, barbed
wire, broken glass or other material designed to do bodily harm.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2305 repealed; new Sec. 19-2305 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2306.   RECREATION AREAS.
   In all mobile home parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty-
five (25) or more mobile homes, there shall be one (1) or more recreation areas
which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. The size of such
recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet
for each space in the park (whether occupied or vacant) that is designed to
accommodate a mobile home. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Recreation areas shall be so
located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where topography permits,
be centrally located.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2306 repealed; new Sec. 19-2306 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2307.   PARK STREET SYSTEM.
   Each mobile home park shall meet the following street system requirements:
   (1)   General requirements. All mobile home parks shall provide safe,
continuous and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or
roads to each mobile home lot. For purposes of this chapter, all streets or
roads providing such vehicular access shall be referred to as the "park street
system" and shall be maintained by the owner.
   (2)   Primary entrance road. The primary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement
width of thirty-six (36) feet, where guest parking is permitted on both sides,
or a minimum road pavement width of twenty-seven (27) feet, where guest parking
is limited to one (1) side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one
hundred (100) feet long and does not provide access to abutting property within
such distance, the minimum road width may be twenty-four (24) feet if parking
is prohibited on both sides.
   (3)   Secondary entrance road. In addition to the required primary entrance
road, all mobile home parks containing twenty-five (25) or more acres in total
area, or providing for the accommodation of one hundred (100) or more mobile
homes, shall have at least one (1) secondary entrance road connecting the park
street system with a public street or road. The secondary roads shall have a
minimum pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet. Where primary and secondary
entrance roads connect to the same public street or road, there shall be a
minimum separation of one hundred fifty (150) feet between such access points;
where this is not feasible or possible, clearly marked oneway entrance and exit
lanes with at least a fifteen (15) foot wide median strip, are acceptable
provided the pavement width of each one-way road is at least twenty-two (22)
feet wide.
   (4)   Interior streets. All interior streets in the park street system shall
have a minimum pavement width of eighteen (18) feet on a twenty-four (24) foot
right-of-way, with parking prohibited on both sides. Dead-end streets shall be
limited in length to one thousand (1000) feet and shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least
sixty-five (65) feet. One-way minor streets shall be acceptable only if less
than five hundred (500) feet long and serving less than twenty-five (25) mobile
homes.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2307 repealed; new Sec. 19-2307 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2308.   STREET CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Each mobile home park shall meet the following requirements for street
construction and design:
   (1)   Pavement materials. All streets shall be provided with seven (7) inch
reinforced, Portland cement concrete or asphalt IDOT approved HMA material
meeting N50 requirements, three (3) inches thick on top of eight (8) inches of
crushed stone.
   (2)   Pavement design. Primary and secondary entrance roads which exceed
twenty (20) feet in width shall have the standard City cross section, with
curbs. Paving on interior streets may have an alley cross section if it is
narrower than twenty (20) feet.
   (3)   Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate
surface drainage, but shall not be more than eight percent (8%). Short runs
with a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, if traffic
safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas, and avoidance
of lateral curves.
   (4)   Intersections. Within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least one
hundred fifty (150) feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1)
point shall be avoided.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2308 repealed; new Sec. 19-2308 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2309.   OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (a)   Paved, off-street parking areas shall be provided in all parks for the
use of park residents and guests; such areas shall be furnished at the rate of
at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home. Parking areas shall be
located at either end of each mobile home and shall not extend alongside
thereof.
   (b)   The parking areas required by this section shall be used solely for
the temporary parking of passenger-type motor vehicles owned by residents of
the park or their guests.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2309 repealed; new Sec. 19-2309 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2310.   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   Pedestrian walkways are required on at least one side of the street with the
primary entrance and any other street with a secondary entrance. Pedestrian
walkways shall be a minimum of four (4.0) feet in width and otherwise comply
with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Pedestrian
walkways constructed on an individual lot for the private use of the residents
thereof shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in width.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2310 repealed; new Sec. 19-2310 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2311.   ILLUMINATION OF PARK STREET SYSTEM.
   All mobile home parks shall be furnished with sufficient electrical systems
and lighting units at the owner's expense, so spaced and equipped with
luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following
average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians
and vehicles at nights:
   (1)   All parts of the park street systems: Four-tenths (0.4) of a foot
candle with a minimum of two-tenths (0.2) of a foot candle.
   (2)   Potentially hazardous locations such as major street intersections and
steps or stepped ramps: Individually illuminated with a minimum of four-tenths
(0.4) of a foot candle.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2311 repealed; new Sec. 19-2311 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2312.   PADS AND ANCHORS.
   Pads, runners or piers of a suitable construction material shall be provided
for each lot. Anchors or tie-downs shall be installed at the corners of each
mobile home for protection against high winds. Each anchor or tie-down shall be
capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of four thousand eight hundred
(4,800) pounds. With each renewal application, the applicant shall expressly
certify that the park in in compliance with this Section
19-2312.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2312 repealed; new Sec. 19-2312 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2313.   SKIRTING.
   Each mobile home shall be skirted around its entire perimeter, including the
hitch portion unless removed, by skirting material of fireproof composition
such as sheet metal.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2313 repealed; new Sec. 19-2313 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2314.   STAIRWAYS.
   A stairway serving an entrance to a mobile home shall have sufficient
strength and stability to support safely its intended load. Each stairway of
more than three (3) risers shall be equipped with handrails not less than
thirty (30) inches nor more than thirty-four (34) inches as measured vertically
from the nosing of stair treads.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2314 repealed; new Sec. 19-2314 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2315.   INTERRING OF UTILITY FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   In accordance with Article VI of Chapter 28 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances, all utility facilities, as defined in Section
28-6101 of this Code, shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground in
conformity with accepted engineering practices and the rules and regulations of
the authority having jurisdiction, in all mobile home parks constructed after
October 1, 1973, and in all additions made to existing mobile home parks after
October 1, 1973, where such addition is designed to accommodate more than five
(5) mobile homes. Exceptions may be considered in accordance with Section 28-
6102.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2315 repealed; new Sec. 19- 2315 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 4. WATER SUPPLY; SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SEC. 19-2400.   WATER SUPPLY.
   Each mobile home park shall have a water supply system capable of providing
a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate pressure, to water supply
facilities for mobile homes, service buildings, fire hydrants, drinking
fountains and other accessory facilities, as required by this article for the
well-being of park residents and for park maintenance. The system shall be
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the state standards of
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as contained in 35 Ill. Adm. Code,
Subtitle F, Chapter II, Parts 651-654, and the provisions of this Code, other
City ordinances and other local laws and shall conform with the regulations of
the authorities having jurisdiction and shall conform with all provisions of
Chapter 34 of this Code. Where conflicts exist, the most restrictive
requirement shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2400 repealed; new Sec. 19-2400 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2401.   SOURCE OF SUPPLY.
   (a)   Where a public water supply system is available, the mobile home park
water supply system shall be connected thereto. A public water supply system
shall be deemed available when the system is within five hundred (500) feet of
the mobile home park, measured along a street or other public easement, and a
connection may be made lawfully thereto. No private water supply system shall
be cross-connected with any public water supply system.
   (b)   Where a public water supply source is not available, the mobile home
park's source of water supply, including the construction, equipment and
distribution system for withdrawing or processing and distributing water shall
be approved by the Director of Public Works and other authorities having
jurisdiction. The chemical and bacteriological quality of the potable water
distributed in any mobile home park, including water treatment processes
employed, shall conform to the standards established by the health authority
having jurisdiction.
   (c)   The water source shall be capable of producing an adequate volume of
water to supply all mobile home lots in any mobile home park, but in no case
shall such capacity be less than one hundred fifty (150) gallons per space per
day in any mobile home park.
   (d)   Where an independent or non-public water system is used to serve the
mobile home park with water obtained from wells, the well shall be located and
constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface contamination
will reach the water supply from any source. A minimum distance of one hundred
fifty (150) feet shall be maintained between the water supply and any cesspool.
A minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be maintained between the
water supply and any other possible source of contamination, except that sewers
or pipes through which sewage may back up shall be located at least fifty (50)
feet from any well or water suction pipeline. New wells are prohibited within
the corporate limits of the City by Section 34-2300 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances.
   (e)   No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes used to
supply water to a mobile home park shall be located in any pit, room or space
extending below ground level, nor in any room or space aboveground which is
walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether aboveground or
belowground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground. The
floor or rooms aboveground shall be at least six (6) inches above the ground's
surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped from well casing to the
drain. Said well casing shall be not less than twelve (12) inches above the
floor.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2401 repealed; new Sec. 19-2401 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2402.   WATER STORAGE FACILITIES.
   All water storage reservoirs for the supply of water to mobile home parks
shall be watertight and constructed of impervious material; all overflows and
vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are
prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers to prevent
the entrance of contaminated material, and so designed that they may be locked.
All the overflow pipes from a reservoir shall be connected with back-siphonage
protection to any pipe in which polluted water may back-up.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2402 repealed; new Sec. 19-2402 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2403.   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (a)   The water distribution system in a mobile home park shall be
constructed of piping, fixtures and other equipment of approved materials and
shall be so designed and maintained to provide a pressure of not less than
thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions, at
each mobile home, service building and other locations requiring a potable
water supply. Such piping shall not be interconnected or cross-connected with
any drainage, venting or other system conveying non-potable water, nor shall
such piping be subject to hazards of backflow or any back-siphonage.
   (b)   The public water supply shall extend only to the mobile home park,
which shall be metered in accordance with Chapter 34 of this Code; individual
mobile home lots will not be metered.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2403 repealed; new Sec. 19-2403 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2404.   INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   Individual water service connections shall be provided at each mobile
home lot in the mobile home park. All water service connections shall be
watertight and located at a minimum distance of five (5) feet from sanitary
sewer connections below ground. The minimum pipe size of connections shall be
one (1) inch. Outlets shall be so constructed as to be free of possible
contamination from surface drainage and possible damage during installation of
a mobile home and shall be four (4) inches above grade.
   (b)   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe, and to protect risers from heaving and thawing
actions of ground during freezing weather.
   (c)   Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any
connection.
   (d)   All potable water connections and supplies to all fixture outlets
within the mobile home unit shall comply with provisions of Chapter 34 Article
IV of this Code in regard to the protection of potable water supply from
contamination and the mobile home park shall, at its sole cost, correct all
instances of infiltration and inflow.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2404 repealed; new Sec. 19-2404 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2405.   WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION.
   Where a public water supply system with a water main of six (6) inches or
larger is available, all mobile home parks accommodating or designed to
accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes shall provide the following water
supply facilities:
   (1)   The system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two (2), one and
one-half (1%) inch hose streams on a fire in any mobile home, service building,
or other accessory structure in the park.
   (2)   Fire hydrants shall be located within five hundred (500) feet in such
structures and shall be of a type prescribed by the water department of the
City.
   (3)   Water supply and associated facilities shall be sufficient to provide
the delivery of an amount of water in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19- 2405 repealed; new Sec. 19-2405 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2406.   WASTE WATER NOT TO BE DISPOSED OF ON GROUND.
   No waste water from mobile homes shall be deposited on the surface of the
ground.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2406 repealed; new Sec. 19-2406 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2407.   USE OF MUNICIPAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be disposed of into a
municipal sewerage system. All provided sewerage systems shall be constructed
in conformity with all laws of the state, regulations of any department,
division or board of the state, and any provision of this Code or other
ordinance of the City relative thereto.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2407 repealed; new Sec. 19-2407 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2408.   INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS.
   Each mobile home site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the
combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the
duty of the owner or operator of the mobile home park to provide an approved
type of water and odor-tight connection from the mobile home water drainage to
the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of the owner or operator to make
the connection and keep all occupied mobile homes connected to the sewer while
located in the mobile home park. Sewer connections in unoccupied mobile home
sites shall be so closed that they will not emit odors or cause a breeding
place for flies. The mobile home park shall, at its sole cost, correct all
instances of infiltration and inflow.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2408 repealed; new Sec. 19-2408 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 5. REFUSE DISPOSAL; VERMIN AND WEED CONTROL
SEC. 19-2500.   REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a mobile home park shall
be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding
areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2500 repealed; new Sec. 19-2500 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2501.   LOCATION, TYPE AND SIZE OF CONTAINERS.
   All garbage refuse shall be stored in commercial-type or large bulk-type
containers which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet
from any mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided by the licensee in
sufficient number and capacity to contain all refuse in a sanitary manner. As
an alternative to the use of such containers, all garbage shall be bagged in
bags designed for holding garbage, which bags shall not be placed outside for
collection until the day designated therefor.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2501 repealed; new Sec. 19-2501 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2502.   PLATFORMS FOR CONTAINERS.
   Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers in
mobile home parks; such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent
containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration,
and to facilitate cleaning around and under them.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2502 repealed; new Sec. 19-2502 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2503.   COLLECTION.
   All refuse shall be collected at least once a week or as often as necessary
to keep the park litter free and sanitary. If garbage bags are used in lieu of
commercial-type or large bulk-type containers, refuse shall be collected at
least twice a week. The mobile home park operator shall provide collection
service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2503 repealed; new Sec. 19-2503 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2504.   INCINERATION.
   (a)   No garbage or refuse shall be burned on the premises of a mobile home
park.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2504 repealed; new Sec. 19-2504 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2505.   VERMIN CONTROL.
   Grounds, buildings and structures in mobile home parks shall be maintained
free of insect, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination
methods and other measures to control insects, vermin and rodents shall conform
with requirements of the health department. Mobile home parks shall be
maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide breeding places
for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. Storage areas in mobile home parks shall
be so maintained as to prevent a rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe and other
building material shall be stored at least one (1) foot above the ground. Where
the potential for vermin infestation exists in mobile home parks, all exterior
openings in or beneath any structures shall be appropriately screened with wire
mesh or other suitable materials. No storage shall be permitted under a mobile
home.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2505 repealed; new Sec. 19-2505 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2506.   WEED CONTROL.
   The owner or operator shall control growth of brush, weeds and grass in
mobile home parks to prevent the harborage of ticks, chiggers, and other
noxious insects. Mobile home parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the
growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds
considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy
undergrowth of any description.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2506 repealed; new Sec. 19-2506 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 6. SERVICE BUILDINGS AND OTHER SERVICE FACILITIES.
SEC. 19-2600.   IN GENERAL.
   The requirements of this division shall apply to accessory structures and
community service facilities in all mobile home parks which are required for
park management and for the servicing and well-being of mobile home park
residents. The accessory structures may include, but are not limited to,
service buildings or other community structures containing one (1) or more of
the following uses and must be constructed in accordance with applicable City
requirements:
   (1)   Park management offices.
   (2)   Community laundry facilities.
   (3)   Community sanitary facilities.
   (4)   Indoor community recreation areas.
   (5)   Repair shops and storage buildings.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2600 repealed; new Sec. 19-2600 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2601.   NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
   No part of any mobile home park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of
the park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2601 repealed; new Sec. 19-2601 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2602.   REQUIRED SERVICE FACILITIES.
   Each mobile home park operated subject to this article shall be provided
with the following:
   (1)   For emergency sanitary accommodations, each fifty (50) mobile home
lots or fractional part thereof, shall have one (1) flush toilet and one (1)
lavatory and shall be marked as gender neutral. The service building containing
such emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile homes.
   (2)   A park management office.
   (3)   Community laundry facilities.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2602 repealed; new Sec. 19-2602 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2603.   STORAGE AREAS.
   Locations for storage of maintenance materials such as lumber, pipe and
other building materials in mobile home parks shall be screened from the view
of the residents and the public.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2603 repealed; new Sec. 19-2603 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2604.   CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The community service building shall be conveniently located, well-
constructed, having good natural and artificial lighting, adequate ventilation
and floors of concrete or similar impervious materials. Concrete curbing,
extending at least six (6) inches above the floor, shall be provided and the
floor sloped to adequate drains. Walls and partitions shall be constructed of
impervious material where they are subject to splash. Such building shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit
during the period from the first day of October to the first day of May.
   (b)   The community service building in a mobile home park shall, as
required by law, be provided with sufficient gender neutral or designated
toilet rooms for each sex, plainly marked by appropriate signs, in which shall
be installed water closets and lavatories adequate in number to serve the
reasonable needs of occupants.
   (1)   Each water closet shall be placed in a separate compartment properly
separated from other water closets and shall be not less than three (3) feet
wide and shall be enclosed with proper partition. The community service
building shall also be provided with tub or shower bath compartments, for both
sexes, adequate in number to accommodate the reasonable needs of occupants.
   (2)   In combination with each bath or shower stall, there shall be provided
an individual dressing compartment not less than two and one-half (2 1/2) by
three (3) feet in plan, so arranged as to insure privacy. The floor of such
compartment shall be waterproof and elevated three (3) inches above the floor
of the shower stall or a six (6) inch curbing provided, separating the shower
compartment from the dressing room. Mats, grids, and walkways of wood, cloth or
other absorbent materials will not be approved for use in bath sections of
community service buildings.
   (c)   A laundry room or building constructed as specified in subsection (a)
shall be provided containing laundry trays to accommodate the patrons of the
mobile home park. No laundry trays shall be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms. Each laundry room or building shall contain, as a minimum the
following fixtures and facilities: One (1) automatic washer, or one (1) wringer
type washing machine and two (2) rinse tubs or their equivalent, for every
twenty (20) mobile home sites; and one (1) electric outlet for ironing for
every twenty (20) mobile home sites.
   (d)   An adequate water supply shall be provided at all times for the
operation of all water closets in service buildings, and an adequate supply of
hot and cold water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for
all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2604 repealed; new Sec. 19-2604 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 7. FIRE PROTECTION
SEC. 19-2700.   IN GENERAL.
   The mobile home park area shall be subject to the Moline Fire Code.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2700 repealed; new Sec. 19-2700 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2701.   FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials; no storage shall be permitted under a mobile home.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19- 2701 repealed; new Sec. 19-2701 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2702.   FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   Two (2) all-purpose fire extinguishers of at least two and one-half (2 1/2)
pound capacity shall be located inside each mobile home at opposite ends
thereof. The mobile home park shall inspect each fire extinguisher annually and
shall require each mobile home owner to keep it at all times in condition for
use.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2702 repealed; new Sec. 19-2702 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2703.   FIRES.
   Fires in mobile home parks shall be made only in cooking stoves and
equipment approved for such purpose.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2703 repealed; new Sec. 19-2703 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 8. MISCELLANEOUS FACILITIES
SEC. 19-2800.   ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   Each mobile home park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting
of approved wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, which shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the Electrical Code of the City and
other regulations governing such systems. All parts of the mobile home park
electrical distribution system shall conform with approved standards for safety
to life and property and with accepted engineering practices. Where an
exception is granted in accordance with Section 28-6102 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances from the requirement to inter utilities, no wires shall be suspended
less than seven (7) feet above the sidewalks or pathways or be allowed to lie
on the ground.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2800 repealed; new Sec. 19-2800 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2801.   NATURAL GAS AND PROPANE INSTALLATIONS.
   Natural gas piping systems and Propane gas tanks and piping in all mobile
home parks shall be installed and maintained in conformity with accepted
engineering practices and the rules and regulations of the authority having
jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2801 repealed; new Sec. 19-2801 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2802.   FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
   Fuel oil supply systems are not permitted in mobile home parks in the City
of Moline.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2802 repealed; new Sec. 19-2802 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2803.   STORAGE STRUCTURES.
   No more than one (1) storage structure shall be permitted on each mobile
home lot. Such storage structures shall be properly maintained, free from
vermin and insect infestations, and located at least three (3) feet from any
mobile home and lot line, and shall be:
   (1)   Not larger than ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet in floor plan, by eight
(8) feet in height.
   (2)   Constructed entirely of fireproof materials such as sheet metal.
   (3)   Capable of being completely and easily disassembled and are readily
portable.
   (4)   Used only for storage purposes.
   (5)   Not attached to a trailer or used as an auxiliary room or otherwise
used for dwelling or living purposes.
   (6)   Set on a poured concrete slab and properly anchored thereto.
(Ord. No. 3023- 2020; Sec. 19-2803 repealed; new Sec. 19-2803 enacted; 10/6/20)
DIVISION 9. OPERATION
SEC. 19-2900.   ATTENDANT OR CARETAKER REQUIRED.
   Each mobile home park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or
caretaker at all times, whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its
equipment and facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and be
accountable to report to the licensee any and all violations of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2900 repealed; new Sec. 19-2900 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2901.   REGISTRATION OF MOBILE HOME AND OCCUPANTS; RETENTION OF
RECORDS.
   (a)   Each mobile home park shall be provided with a custodian's office
where each mobile home entering the mobile home park shall be assigned to a lot
location, given a copy of the mobile home park rules, and registered according
to the prescribed form. The registration shall include the name and address of
each occupant of the mobile home; the license number of all units; the state
issuing such licenses; and a statement indicating the exact location at which
the mobile home was last parked, including the state, City, town or village
where the parking occurred. The register shall be signed by an occupant of the
trailer coach. Any person furnishing misinformation for the purposes of
registration shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable under the
general statutes for such an offense.
   (b)   The registration records required by subsection (a) shall be neatly
and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be destroyed until
six (6) years have elapsed following the date of registration. The register
shall be available at all times for inspection by law enforcement officers and
the building official.
   (c)   No licensee shall permit any mobile home to be parked on the licensed
premises unless it was manufactured after 1974 and complies with the Safety
Code.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2901 repealed; new Sec. 19-2901 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2902.   REGISTRATION OF SCHOOL AGE CHILDREN; NOTICE TO SCHOOL BOARD.
   (a)   At the time of the registration of the mobile home and its occupants,
as required by this division, the licensee shall prepare and keep a registry of
all children of school age in the mobile home.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of each licensee under this article, on the first
day of February and the first day of September of each year, to file with the
school board a report giving the names and ages of all children of school age
living in the mobile home park.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of each licensee under this article to permit
officials of the school board to examine the register required by subsection
(a) for the purpose of enforcing attendance of school children housed in the
mobile home park.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2902 repealed; new Sec. 19-2902 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2903.   REPORT OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   Each owner, operator, attendant or other person operating a mobile home park
shall notify the health officer or the county health officer immediately of any
suspected communicable or contagious disease within the mobile home park. In
the case of diseases diagnosed by a physician as quarantinable, the departure
of a mobile home or its occupants, or the removal therefrom of clothing or
other articles which have been exposed to infection, without approval of the
building official, is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2903 repealed; new Sec. 19-2903 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-2904.   MAINTENANCE; EJECTMENT OF TENANTS VIOLATING THIS CHAPTER.
   The licensee of each mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all park facilities required by this
chapter, including streets and sanitary and safety appliances, and shall
promptly bring such action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from the park
any person or persons who willfully or maliciously damage any appliance, or any
person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-2904 repealed; new Sec. 19-2904 enacted; 10/6/20)
ARTICLE III. ABANDONED MOBILE HOMES
SEC. 19-3100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the term abandoned mobile home shall mean a mobile
home located in a mobile home park that has no owner currently residing in the
mobile home or authorized tenant of the owner currently residing in the mobile
home to the best knowledge of the mobile home park owner or operator or the
City; has had its electricity, natural gas, sewer, and water utilities
terminated or disconnected by the utility companies or mobile home park owner
or operator that are providing such services; and for which the Mobile Home
Privilege Tax, imposed under the Mobile Home Local Services Tax Act, is
delinquent for at least 3 months.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-3100 repealed; new Sec. 19-3100 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-3101.   AUTHORIZATION.
   The building official may proceed under the Abandoned Mobile Home Act, 210
ILCS 117/1 et seq., to remove or dispose of any abandoned mobile home found
within the City of Moline and may legally enter upon any land to do so as
provided in the Act. The cost of disposal shall be the responsibility of the
mobile home park and the City shall have a lien for any unpaid costs of
disposal.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-3101 repealed; new Sec. 19-3101 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-3102.   CONTRACT; REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY; AGENCY.
   (a)   In the city administrator's sole discretion, if desirable and in the
best interests of the City, the city administrator may, with authorization or
direction of the City Council, enter into a written contract with the owner of
any mobile home park for the purpose of recovering full reimbursement from said
owner to the City of any and all costs incurred by the City in enforcing or
implementing this ordinance. Said contract shall be on a form approved by the
city attorney and secured by a performance bond or other acceptable surety or
guarantee.
   (b)   Any such contract executed pursuant to the terms of this section shall
contain an indemnification and hold harmless clause, which clause shall
indemnify the City, its employees, and officers from any and all liabilities
imposed, if any are so imposed, arising out of or related in any manner to any
of the actions taken herein or pursuant hereto.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-3102 repealed; new Sec. 19-3102 enacted; 10/6/20)
SEC. 19-3103.   HOME RULE AUTHORITY; DEROGATION OF STATE LAW.
   This Article shall be and is an enactment of the home rule authority of the
City which is granted by Article VII, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution of
1970 and any conflict between this ordinance and State statute or law shall be
in derogation of such statute or law and shall supersede such statute or law,
unless to do so would be otherwise unconstitutional, or otherwise create any
liability on the part of the City, its employees, or officers.
(Ord. No. 3023-2020; Sec. 19-3103 repealed; new Sec. 19-3103 enacted; 10/6/20)
CHAPTER 20
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Art. I.    In General, §20-1100 - §20-1109
   Art. II.    Administration and Enforcement
      Div. 1.   In General, §20-2100 - §20-2115
      Div. 2.   Traffic Engineer, §20-2200 - §20-2209
      Div. 3.   Main Parking Attendants, §20-2300 - §20-2301
   Art. III.    Traffic-Control Devices, §20-3100 - §20-3111
   Art. IV.    Operation
      Div. 1.   In General, §20-4100 - §20-4120
      Div. 2.   Speed, §20-4200 - §20-4205
      Div. 3.   Driving on Roadway; Overtaking and Passing, §20-4300 - §20-4309
      Div. 4.   Turning Movements, §20-4400 - §20-4407
      Div. 5.   Right-of-Way, §20-4500 - §20-4508
   Art. V.    Stopping, Standing and Parking
      Div. 1.   In General, §20-5100 - §20-5128
      Div. 2.   Snow Removal, §20-5200 - §20-5206
               Div. 3.   Parking Meters, §20-5300 - §20-5309
   Art. VI.    Pedestrians, §20-6100 - §20-6109
   Art. VII.    Motor Vehicles
      Div. 1.   In General, §20-7100 - §20-7101
      Div. 2.   Equipment, §20-7200 - §20-7211
      Div. 3.   Size, Weight and Load, §20-7300 - §20-7305
      Div. 4.   Abandoned and Inoperative Vehicles, §20-7400 - §20-7413
      Div. 5.   Truck, Bus and Trailer Regulations, §20-7500 - §20-7503
      Div. 6.   Fleeing Vehicles, §20-7600 - §20-7605
      Div. 7.   Neighborhood Electric Vehicles, §20-7700 - §20-7701
   Art. VIII.    Bicycles
      Div. 1.   In General, §20-8100 - §20-8111
      Div. 2.   Registration, §20-8200 - §20-8203
   Appendix 1. Traffic-Control Signals
   Appendix 2. Left Turn Restriction Intersections
   Appendix 3. Pedestrian Crossing Signals
   Appendix 4. Three-Way Stop Intersections
   Appendix 5. All-Way Stop Intersections
   Appendix 6. Yield Intersections
   Appendix 7. One-Way Streets
   Appendix 8. Play Streets
   Appendix 9. Streets Closed to Commercial Vehicles
   Appendix 10. Parking Prohibited at Any Time
   Appendix 11. Parking Prohibited at Certain Times
   Appendix 12. Skateboarding, In-line Skating and Roller-skating Prohibited In
Business Districts
   Appendix 13. Reserved
   Appendix 14. Fifteen-Minute Parking Restrictions in Nonmetered Zones
   Appendix 15. Thirty-Minute Parking Restrictions in Nonmetered Zones
   Appendix 16. One-Hour Parking Restrictions in Nonmetered Zones
   Appendix 17. Reserved
   Appendix 18. Two-Hour Parking Restrictions in Nonmetered Zones
   Appendix 19. Reserved
   Appendix 20. Three-Hour Parking Restrictions in Nonmetered Zones
   Appendix 21. One-Hour Parking Restrictions in Metered Zones
   Appendix 22. Reserved
   Appendix 23. Off-Street Lots
   Appendix 24. Reserved for Future Use
   Appendix 25. Angle Parking
   Appendix 26. Reserved
   Appendix 27. Loading Zones
   Appendix 28. Reserved
   Appendix 29. Altered Traffic Code Devices – No Warrant or Study
   Appendix 30. No Truck Parking
   Appendix 31. Snow Routes
   Appendix 32. Fire Lanes
   Appendix 33. Regulations on Private Property
   Appendix 34. Fire Crossing Signals
   Appendix 35. Altered Speed Limits
   Appendix 36. No U Turn
   Appendix 37. No Turn on Red
   Appendix 38. No Turn on Red When Children are Present
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-1100.   SHORT TITLE.
   This Traffic Code shall be known and cited as the "Moline Traffic Code."
SEC. 20-1101.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Traffic Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Alley shall mean a public roadway or public way within a block,
generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, for loading and
unloading, and not used for general Traffic circulation.
   (2)   Attendant, main parking: See "Main parking attendant."
   (3)   Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean emergency vehicles of
municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or
authorized by proper local authorities; police vehicles, vehicles of the fire
department and ambulances.
   (4)   Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power, upon which
any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than
sixteen (16) inches in diameter.
   (5)   Bike lane shall mean that portion of a roadway designated by signs
and/or markings for bicycle and moped operation.
   (6)   Bike path shall mean a pathway designed and designated by signs and/or
markings for bicycle and pedestrian use and is not part of a roadway.
   (7)   Bus shall mean any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten
(10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor
vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of
persons for compensation.
   (8)   Business district shall mean the territory contiguous to and including
a highway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such highway, there are
buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not
limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public
buildings which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one (1)
side, or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the highway.
   (9)   Collection shall mean the act of removing coins from any parking
meters or gates operated by the City and depositing such coins in the office of
the accounts and finance office.
   (10)   Convention sticker shall mean a notice that the operator of the
vehicle, upon the windshield of which such sticker is displayed, has paid the
City for parking for the duration of time specified thereon.
   (11)   Crosswalk shall mean:
      a.   That portion of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
      b.   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossings by lines or other markings on the surface placed in accordance with
the appropriate specifications.
   (12)   Curb shall mean the boundary of that part of the street intended for
vehicles; the boundary of the roadway.
   (13)   Double park shall mean to stand a vehicle on the street next to a
vehicle parked at the curb, or to stand a vehicle on the street not having the
wheels thereof within twelve (12) inches from the curb, except in an emergency
or by order of a police officer.
   (14)   Downtown parking district shall mean the area bounded as follows:
East of the rear lot lines fronting    on the west side of 12th Street; North
of 8th Avenue; West of FAI Route 74.
   (15)   Driver shall mean a person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle; and such term shall also include the rider of a horse or
one who pulls or pushes a vehicle on a roadway.
   (16)   Fire crossing signal shall mean an electrically operated device which
halts traffic at the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle.
   (17)   Heavy vehicle shall mean a vehicle singly or in combination having
more than two (2) axles, or one that exceeds eight thousand (8,000) pounds
gross weight.
   (18)   Holidays, legal shall mean the days celebrated as the following
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
   (19)   Illinois Vehicle Code shall mean Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
   (20)   Improper parking shall mean parking in a manner which is in conflict
with any provision of this Traffic Code.
   (21)   Improved highway shall mean a roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt,
macadam, crushed stone or gravel.
   (22)   Intersection shall mean:
      a.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      b.   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways, forty (40) feet or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate highway.
      c.   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
   (23)   Laned highway shall mean a roadway which is divided into two (2) or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   (24)   Loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb on a street
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the temporary, active and
actual engagement in loading or unloading of passengers, materials or
merchandise from said vehicle; and in an alley shall mean a space adjacent to a
door or other building entrance used traditionally, but not exclusively, for
the temporary, active and actual engagement in loading or unloading of
passengers, materials or merchandise from said vehicle. The term "loading zone"
shall not include any property subject to Sec.
20-5102, infra. For purposes of this Code, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any vehicle parked for a period of 20 minutes or more is not
loading and is parked in violation of this Code.
   (25)   Main parking attendant shall mean an employee under the supervision
and control of the police chief of the City of Moline.
(Revised on 04/01/94 by a budget change.)
   (26)   Motor driven cycle shall mean every motorcycle, every motor scooter,
or every bicycle with motor attached, with less than one hundred fifty (150)
cubic centimeter piston displacement.
   (27)   Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is self-propelled and
every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead
trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. For the purpose of this Traffic
Code, motor vehicles as a class shall be divided into two (2) divisions as
follows:
      a.   First division: Those vehicles which are designed and used for the
carrying of not more than ten (10) persons;
      b.   Second division: Those vehicles which are designed and used for
pulling or carrying freight and also those vehicles or motorcars which are
designed and used for the carrying of more than ten (10) persons and those
motor vehicles of the first division remodeled as motor vehicles of the second
division.
   (28)   Motor vehicle parking system fund shall include receipt of revenues
from all parking control devices, cafeteria court receipts for nonmoving
violations and any income from property purchased by the motor vehicle parking
system fund.
   (29)   Motorcycle shall mean any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use
of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
   (30)   Neighborhood electric vehicle shall mean a self-propelled,
electronically powered four-wheeled vehicle (or a self-propelled gasoline
powered four-wheeled motor vehicle with an engine displacement under 1,200
cubic centimeters) which is capable of attaining in one (1) mile, a speed of
more than twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more than twenty-five (25) miles
per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations under Title 49 C.F.R. Part
571.500. (Ord. No. 3049-2008; new subsection (30) enacted; 11/18/08)
   (31)   Nonmoving traffic violation shall mean all violations of Article V of
this Code and shall also include violations of Sections
20-1102;
20-1108;
20-1109;
20-4106;
20-4107;
20-4108;
20-4109;
20-4110;
20-4118;
20-4119;
20-5103;
20-5201; 2Article VII, or Article VIII of this Code.
(Ord. No. 3007-2016; Sec. 20-1101(31) amended by deleting reference to Sec. 20-
5206 and adding reference to Sec. “20-5103” in lieu thereof; 03/22/16)
   (32)   Official traffic-control devices shall mean any signs, signals,
markings and devices which conform to the state manual and which are not
inconsistent with this Traffic Code or state law, and which are placed or
erected by authority of the City or other public body having jurisdiction
thereof.
   (33)   One-way traffic shall mean the restriction of the movement of
vehicles to one (1) direction on any street or alley.
   (34)   Operator shall mean any individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is
in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   (35)   Park or parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, other than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers, within twelve (12) inches of curb or edge
of roadway.
   (36)   Parking control device shall mean a mechanically operated device used
to regulate the duration of parking in a given area.
   (37)   Parking lot shall mean any parcel of land which has been purchased or
leased by the City, upon which parking control devices or parking regulation
signs are installed or placed.
   (38)   Parking meter shall mean a mechanical device not inconsistent with
this Traffic Code, placed or erected for the regulation of parking in an
individual space by authority of this Traffic Code. Each parking meter
installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by
the City, instructions for the proper operation of the device and, when
operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and at
the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
   (39)   Parking meter zone shall mean any restricted street or lot upon which
parking control devices are installed and in operation.
   (40)   Parking space shall mean any space within a parking meter zone or
parking lot which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by
lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the
street or lot.
   (41)   Parking ticket shall mean a summons for a nonmoving violation of any
provision of this Traffic Code.
   (42)   Pedestrian shall mean a person on foot or on skateboard, but shall
not mean a person on foot walking a bicycle or moped.
   (43)   Pedestrian signal shall mean an electrically operated device which
regulates pedestrian traffic across streets.
   (44)   Play street shall mean a roadway closed to vehicular traffic by
barricades or other devices for the purpose of allowing a safe area for
recreation.
   (45)   Police officer shall mean any officer of the City police department
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   (46)   Private road, driveway or area shall mean every way or place in
private ownership used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   (47)   Public building shall mean a building used by the City or by any park
district, school district, the state or the United States Government.
   (48)   Public carrier stand shall mean a space reserved for buses and taxis.
   (49)   Quiet zone shall mean a territory marked upon the street in such a
manner as to warn against unnecessary noise.
   (50)   Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other
than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
   (51)   Recreational vehicle shall mean every vehicle originally designed or
permanently converted and primarily used for living quarters or for human
habitation and not used as a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house
trailer, camper or private living coach.
   (52)   Residence district shall mean the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on the
highway, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is, in the main,
improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
   (53)   Right-of-way shall mean the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to
proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian
approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to
give rise to the danger of collision, unless one grants precedence to the
other.
   (54)   Roadway shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In
the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term
"roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.
   (55)   Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within
a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone.
   (56)   School bus shall mean any motor vehicle of the second division owned
or operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or
religious organization for the transportation of pupils in connection with any
school activity. This definition does not include a bus operated by a public
utility or municipal corporation authorized to conduct the local or inter-urban
transportation of passengers.
   (57)   Semi-trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power, other
than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and
that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   (58)   Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines,
or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.
   (59)   Skateboard shall mean a single platform mounted on wheels, which is
propelled solely by human power.
   (60)   Stand or standing shall mean the halting of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading
or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.
   (61)   Sticker, convention : See "Convention sticker."
   (62)   Street shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for the purposes of vehicular travel.
   (63)   Thoroughfare shall mean any street.
   (64)   Through street shall mean any street or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield
the right-of-way to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a
stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this
Traffic Code.
   (65)   Ticket, parking : See "Parking ticket."
   (66)   Ticket, traffic : See "Traffic ticket."
   (67)   Time limit zone shall mean a defined area in which the parking time
duration is regulated, as authorized and according to the provisions of this
Traffic Code.
   (68)   Traffic shall mean and include pedestrians, ridden or herded animals,
vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any
public thoroughfare for the purpose of travel.
   (69)   Traffic-control signal shall mean any official traffic-control
device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which
traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   (70)   Traffic ticket shall mean a summons, other than a parking ticket, for
any violation of any provision of this Traffic Code.
   (71)   Truck tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load
other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   (72)   Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and toy
vehicles such as roller skates, coasters, sleds or similar toys and snowmobiles
or defined by 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.
   For the purposes of this Traffic Code, vehicles are divided into two (2)
divisions:
      a.   First division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten (10) persons;
      b.   Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than ten (10) persons, those designed or used for living
quarters, those which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo,
those of the first division remodeled for use as motor vehicles of the second
division, and those of the first division which are used and registered as
school buses.
SEC. 20-1102.   PLACING OR LEAVING DANGEROUS OBJECTS ON ROADWAYS.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any street or
alley in the City, any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wires, cans or other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon the street or
alley.
   (b)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
street or alley, any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove
the same or cause it to be removed.
   (c)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or
alley shall remove all glass or other injurious substances dropped upon the
street or alley from the vehicle.
SEC. 20-1103.   OWNERSHIP TO CONSTITUTE PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF OPERATION.
   In any case involving the operation or parking of a motor vehicle in
violation of any of the provisions of this Traffic Code, proof that the motor
vehicle was registered and licensed in the office of the secretary of state in
the name of the defendant in the case shall be deemed to be prima facie
evidence that the defendant was the operator of the motor vehicle at the time
of such alleged improper operation or parking thereof.
SEC. 20-1104.   APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC CODE TO BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code
applicable to the driver of the vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application.
SEC. 20-1105.   APPLICATION OF THIS TRAFFIC CODE TO PUBLIC OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES IN GENERAL.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Traffic Code
shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the
United States Government, the state, the county or the City, and it shall be
unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this Traffic
Code.
SEC. 20-1106.   EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (a)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions prescribed in this section.
   (b)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
   (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Traffic Code;
   (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
   (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limit so long as said driver does not
endanger life or property;
   (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
   (c)   The exemptions granted by subsection (b) to an authorized emergency
vehicle, other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the driver of the
vehicle is making use of either an audible signal when in motion or visual
signals meeting the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-215.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of such reckless disregard for the safety of others.
SEC. 20-1107.   EXEMPTION FOR STREET MAINTENANCE VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code, with the exception of Sections
20-4101 and
20-4104, shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of the highway but shall apply to
such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
SEC. 20-1108.   RIDING OUTSIDE PASSENGER COMPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful within the City for any person to extend a portion of
the body outside the passenger compartment or the planes established by the
doors, floor board, top of front windshield, windshield, and rear windshield,
or, to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle, or
to cling to, seize, hang upon, get upon, hold tight or fasten such person's
body to any railroad car, engine, carriage, wagon, motor vehicle or other
vehicle or conveyance, or to attempt to do so while the vehicle is moving.
SEC. 20-1109.   CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle,
motorcycle or any toy vehicle, to cling to or attach such person's body or such
vehicle to any moving motor vehicle, wagon or conveyance.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-2100.   POLICE DEPARTMENT TO ENFORCE THIS TRAFFIC CODE.
   The police department shall have the general duty of enforcing the
provisions of this Traffic Code.
SEC. 20-2101.   AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC; OBEDIENCE.
   (a)   Members of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic
in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic Code or in emergencies as the
public safety or convenience may require, and may temporarily divert or exclude
the movement of pedestrian, animal or vehicular traffic of every kind, in the
streets, parks and on bridges of the City; except in case of an emergency, it
shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the chief of police to
direct or attempt to direct traffic.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.
SEC. 20-2102.   AUTHORITY OF SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Crossing guards of the City are hereby authorized to direct traffic at their
respective posts for the purpose of protecting children crossing streets in
going to and from school, and for that purpose to have the powers to direct
traffic that a peace officer of the City has.
SEC. 20-2103.   CHIEF OF POLICE MAY PROMULGATE AND ENFORCE TEMPORARY EMERGENCY
REGULATIONS.
   The chief of police shall have the power to make and enforce temporary
regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, which temporary
regulations shall remain in effect only during the period of such emergencies
or special conditions.
SEC. 20-2104.   PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC GUARDS.
   As many pedestrian traffic guards as may be determined to be necessary, and
one (1) sergeant, shall control and direct traffic to the extent necessary for
the safety and protection of pedestrians at any crosswalk, whether or not such
crosswalk is protected by traffic-control devices. Such guards shall be under
the supervision and training of the chief of police and the traffic supervisor,
and all salaries shall be paid from the school crossing guard fund.
SEC. 20-2105.   INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.
   The director of public works shall cause parking meters to be installed on
street curbs or sidewalks immediately adjacent to the parking spaces as
provided in this Traffic Code, which installation shall be made not more than
two (2) feet from the back of the curb, nor more than four (4) feet from the
front line of the indicated parking space.
SEC. 20-2106.   REGULATION AND OPERATION OF PARKING METERS.
   The director of public works shall supervise the operation and maintenance
of parking meters. Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing
legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins, lawful money
of the United States, for the period of time prescribed by this Traffic Code.
Each parking meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of the lawful
time limit it will indicate by a proper visible signal that the lawful parking
period has expired and in such cases the right of such vehicle to occupy such
space shall cease and the operator, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall
be subject to the penalties provided for a violation of such parking
restriction.
SEC. 20-2107.   PROVISIONS FOR COLLECTIONS.
   The director of public works shall designate some person to make regular
collections of the money deposited in the parking meters and gates and collect
revenue from leased parking. It shall be the duty of said person so designated
to remove from the parking meters the coins so deposited therein and deliver
the collection to the accounts and finance officer. The accounts and finance
officer may designate someone from the accounts and finance office to accompany
the meter collector whenever such an action is necessary or advisable. Each
collector shall give a bond in the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000)
with a surety to be approved by the City Council.
SEC. 20-2108.   ADMINISTRATION OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING SYSTEM FUND.
   The accounts and finance officer shall have the responsibility for the
administration of the motor vehicle parking system fund.
SEC. 20-2109.   GENERAL DUTIES OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCE OFFICER.
   With respect to the administration of this Traffic Code, the accounts and
finance officer shall have the following duties and responsibility:
   (1)   To receive collections from parking-control devices and receive
collections from leased parking; and count, sort and deposit such collections
in the bank;
   (2)   To supervise the motor vehicle parking system office in its collection
of administrative fees for parking violations.
SEC. 20-2110.   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (a)   Report to the state. The driver of any vehicle which is involved in an
accident, for which a report is required by the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
codified under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5, shall make the report
required by the Illinois Vehicle Code within the time specified therefor.
   (b)   Reporting accidents to the City police department. The driver of a
vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident within the City
resulting in injury or where the damage to any one vehicle or other property
exceeds the dollar amount as specified in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall
immediately and in person give notice to the police department. The driver
shall furnish all information necessary for the police department to file the
required reports.
SEC. 20-2111.   NOTICE WHEN ACCIDENT RESULTS IN DAMAGE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL
DEVICES.
   Every person damaging a traffic-control or parking control device or signal
shall report the damage to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours.
SEC. 20-2112.   ISSUANCE OF PARKING SUMMONS FORMS TO ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.
   The accounts and finance officer shall maintain books of mail-in type
parking summonses and receipts and issue them as needed to the officers of the
police department and main parking attendants.
SEC. 20-2113.   RECORD OF ISSUED AND UNISSUED PARKING TICKETS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the accounts and finance officer to
maintain files both of issued and unissued summonses for all nonmoving traffic
and parking violations and to ascertain that all such summonses are present or
accounted for at all times.
SEC. 20-2114.   EXCUSING PARKING TICKETS.
   Under certain extreme circumstances, such as an inoperative parking meter or
similar inescapable situation, summonses for nonmoving traffic violations may
be excused; provided, however, the reason for such an excuse must be clearly
stated on the summons and all such summonses shall be signed under the
authority of the mayor, city administrator, city attorney, or chief of police.
It shall be the responsibility of the accounts and finance officer to receive
all such excused summonses and to report the number so excused to the City
Council at the first of each month.
SEC. 20-2115.   VIOLATION OF TRAFFIC CODE; PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do any act forbidden
or fail to perform any act required by this Traffic Code. Except as otherwise
expressly provided in this Traffic Code, any person violating any provision of
this Traffic Code shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. No. 98-
2-6; §20-2115 repealed; new §20-2115 enacted; 02/03/98)
DIVISION 2. TRAFFIC ENGINEER
SEC. 20-2200.   DESIGNATION; DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   The traffic engineer shall be designated by the director of public works
from the personnel of the public works department of the City and shall have
the general duty to determine the installation, proper timing and maintenance
of traffic-control devices and signals; conduct engineering analysis of
accidents and to devise remedial measures; establish locations of public
carrier stands and parking restrictions within the downtown parking district;
conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions and cooperate with
other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties prescribed in this
division and as directed by the City Council.
SEC. 20-2201.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND SIGNALS.
   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals to guide or warn traffic. All traffic-control
devices and signals installed and maintained on the streets of the City shall
be subject to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code and the manual
adopted thereby. All traffic-control devices and signals so erected shall be
official traffic-control devices and signals.
SEC. 20-2202.   LOADING ZONES.
   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals indicating the location of passenger and freight
loading zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this Traffic
Code establishing the loading zones are applicable.
SEC. 20-2203.   PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS.
   The traffic engineer shall approve and supervise the placing and maintenance
of appropriate signs or signals at all bus stops, taxicab stands, and other
passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on the public streets.
SEC. 20-2204.   PROHIBITED PARKING ZONES.
   (a)   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals prohibiting parking upon that side of any street
adjacent to any school property where, in the opinion of the City Council, such
parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
   (b)   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals prohibiting parking upon any street when the width
of the roadway does not exceed twenty-two (22) feet or upon one (1) side of a
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
   (c)   The traffic engineer shall establish parking restrictions within the
downtown parking district.
SEC. 20-2205.   PERMITTED PARKING.
   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals upon such streets where parking shall be
permitted, the duration of the parking allowed and the hours and days during
which the regulations shall be in effect.
SEC. 20-2206.   QUIET ZONES.
   The traffic engineer shall supervise the placing and maintenance of
appropriate signs or signals marking temporary zones of quiet upon any street
where a person is seriously ill, if requested so to do by the written statement
of at least one (1) registered physician certifying to its necessity, by
placing at a conspicuous place in the street an official sign or marking
bearing the words "Quiet Zone." A temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all
territory within a radius of two hundred (200) feet of the building occupied by
the person named in the request of the physician pursuant to this section.
SEC. 20-2207.   PLAY STREETS.
   The traffic engineer may declare any street or part thereof a play street
and place appropriate signs or devises in the roadway of any street or part
thereof indicating the street or portion thereof to be a play street and aiding
in providing protection therefor.
SEC. 20-2208.   TEMPORARY REGULATION.
   The traffic engineer and/or director of public works may make, without prior
City Council approval, temporary rules to regulate or test traffic-control
devices under actual conditions of traffic, and to handle emergencies or
special conditions. No experimental regulations of traffic shall remain in
effect for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SEC. 20-2209.   INSTALLATION OF PARKING GATES.
   The traffic engineer shall cause parking gates to be installed at entrances
and exits of off-street parking lots, when necessary.
DIVISION 3. MAIN PARKING ATTENDANTS
SEC. 20-2300.   SUPERVISION OF MAIN PARKING ATTENDANTS.
   Main parking attendants are hereby placed under the supervision and control
of the police chief of the City of Moline.
SEC. 20-2301.   ISSUANCE OF TICKETS.
   Main parking attendants are authorized to issue summonses for violations of
any provision of this Traffic Code involving nonmoving traffic.
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
SEC. 20-3100.   CONFORMITY OF DEVICES TO MANUAL.
   All signs and signals established by direction of the City Council shall
conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices for
Streets and Highways.
SEC. 20-3101.   LEGIBILITY OF SIGNS.
   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be
enforceable against any violator if, at the time and place of the violation,
the sign required is not in the proper position and sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person.
SEC. 20-3102.   WHEN SIGNS ARE NOT REQUIRED.
   Whenever a particular section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs
are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected.
SEC. 20-3103.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   (a)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows successively, one at a time,
or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (1)   Green indication:
      a.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      b.   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      c.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal,
pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (2)   Steady yellow indications:
      a.    Vehicular traffic facing steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
      b.   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, are thereby advised
that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is
shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
   (3)   Steady red indication:
      a.   Except as provided in subsection (a)(3)c of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      b.   Except as provided in subsection (a)(3)c of this section, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to
make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection
to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
      c.   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and local
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by subsection (a)(3)a. or b.
of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      d.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not
enter the roadway.
   (4)   Signals at other than intersections. In the event an official traffic-
control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection,
the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions
which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a
traffic sign or a marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be
made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the
signal.
   (b)   
Appendix 37 sets forth the locations where, by local ordinances, a turning
movement as permitted by subsection (a)(3)c above is prohibited and said
Appendix 37 is incorporated herein as if set out in full.
SEC. 20-3104.   FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows:
   (1)   Flashing red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
SEC. 20-3105.   ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCATIONS OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Traffic-control signals shall be maintained at the intersections specified
in
Appendix 1, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-3106.   ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCATION OF PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS;
PLACEMENT.
   Pedestrian-control signals, including school crossing signals, shall be
maintained at those intersections designated in
Appendix 3, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-3107.   ESTABLISHMENT OF LOCATION OF FIRE CROSSING SIGNALS.
   Fire crossing signals shall be installed and maintained at the intersections
specified in
Appendix 34, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in
full.
SEC. 20-3108.   PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The public works department shall install (or cause to be installed),
maintain and repair all traffic-control devices.
SEC. 20-3109.   RESERVED.
SEC. 20-3110.   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   (a)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway
any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic
or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (b)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (c)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is a public nuisance,
and any police officer is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be
removed without notice.
SEC. 20-3111.   INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority attempt to or in fact, alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription or shield, or insignia thereon
or any part thereof.
ARTICLE IV. OPERATION
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-4100.   OPERATORS TO BE LICENSED.
   No resident of the state shall operate a motor vehicle on any street in the
City unless such resident shall possess an operator's license issued to such
resident by the state.
SEC. 20-4101.   DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING OR NARCOTIC
DRUG.
   (a)   A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any
vehicle within the City while:
   (1)   The alcohol concentration in such person's blood or breath is 0.10 or
more based on the definition of blood and breath units in 625 ILCS 5/11-501.2,
which is incorporated herein by this reference thereto;
   (2)   Under the influence of alcohol;
   (3)   Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or
   (4)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs to
a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving.
   (b)   The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has
been legally entitled to use alcohol or other drugs or any combination of both
shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section.
   (c)   Every person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor as is defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-5-1(C)(1), and shall be
punishable by imprisonment for any term less than one (1) year or a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) or both.
SEC. 20-4102.   IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (a)   Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of the motor
vehicle upon the public highways of this state shall be deemed to have given
consent subject to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-501.2, to a chemical test or
tests of blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcohol,
other drug or combination thereof, content of such person's blood if arrested
as evidence by the issuance of a uniform traffic ticket for any offense as
defined in Sec.
20-4101, the test or tests shall be administered at the direction of the
arresting officer. The chief of police shall designate which of the aforesaid
tests shall be administered by the police department.
   (b)   Any person who is dead, unconscious or who is otherwise in a condition
rendering such person incapable of refusal shall be deemed not to have
withdrawn the consent provided by subsection (a) of this section and the test
or tests may be administered subject to the provisions of said Section
11-501.2.
   (c)   A person requested to submit to a test as provided above shall be
warned by the arresting officer requesting the test that a refusal to submit to
the test will result in suspension of such person's license to operate a motor
vehicle for six (6) months for the first such arrest and refusal and suspension
of such privileges for twelve (12) months for the second and each subsequent
such arrest and refusal within five (5) years. Following this warning, if a
person under arrest refuses upon the request of a law enforcement officer to
submit to a test designated by the police department as provided in subsection
(a) of this section, none shall be given, but the law enforcement officer shall
file with the clerk of the circuit court for the county in which the arrest was
made a sworn statement naming the person refusing to take and complete the test
or tests requested under the provisions of this section. Such sworn statement
shall identify the arrested person, such person's driver's license number and
current residence address and shall specify that a refusal by said person to
take the test or tests was made. Such sworn statement shall include a statement
that the arresting officer had reasonable cause to believe the person was
driving a motor vehicle within this state while under the influence of alcohol,
other drug or combination thereof and that such test or tests were to be made
as an incident to and following the lawful arrest for an offense as defined in
this section and that the person, after being arrested for an offense arising
out of the acts alleged to have been committed while so driving or in actual
physical control of the motor vehicle, refused to submit to and complete a test
or tests as requested by the law enforcement officer.
   The clerk shall thereupon notify such person in writing that the person's
privilege to operate a motor vehicle will be suspended unless within twenty-
eight (28) days from the date of mailing of the notice such person shall
request in writing a hearing thereof. If the person desires a hearing, such
person shall file a complaint in the circuit court for and in the county which
such person was arrested for such hearing. Such hearing shall proceed in the
court in the same manner as other civil proceedings, shall cover only the issue
of whether the person was placed under arrest for an offense as defined in
Section
20-4101 or as evidenced by the issuance of a uniform traffic ticket, whether
the arresting officer had reasonable grounds to believe that such person was
driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, other drug or combination thereof and whether such person
refused to submit to and complete the test or tests upon the request of the law
enforcement officer. Whether the person was informed that such person's
privilege to drive would be suspended if such person refused to submit to the
test or tests shall not be an issue.
   Immediately upon the termination of the court proceedings, the clerk shall
notify the Secretary of State of the court's decision.
SEC. 20-4103.   CHEMICAL AND OTHER TESTS.
   (a)   Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising
out of an arrest for an offense as defined in Section
20-4101, evidence of the concentration of alcohol, other drug or combination
thereof in a person's blood or breath at the time alleged as determined by
analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall
be admissible where such test is made in accordance with the provisions of 625
ILCS 5/11-501.2.
   (b)   Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising
out of the acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or
in actual physical control of the vehicle while under the influence of alcohol,
the concentration of alcohol in the person's blood or breath at the time
alleged is shown by analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other
bodily substance shall give rise to the following presumptions:
   (1)   If there was at the time an alcohol concentration of 0.05 or less, it
shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of alcohol.
   (2)   If there was at the time an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05,
but less than 0.10, such facts shall not give rise to any presumption that the
person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, but such fact may be
considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was
under the influence of alcohol.
   (3)   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.10 or more, it
shall be presumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol.
   (4)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as
limiting the introduction of any other relevant evidence bearing upon the
question whether the person was under the influence of alcohol.
   (c)   If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a chemical test under
the provisions of Section 20.4102, evidence of refusal shall be admissible on
any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have
been committed while the person under the influence of alcohol or other drugs
or combination of both was driving or in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle.
SEC. 20-4104.   RECKLESS DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle with a willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property, and any person who does
so shall be guilty of reckless driving.
SEC. 20-4105.   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; EVADING.
   (a)   Every person shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this Traffic Code
or state law, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel
across private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
SEC. 20-4106.   COASTING OF MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   The operator of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade on any
street or alley in the City shall not coast the same, either with the clutch
disengaged or with the gears of the vehicle in neutral.
SEC. 20-4107.   OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle when it is so
loaded or when there is in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a
position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to
interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
SEC. 20-4108.   OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
SEC. 20-4109.   OPERATION OF SEMITRAILERS AND TRUCK TRACTORS ON COMMERCIAL
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND UNPAVED ALLEYS.
   (a)   No semi-trailer, truck tractor or combination of a truck tractor or
semi-trailer shall be operated or drawn, loaded or unloaded, upon any unpaved
alley within the City. The term "unpaved alley" means an alley which has not
been paved with asphalt, brick or concrete.
   (b)   Semitrailers, truck tractors, or a combination of truck tractors or
semitrailers, shall be prohibited on 15th Street from 4th Avenue to 6th Avenue.
Single unit vehicles with wheel bases longer than thirty (30) feet shall be
prohibited on 15th Street from 4th Avenue to 6th Avenue.
(Ord. No. 3006-2004; new 20-4109 (b) enacted; 02/03/04)
SEC. 20-4110.   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES NOT TO BE OPERATED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, guide, steer or propel
any vehicle that is registered in this state as a "Class C Licensed Vehicle" or
a vehicle that weighs in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, except a
pleasure type vehicle, over, on or along any street in the City designated
pursuant to subsection (b); provided, however, vehicles used for delivery
purposes only may drive from one (1) intersected street to the next street upon
the designated avenue for the purpose of making deliveries within the block and
only when necessary, it being the intent of this section to make it unlawful
for any vehicle except pleasure-type vehicles to travel upon or along the
streets so designated.
   (b)   The streets closed to commercial traffic pursuant to subsection (a)
shall be as designated in
Appendix 9, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4111.   DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway, or for routine
maintenance, utility or emergency service, or for special delivery or pickup
involving goods or customer services.
SEC. 20-4112.   DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
SEC. 20-4113.   FOLLOWING OR PARKING NEAR FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block
where such fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
SEC. 20-4114.   CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department
when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in
command.
SEC. 20-4115.   MERGING TRAFFIC.
   At an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging traffic, the
driver of each vehicle on the converging roadway is required to adjust the
vehicle's speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with another
vehicle.
SEC. 20-4116.   ENTERING AND LEAVING LIMITED-ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access or
limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by
public authority.
SEC. 20-4117.   LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle unless the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interference with other
traffic.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle on any controlled-
access highway.
SEC. 20-4118.   FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (a)   Funeral processions shall have the right-of-way at intersections when
vehicles comprising such procession have their headlights lighted, subject to
the following conditions and exceptions:
   (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-
of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible
or visible signal;
   (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-
of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
   (3)   The operator of the lead vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply
with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when the lead vehicle has
proceeded across an intersection in accordance with such signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in such procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal and the lead vehicle
and the vehicles in the procession shall proceed with due caution.
   (b)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession shall not drive
such vehicle in the procession except when authorized to do so by a traffic
officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal.
   (c)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form
a procession or convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose of
securing the right-of-way granted by this section to funeral processions.
   (d)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such
procession.
   (e)   The lead vehicle in a funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may
utilize funeral pennants, flags or windshield stickers to identify the
individual vehicles in such procession.
SEC. 20-4119.   DRIVING OVER FRESH PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over or across any
newly laid pavement in any public street, on which pavement there is a barrier,
or drive at, over or near where there is a person or a sign warning persons not
to drive over or across such pavement or a sign stating that the street is
closed.
SEC. 20-4120.   SOUND AMPLIFICATION REGULATION.
   (a)   No driver of any motor vehicle within this City shall operate or
permit operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside
the vehicle from seventy-five (75) or more feet when the vehicle is being
operated upon a street, unless such system is being operated to request
assistance or warn of a hazardous condition or situation.
   (b)   Subsection (a) above does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (c)   Any violation of subsection (a) above shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for a first offense, one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second offense, and three hundred dollars
($300.00) for a third or subsequent offense, nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 2000-06-03; new Sec. 20-4120 enacted; 06/06/00)
DIVISION 2. SPEED
SEC. 20-4200.   MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any public street in the City at a
speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic
and use of the way, or so as to endanger the life or limb or injure the
property of any person. If the rate of speed of any motor vehicle operated upon
any public alley in the City exceeds fifteen (15) miles per hour, or if the
rate of speed of any motor vehicle operated on any public street in the City
where the street passes through an urban district as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-
214, exceeds thirty (30) miles per hour, or if the rate of speed of any motor
vehicle operated on any public street in the City exceeds the posted limit,
such rate of speed shall be prima facie evidence that the person operating the
motor vehicle is running at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic and use of the way, or so as to
endanger the life or limb or injure the property of any person.
SEC. 20-4201.   SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20)
miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during
school days when school children are present. Appropriate signs shall be posted
to indicate such restriction.
SEC. 20-4202.   PLAY STREETS, ESTABLISHMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon the
streets and at the designated times listed in
Appendix 8, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4203.   REDUCTION OF SPEED UNDER HAZARDOUS CIRCUMSTANCES.
   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the maximum speed limits
established pursuant to this division shall not relieve the driver from the
duty to decrease speed as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care when approaching and crossing an
intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a
hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, when special
hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of
weather or highway conditions.
SEC. 20-4204.   MINIMUM SPEED; IMPEDING TRAFFIC.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at such a
slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with
law.
   (b)   Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce subsection (a) by
directions to drivers and, in the event of apparent willful disobedience and
refusal to comply with such directions of the police officers in accordance
herewith, the continued slow operation by such driver shall be an offense.
SEC. 20-4205.   ALTERED SPEED LIMITS.
   Upon the roadways and streets listed in
Appendix 35 which is incorporated herein by this reference thereto, the speed
limits established by Section
20-4200 above are altered in the manner set forth in said
Appendix 35 and it shall be unlawful for any person to exceed said altered
speed limits when signs giving notice of said altered speed limits are erected
at the proper place or along the proper part or zone of the roadway or streets.
DIVISION 3. DRIVING ON ROADWAY; OVERTAKING AND PASSING
SEC. 20-4300.   DUTY TO KEEP TO RIGHT; EXCEPTIONS; SLOW-MOVING TRAFFIC.
   (a)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway except as follows:
   (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
   (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
   (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon;
   (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic pursuant to this
division;
   (5)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one (1) side of the
public highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is
the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to the other
vehicle.
   (b)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall
be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
SEC. 20-4301.   MANNER OF MEETING VEHICLES.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this division, shall pass each other to the right and,
upon roadways having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each
direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2) of the
main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
SEC. 20-4302.   MANNER OF OVERTAKING AND PASSING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special
rules otherwise stated in this Traffic Code:
   (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main-traveled portion of the roadway.
   (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of such
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (3)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit such passing maneuver safely.
SEC. 20-4303.   OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle with three (3) or more wheels may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
   (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
   (2)   Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction;
   (3)   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one (1) direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstruction and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles.
   (b)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement
to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than eight
(8) feet.
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
SEC. 20-4304.   LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel
as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use
of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction,
before coming within two hundred (200) feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
   (b)   No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle, or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
   (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway
where the driver's view is obstructed within a sufficient distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
   (2)   When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any
railroad grade crossing.
   (3)   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right, or a distinctive line also directs traffic as declared in the sign
manual adopted by the state department of public works and buildings.
   (c)   The limitations in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b) shall not
apply upon a one-way street or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction
when such movement can be made with safety.
SEC. 20-4305.   PASSING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to overtake and pass
another vehicle at street intersections, except on such streets designated as
one-way streets pursuant to this division; provided, however, the operator of a
vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction which is about to make or is making a left turn.
SEC. 20-4306.   DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following requirements, in addition to all others
consistent herewith, shall apply:
   (1)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
   (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control
devices.
   (3)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
   (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
SEC. 20-4307.   ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   (a)   The City Council, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may
designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway or specific lanes upon which
vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall
be indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (b)   The roadways established as one-way roadways shall be as set out in
Appendix 7, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4308.   DRIVING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS; TRAFFIC ROTARYS.
   (a)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, pursuant to this
division, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or
such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (b)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the island.
   (c)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, a vehicle shall
be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use
another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier
or section, except through an opening in the physical barrier, dividing section
or space, or at a crossover or intersection, as established by public
authority.
SEC. 20-4309.   MEETING, PASSING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway upon meeting or overtaking,
from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle
before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus a
visual signal as specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-114, and the driver shall not
proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the driver of the vehicle is
signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no
longer actuated.
   (b)   Every school bus when used for the transportation of school children
must comply with the color requirements established by the superintendent of
public instruction and shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly
visible signs containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight
(8) inches in height, and in addition shall be equipped with visual signals
meeting the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-114, which shall be actuated by the
driver of the school bus immediately preceding the point at which the school
bus stops for the purpose of loading or discharging school children. Such
visual signals shall be actuated by the driver continuously during not less
than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the school bus within a
business or residence district, except that outside a business or residence
district such visual signals shall be given continuously during not less than
the last two hundred (200) feet traveled by the school bus. Such visual signals
must remain actuated when children are loading or unloading from a school bus
which is stopped on a roadway. At no other time shall these visual signals be
actuated.
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway of which the roadways for
traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground which
is not surfaced or suitable for vehicular traffic need not stop the vehicle
upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite roadway; and need
not stop the vehicle when driving upon a controlled-access highway when a
school bus is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved
part of the controlled-access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to
cross such controlled-access highway.
   (d)   When a school bus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other
than the actual transportation of children either to or from school or in
connection with any school activity, all signs thereon indicating "SCHOOL BUS"
shall be covered or concealed.
DIVISION 4. TURNING MOVEMENTS
SEC. 20-4400.   REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn right at an intersection
shall make the approach for a right turn and make the right turn as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
   (c)   The City Council may cause official traffic-control devices to be
placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that
a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection and when such devices are so placed no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and
required by such devices.
SEC. 20-4401.   WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle
is in proper position upon the roadway as required by this division or turn a
vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a
direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, unless and until the
movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any
vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this
section.
   (b)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required by
subsection (a) shall be given continuously during no less than the last one
hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning within a business or
residence district, and the signal shall be given continuously during not less
than the last two hundred (200) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning
outside a business or residence district.
   (c)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of the vehicle
being driven without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
in this division to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when
there is an opportunity to give such a signal.
   (d)   The electric turn signal device required by state law shall be used to
indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, or start from a parallel parked
position but shall not be flashed on one (1) side only on a parked or disabled
vehicle or flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other
vehicles approaching from the rear; provided, however, such signal devices may
be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking and passing.
SEC. 20-4402.   SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required by this division, shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device.
SEC. 20-4403.   METHOD OF GIVING HAND-AND-ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals herein required to be given by hand and arm shall be given from
the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
   (1)   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (2)   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
   (3)   Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward.
SEC. 20-4404.   U-TURNS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction at any intersection and shall not, at any other place, so
turn such vehicle unless the movement can be made with safety and without
interfering with other traffic, except however, no U-turns shall be made at the
places listed in
Appendix 36 which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4405.   TURNING ON THE CURVE OR CREST OF A HILL.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon
any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred (500) feet.
SEC. 20-4406.   MANNER OF CROSSING FROM ONE SIDE OF THE STREET TO THE OTHER.
   The driver of a vehicle crossing from one (1) side to the other side of a
street, except on such streets of the City as are designated as one-way
streets, shall do so by turning to the left at the street intersection, except
at intersections where such turns are prohibited.
SEC. 20-4407.   RESTRICTIONS ON LEFT TURNS; RIGHT TURNS ONLY.
   (a)   At left turn restricted intersections established by
Appendix 2, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a left
turn with the vehicle at any intersection with a “No Left Turn” sign posted, or
at any intersection controlled by a signal device, which has a left turn green
arrow and is posted “Left Turn on Green Arrow Only,” except during the time
said arrow is lighted or as otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   At right turn only intersections established by
Appendix 2A, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a left
turn or to proceed forward with the vehicle at any intersection with a “Right
Turn Only” sign posted, or at any intersection controlled by a signal device
and posted “Right Turn Only,” except during a time as otherwise directed by a
police officer.
(Ord. No. 3004-2016; Sec. 20-4407, “RESTRICTIONS ON LEFT TURNS,” repealed; new
Sec. 20-4407, “RESTRICTIONS ON LEFT TURNS; RIGHT TURNS ONLY,” enacted; 03/22/
16)
DIVISION 5. RIGHT-OF-WAY.
SEC. 20-4500.   VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicles traveling on the
streets of the City and approaching or entering an intersection shall give the
right-of-way to vehicles approaching along intersecting streets from the right
and shall have the right-of-way over those vehicles approaching from the left.
SEC. 20-4501.   VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION, IN GENERAL.
   (a)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
or yield signs.
   (b)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway or which is
approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval
occurs.
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or,
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection. Yield intersections shall be as designed and prescribed in
Appendix 6, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
   (d)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield-
right-of-way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.
SEC. 20-4502.   DUTY OF DRIVERS APPROACHING A FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTION.
   Certain street intersections in the City may be designated as four-way stop
intersections and the driver of a vehicle approaching any such street
intersection shall stop such vehicle before entering the intersection and
remain stopped until entrance upon the intersection can be made with safety,
unless a "go" signal is given at the intersection by a police officer or a
traffic-control signal. Four-way stop intersections shall be as designated and
prescribed in
Appendix 5, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4503.   DUTY OF DRIVERS APPROACHING A THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTION.
   Certain street intersections in the City may be designated as three-way stop
intersections, and each driver of a vehicle approaching any such street
intersection shall stop such vehicle before entering upon the intersection and
remain stopped until entrance upon the intersection can be made with safety,
unless a "go" signal is given at the intersection by a police officer or a
traffic-control signal. Three-way stop intersections shall be as designated and
prescribed in
Appendix 4, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-4504.   DUTIES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law or a police
vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual signal, the
driver of every other vehicle on the same roadway shall yield the right-of-way
and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible
to, the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and
shall stop if possible and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   (b)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
SEC. 20-4505.   VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver having so yielded may proceed at
such time as a safe interval occurs.
SEC. 20-4506.   VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley,
building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the highway to be entered.
SEC. 20-4507.   OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN.
   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing
such person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad
track across a highway is a warning of danger and, under any of the
circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within fifty (50)
feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of the railroad,
and shall not proceed until such driver can do so safely. The foregoing
requirements shall apply when:
   (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
   (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach of passage of a railroad train;
   (3)   A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal
and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing,
is an immediate hazard;
   (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing;
   (5)   A railroad train is approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is
created.
SEC. 20-4508.   CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (a)   The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of
any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying liquid
petroleum and liquid petroleum products, explosives, flammable or oxidizing
liquids and solids, flammable or poisonous compressed gases, volatile liquids
and solids which emit poisonous fumes, corrosive liquids, and radioactive
materials as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track of
a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped
shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching
train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as
hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until such driver can do so safely.
   (b)   After stopping as required by subsection (a), the driver shall proceed
only in a gear not requiring a change of gears during the crossing, and the
driver shall not shift gears while crossing the track.
   (c)   No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a
traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
ARTICLE V. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-5100.   PROHIBITED PARKING ZONES; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle under such
person's control to be parked in any prohibited parking zone established
pursuant to subsection (b), except that parking in such zones is permitted in
order to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions
given by a police officer or official traffic-control device.
   (b)   Prohibited parking zones, as referred to by subsection (a), shall be
as established from time to time by the City Council and set out in
Appendix 10 and
Appendix 30 or shall be as established from time to time by the traffic
engineer within the downtown parking district and set out in the Parking Meter/
Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in this section as if set out in full.
SEC. 20-5101.   PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS AT CERTAIN TIMES, ESTABLISHMENT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle under such
person's control to be parked in any prohibited parking area at certain times
established in subsection (b), except that parking in such areas is permitted
in order to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions
given by a police officer or official traffic-control device.
   (b)   Prohibited parking areas at certain times, as referred to by
subsection (a), shall be as established from time to time by the City Council
and set out in
Appendix 11, or shall be as established from time to time by the traffic
engineer within the downtown parking district and set out in the Parking Meter/
Lot Location Book, located at city hall, office of public works director, which
is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in full.
SEC. 20-5102.   IMPROPER PARKING PURPOSES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon
any roadway for the principal purpose of:
   (1)   Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
   (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   (b)   It shall be an improper purpose to park, stop or stand any vehicle,
part of a vehicle, item being towed by a vehicle, or capable of being towed by
a vehicle, or any other object in any public alley or right-of-way which has
the effect, whether intended or not, of blocking the access or egress to any
property abutting said alley or right-of-way for any length of time; provided
however, that there shall be no violation of this chapter if the owner or
person in possession of said blocked property grants his permission to allow
such blocking.
   (1)   The permission referred to in this subsection must be the expressed
permission of the owner or person    in possession of the blocked property; it
shall not be a defense to a complaint under this subsection to claim, argue or
otherwise attempt to prove that permission was implicitly given by the owner or
person in possession of the blocked property.
   (2)   It shall not be a defense to a complaint filed pursuant to this
subsection that the vehicle is parked, standing or stopped in a loading zone,
or that the vehicle is being utilized for the purposes of loading or unloading.
   (c)   For purposes of advancing the health, safety and welfare of the
community, there shall be a presumption that the property owner grants express
permission to the City and to public or franchise utility companies, for
purposes of collecting garbage or refuse or performing other regular City/
utility services. Any person desiring to revoke the presumption of express
permission provided by this chapter must do so by written request to the City
requesting the City service be relocated to a different portion of said
requesting person's property, which relocation request may be denied.
   (d)   No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street,
highway, or roadway a vehicle which lacks current, legal registration.
Enforcement of this subsection shall not be given to an appointed volunteer or
private or public entity under contract to enforce persons with disabilities
parking laws.
(Ord. No. 3028-2016; Sec. 20-5102(d) enacted; 11/01/16)
SEC. 20-5103.   UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES; SUBJECT TO REMOVAL AFTER FORTY-EIGHT
HOURS; COSTS OF REMOVAL.
   (a)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to
stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and
removing the key and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, without
effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the highway.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle unattended on any
street of the City for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. The police
officers of the City are hereby required and empowered to remove from the
streets and alleys thereof, any vehicle found standing thereon in violation of
this article if the owner or operator cannot be found after reasonable inquiry.
In the event any vehicle is so removed, the reasonable expense of such removal
shall be taxed to the owner or operator as part of the costs in addition to any
penalty either voluntarily paid or assessed by the court.
(Ord. No. 3007-2016; Sec. 20-5103 repealed; new Sec. 20-5103 enacted; 03/22/16)
SEC. 20-5104.   DOUBLE PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to double-park at any time at any place
in the City.
SEC. 20-5105.   DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES; CONFORMITY WITH MARKINGS.
   (a)   At all places in the City, parking shall be governed by the markings
on the pavement or by signs placed or approved by the City Council.
   (b)   All parking parallel to any curb shall be in a space between two (2)
lines, not less than eighteen (18) feet apart and not more than twenty-two (22)
feet apart, and marked at right angles to the curb.
   (c)   The public works department is directed and authorized to mark off
individual parking spaces in any parking zone, which parking spaces shall be
designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or surface of the
street.
   (d)   At each parking space marked off pursuant to this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in such a way that the vehicle
shall not be entirely within the limits of the parking space so designated.
   (e)   In an area where parking spaces are designated pursuant to this
section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle except in a
parking space so designated.
   (f)   Except for a lessee displaying a valid lease sticker on the motor
vehicle, no person may park a motor vehicle in leased spaces marked such within
either the off-street parking lots owned by the City of Moline which are listed
in
Appendix 23, or as designated in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book.
   (g)   In those off-street areas owned by the City as shown in the Parking
Meter/Lot Location Book, on file in the public works director's office which
book is hereby adopted by this reference thereto, or as listed in
Appendix 23 which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a manner or for
a longer period than herein authorized.
SEC. 20-5106.   LEASED PARKING FEES.
   (a)   Leased parking fees shall be as noted in the Parking Meter/Lot
Location Book, on file in the Public Works Department.
   (b)   The accounts and finance officer shall execute leases for designated
leased parking spaces.
SEC. 20-5107.   MANNER OF PARKING.
   (a)   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle to the
curb, except at such places as angle parking is permitted, such places being
described in
Appendix 25, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any vehicle in a
street other than parallel with the curb with the two (2) right wheels of the
vehicle not more than twelve (12) inches from the regularly established curb
line, except on the left side of those streets of the City designated as one-
way streets, in which case the two (2) left wheels of the vehicle shall be not
more than twelve (12) inches from the regularly established curb line.
SEC. 20-5108.   BACKING TO THE CURB.
   No vehicle shall remain backed up to the curb unless it is actually being
loaded or unloaded and in no case shall it be backed to the curb for a longer
time than for the actual loading or unloading of the vehicle. If the vehicle is
horse-drawn or a semi trailer, the horse or tractor shall be turned at right
angles to the vehicle or trailer and in the direction in which traffic on that
side of the street is moving. In no case shall any such vehicle obstruct
traffic on the street unless permission therefore is obtained from the chief of
police.
SEC. 20-5109.   PARKING TIME LIMITS/RESTRICTIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   Parking time limit-Generally. Upon entering any posted zone parking
space, a vehicle may occupy such space for a period of time not to exceed the
posted time limit for the zone.
   (b)   Same--Enforcement.  
   (1)   All parking zones shall be enforced during the times posted in the
zone. Unless otherwise posted, the parking zones shall not be enforced on
Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays.
   (2)   During these times, enforcement personnel will patrol designated
streets. Vehicles that have occupied any given parking space in excess of the
posted parking limitation shall be considered as parking overtime and beyond
the period of legal parking and shall be in violation of this division.
   (3)   Penalties for overtime parking, whether in metered spaces or
otherwise, shall be as set forth pursuant to 20-5119.
   (c)   Particular time zone areas described. Whether posted or not, the
following areas shall be regulated to parking only for the prescribed time
limit:
   (1)   One-hour time zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle in a parking space not subject to a parking meter for a longer period
than sixty (60) minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excepted, on the streets described in
Appendix 16, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full.
   (2)   Two-hour time zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle in a parking space not subject to a parking meter for a longer period
than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays excepted, on the streets described in
Appendix 18, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full.
   (3)   Three-hour time zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle in a parking space not subject to a parking meter for a longer period
than three (3) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays excepted, on the streets described in
Appendix 20, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full.
   (4)   Fifteen-minute time zone. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle in a parking space not subject to a parking meter for a longer
period than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays excepted, on certain streets described
in
Appendix 14, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full. It shall also be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a parking
space not subject to a parking meter for a longer period than fifteen (15)
minutes, on any day, 7 days a week, 24 hours a day, on certain streets
described in
Appendix 14, which is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in
full.
(5)   Exceptions by permit. Notwithstanding the time limits established
hereinabove, any person, who displays a permit issued by the finance department
under the authority of the City Council in the left rear passenger window of
his vehicle, may park in designated spaces in excess of posted time limits. The
permits and designated spaces are as follows:
a.   Resident parking permit: Persons displaying a resident permit may park in
any two hour parking lot in excess of the time limit.
b.   Roving permit: Persons displaying a roving permit may park in any one or
two hour space in excess of the posted time limits.
c.   One day permit: Persons displaying a one day permit may park in any two
hour space in excess of the posted time limit.
(d)   Repealed. Reserved for Future Use.
(Ord. No. 3001-2006; Sec. 20-5109 repealed; new Sec. 20-5109 enacted; 01/17/06;
Ord. No. 3017-2017; Sec. 20-5109(d) repealed; 09/19/17; Ord. No. 3003-2025;
Sec. 20-5109 amended; 01/7/25)
SEC. 20-5110.   PARKING WIDE VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for vehicles over seven (7) feet in width at the widest
point to park on streets in residential areas from sunset to sunrise.
SEC. 20-5111.   TAXICAB STANDS.
   Taxicab stands shall be established and approved by the traffic engineer.
SEC. 20-5112.   PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than a
public carrier, to park the vehicle in a public carrier stand where space is so
designated and marked by curb painting, lettering or signs as provided in this
section.
   (b)   Public carrier stands, as referred to in subsection (a) and not
otherwise established pursuant to subsection (c), are hereby established and
designated as spaces eight (8) feet wide and forty (40) feet long extending
lengthwise along the right-hand curb beginning at a point on the curb of the
near corners of such intersecting streets along the routes traveled by
intercity and intra-city buses. The public carrier stands shall be located on
the near side of the intersection and on the far side of the intersection when
it is properly marked by curb painting, lettering or signs, in conformity with
this section.
   (c)   The traffic engineer may from time to time establish public carrier
stands.
SEC. 20-5113.   MANNER OF PICKING UP AND DISCHARGING BUS PASSENGERS.
   (a)   All buses operating in the City for the purpose of intercity or
intracity transportation of passengers shall stop at the curb at all
appropriate bus stops for the loading and unloading of passengers.
   (b)   The driver of any school bus when receiving or discharging any school
children shall stop the school bus at the curb on the right side of the street,
avenue, alley or highway on which the school bus is operating or, if there is
no curb on the right side of the street, avenue, alley or highway, the driver
of the school bus shall stop the school bus on the right shoulder of the
street, avenue, alley or highway upon which the school bus is operating.
SEC. 20-5114.   LOADING ZONES.
   (a)   As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for the driver
of a vehicle to stand a motor vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the active loading or unloading of passengers, materials,
supplies, or freight, not to exceed 20 minutes, on any day, seven days a week,
24 hours a day in any loading zone established pursuant to subsection (b);
provided however that should the use of any such property which would otherwise
meet the definition of loading zone pursuant to this subsection, result in the
blocking of an abutting property as prohibited in Sec.
20-5102(b), then such alley or public right-of-way shall not be used as a
loading zone unless permission is obtained pursuant to Sec.
20-5102.
   (b)   Loading zones, as referred to in subsection (a), shall be as
established from time to time by the City Council and designated in
Appendix 27, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in
full.
SEC. 20-5115.   RESTRICTIONS ON PARKING FOR CLEANING OF STREETS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any
vehicle in or upon the following streets and avenues, until after the street
cleaner has passed, upon the days and during the time periods specified as
follows:
   (1)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday of each week on the
following avenues: Fourth and Fifth Avenues between First Street and Twenty-
seventh Street; Sixth Avenue between Twelfth Street and Twenty-seventh Street;
Seventh Avenue between Twelfth Street and Twenty-third Street; Eighth Avenue
between Fifteenth Street and Eighteenth Street; Eighteenth Avenue between
Seventh Street and Ninth Street.
   (2)   Between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Thursday of each week on the
following streets: Twelfth Street to Twenty-third Street between Fourth Avenue
and Seventh Avenue.
   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined
five dollars ($5.00) for each offense.
SEC. 20-5116.   OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL PARKING ZONES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to stand or
park at any time, except as provided in subsection (b), in the places
designated in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in
this section as if set out herein in full.
   (b)   The areas described in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book which are
specifically reserved for official municipal parking only, as designated by the
mayor and the City Council, and parking for any other reason or by any other
person not so designated is expressly prohibited.
SEC. 20-5117.   FIRE LANES.
   (a)   It shall be an offense for any person to block or obstruct all or any
portion of a fire lane, as established by Section 10.207 of the Uniform Fire
Code or by any prior provision of a Fire Code enacted by the City or by
contract with the property owner, by parking, stopping, or allowing the
standing of a vehicle therein or thereof for more than two (2) minutes;
provided, however, in no event shall any commercial vehicle use a fire lane for
the loading or unloading of cargo or merchandise during business hours.
   (b)   All vehicles parked, stopped, or left standing illegally within a fire
lane are declared to be a public nuisance. Any member of the police or fire
department is authorized to use all necessary and reasonable force to remove
such vehicles whenever the vehicles obstruct or interfere with the operations
of the fire or emergency services and disaster departments. Said removal shall
occur as provided for in Article VII, Division 4 hereof.
   (c)   Fire lanes created by contract between the City and property owners
are designated by location and description in
Appendix 32 to the Traffic Code, which appendix is incorporated herein by this
reference thereto.
SEC. 20-5118.   REGULATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to violate a contract (executed between the City
and the owner of property to which said contract applies) concerning the
operation, use, parking, stopping and standing of vehicles on private property;
provided, said contract has been recorded with the recorder of deeds, and
provided that signs and/or pavement markings provide notice of the applicable
contract provision.
   (b)   Contracts in force and effect are listed in
Appendix 33 hereto, which appendix is incorporated herein by this reference
thereto.
SEC. 20-5119.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
   (1)   A person parking illegally and receiving a traffic ticket therefor
shall, prior to the issuance of a warrant or summons, be allowed to pay a
violation fee for such person's illegal use of the parking space or area, which
fee shall be collected by the motor vehicles parking systems supervisor and
deposited with the accounts and finance officer as follows:
      a.   Prohibited zones; prohibited times. Unless listed elsewhere in this
section for a specific offense, for unlawful parking in violation of Sections
20-5100,
20-5104,
20-5105 (except
20-5105(f)),
20-5107,
20-5108,
20-5110,
20-5112,
20-5118 (except persons with disabilities parking restrictions), and
20-5201, the violation fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within five
(5) days (excluding Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays) after issuance of the
ticket; thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid after five (5) days.
      b.   Non-metered spaces. For illegally parking in violation of any of the
subsections of Section
20-5109, upon a vehicle’s first violation each calendar year, which shall be
January 1- December 31, a courtesy warning violation ticket shall be issued.
For each subsequent violation each calendar year, the violation fee shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within five (5) days (excluding Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holidays); thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid after five (5)
days. Record of vehicle license plate numbers receiving tickets for violations
of any subsections of Section
20-5109 shall be maintained by the Finance Department.
      c.   Persons with disabilities parking spaces. For unlawful parking in
violation of persons with disabilities parking restrictions upon private
property for which a contract pursuant to Section
20-5118 exists or in violation of Section
20-5123, the violation fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
      d.   Leased and reserved spaces. For unlawful parking in violation of
Section
20-5105(f) or Section
20-5116, the violation fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within five
(5) days (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays) after issuance of the
ticket; thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid after five (5) days.
      e.   Fire Lane. For unlawful parking in violation of Section
20-5117, the violation fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid within
five (5) days (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays) after issuance of
the ticket; fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid after five (5) days.
      f.   Loading Zone. For unlawful parking in violation of Section
20-5114, the violation fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within five
(5) days (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays) after issuance of the
ticket; thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid after five (5) days.
      g.   Fire Hydrant. For unlawful parking in violation of
Chapter 20,
Appendix 10(a)(8), parking within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, the
violation fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if paid within five (5)
days (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays) after issuance of the
ticket; fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid after five (5) days.
   (2)   In the event that a summons or notice is issued upon nonpayment of the
violation fees established in subsection (1) a., b., c., or e. and that the
person charged is found guilty of violating any of the provisions set forth in
said subsection, the court shall assess a fine as follows:
      a.   For subsection (1) a., b., or c., the fine shall be not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus the costs of the proceeding.
      b.   For subsection (1) e., the fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) plus
the costs of the proceeding.
   (3)   In the event of a finding of guilty for a violation of any of the
provisions of this article for which no violation fee is provided, the court
shall assess a fine of not less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) plus the
costs of the proceedings except for violations of Sections
20-5304 or
20-5309 in which case the court shall fine the defendant not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus the
costs of the proceeding.
   (4)   In the event that a summons is issued upon payment of the violation
fees established in Section (1)d., and the person charged is found guilty of
violating any of the provisions set forth in said subsection (1)d., the court
shall assess a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus
the costs of the proceeding.
(Ord. No. 2000-06-04; Sec. 20-5119 (2), (3) and (4) repealed; new subsections
(2), (3) and (4) enacted; 06/06/00; Ord. No. 3005-2006; Sec. 20-5119(4)
repealed; new Sec. 20-5119(4) enacted; 02/21/06; Ord. No. 3014-2008; Sec. 20-
5119 repealed; new Sec. 20-5119 enacted; 03/04/08; Ord. No. 3028-2009; Sec. 20-
5119(1)(d) repealed; new Sec 20-5119(1)(d) enacted; 10/13/09; Ord. No. 3029-
2013; Sec. 20-5119(1)(a)-(g) repealed; new Sec. 20-5119(1)(a)-(g) enacted; 10/
01/13; Ord. No. 3017-2017; Sec. 20-5119(1)(b) repealed; new Sec. 20-5119(1)(b)
enacted; 09/19/17; Ord. No. 3003-2021; Sec. 20-5119(a)(1) amended; 03/16/21)
SEC. 20-5120.   PAYMENT OF VIOLATION FEE FOR NONMOVING TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS IN
LIEU OF TRIAL.
   (a)   Any person violating or causing or knowingly permitting the violation
of any provision of this Traffic Code, which violation is a nonmoving traffic
violation other than violations of those sections specified in Section
20-5119, may voluntarily pay the violation fee established herein for the
violation charged, in addition to any towing or other actual expense incurred
by the City, within ten (10) days other than Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays. If requested by the party paying the violation fee, a receipt
therefor shall be issued in duplicate, one to the party paying the violation
fee and the second for the permanent records of the motor vehicle parking
system.
   (b)   The violation fees for nonmoving traffic violations, other than
violations of those sections specified in Section
20-5119, are hereby established as follows:
   (1)   For violation of Sections
20-1103,
20-1108,
20-1109,
20-4106,
20-4107,
20-4108,
20-4109,
20-4110,
20-4118, and
20-4119, and of Article VII other than Division 4, the violation fee shall be
thirty-five dollars ($35.00).
   (2)   For violation of Section
20-5102(d), Section
20-5103, and Division 4 of Article VII and Article VIII, the violation fee
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 3007-2016; Sec. 20-5120(b)(2) amended by deleting the reference to
“Section
20-5206” and adding in lieu thereof the reference to “Section
20-5103;” 03/22/16; Ord. No. 3028-2016; Sec. 20-5120(b)(2) repealed in its
entirety; new Sec. 20-5120(b)(2) enacted to include the reference to “Section
20-5102(d); 11/01/16)
   (3)   For violation of Section
20-5201, the violation fee will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) if paid within
five (5) days after the issuance of the ticket, thirty-five dollars ($35.00) if
paid after five (5) days.
(Ord. No. 97-8-1; Sec. 20-5120, §(b)(2) repealed; new §(b)2 enacted; new §(b)
(3) enacted; 08/05/97)
   (c)   Payment of violation fees for nonmoving traffic violations may be made
at the accounts and finance office or by mail or in a specified courtesy box.
Payment by mail or by placing payment in a specified courtesy box shall
constitute waiver of the right to issuance of the receipt provided for in
subsection (a).
   (d)   On the first (1st) day, other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, of each month, the motor vehicle parking system office shall report to
the accounts and finance officer numbers of receipts for funds received under
this section and the aggregate amount shown upon the receipts issued during the
preceding month and shall remit with the report to the accounts and finance
officer the amount shown upon the report to have been collected.
   (e)   A payment voluntarily made pursuant to this section and accepted by
the City shall be a full and effectual bar to further prosecution of the
specific violation designated on the parking ticket or other "hang-on" ticket
permitted by Supreme Court Rules.
   (f)   In the event that a summons or warrant is issued upon nonpayment of
the violation fees established in subsection (b) and the person charged is
found guilty of violating said provisions shall be fined as follows:
   (1)   For violation of Sections
20-1102,
20-1108,
20-1109,
20-4106,
20-4107,
20-4108,
20-4109,
20-4110,
20-4118, and
20-4119, and of Article VII other than Division 4, the fine shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   (2)   For violation of Sections
20-5103 and
20-5201 and Division 4 of Article VII and Article VIII, the fine shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 3007-2016; Sec. 20-5120(f)(2) amended by deleting the reference to
“Section
20-5206” therein and adding in lieu thereof the reference to “Section
20-5103;” 03/22/16)
SEC. 20-5121.   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES DEFINED.
   Every natural person who is a person with disabilities as defined by 625
ILCS 5/1-159.1 and a disabled person presenting an Illinois Disabled Person
Identification Card indicating that that person has a Class 1A or Class 2A
disability as provided by 15 ILCS 335/4A is a "person with disabilities."
SEC. 20-5122.   SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES AND DECALS.
   (a)   The City of Moline shall recognize special registration plates or
special decals for disabled veterans and persons with disabilities issued by
the State of Illinois pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609, 5/3-616, and 5/11-1301.2;
and any special registration plates issued by another state which clearly shows
upon said plate that it is a disabled veteran or persons with disabilities
plate; and any official special decal issued by any political subdivision of
the State of Illinois for persons with disabilities as prima facie evidence
that the vehicle is being operated by or for a person with disabilities.
   (b)   The traffic bureau of the Moline police department shall issue
official special decals as designed by the Secretary of State pursuant to 625
ILCS 5/11-1301.2 to any resident of the City of Moline who is a person with
disabilities and to any not-for-profit organization with a business office in
the City of Moline who transports persons with disabilities for display in
vehicles not bearing special registration plates but being used in the
transporting of persons with disabilities.
(Ord. No. 3059-2004; Sec. 20-5122 repealed; new Sec. 20-5122 enacted; 08/17/04)
SEC. 20-5123.   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING INCLUDED IN CONTRACTS.
   The chief of police of the City of Moline, Illinois, is hereby authorized to
include in any contract listed in Section
20-5118 hereof, with the mutual consent of the property owner or in any
contract to be negotiated in the future, persons with disabilities parking
restrictions enforceable by the City of Moline.
SEC. 20-5124.   UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS USING PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING
SPACES; A VIOLATION.
   (a)   Persons with disabilities parking spaces are intended to be used for
increased accessibility by persons with disabilities. Therefore, the following
actions shall be violations of Sections
20-5121 through
20-5126:
   (1)   To park any motor vehicle which is not bearing special registration
plates or displaying a special decal recognized by the City of Moline as issued
to a person with disabilities in any parking space specifically reserved by the
posting of an official sign for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates
or displaying a special decal;
   (2)   For a person who is not the recipient of the persons with disabilities
plates or decal to park a vehicle bearing same in a designated persons with
disabilities parking space when unaccompanied by the recipient of the plates
and/or decal; or
   (3)   For a person who is not the recipient of the persons with disabilities
plates or decal, when accompanied by the recipient of the plates and/or decal,
to park a vehicle bearing same in a designated persons with disabilities
parking space and to exit the vehicle while the recipient of the plates and/or
decal remains in the vehicle.
   (4)   To park any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any
parking space specifically reserved for persons with disabilities.
(Ord. No. 3007-2007; new Sec. 20-5124(a)(4) enacted; 03/06/07)
   (b)   It is not a defense to violations of Sections
20-5121 through
20-5126 of this Code that the sign posted does not meet the technical
requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code, local ordinance or any other laws or
regulations as long as a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or
notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person
with disabilities.
(Ord. No. 3043-2006; new Sec. 20-5124(c) enacted; 10/03/06; Ord. No. 3026-2019;
Sec. 20-5124(b) repealed; Sec. 20-5124(c) renamed; 11/19/19)
SEC. 20-5125.   EXEMPTION OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING FROM PARKING
TIME LIMITATIONS; BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates or displaying a special
decal issued to a person with disabilities or disabled veteran shall be exempt
from any of the provisions of this division dealing with time limitations on
parking in a business district (except those restrictions of thirty (30)
minutes or less in duration).
   (b)   Such exemption shall not apply to prohibited parking areas or any
other ordinance prohibiting parking during certain times or at certain places
or to provisions prohibiting the obstruction of traffic.
   (c)   Such exemption is strictly limited to the person to whom such special
registration plates or a special decal was issued and to qualified operators
acting under his or her express direction while the person with disabilities is
present.
(Ord. No. 3059-2004; Sec. 20-5125 repealed; new Sec. 20-5125 enacted; 08/17/04)
SEC. 20-5126.   DESIGNATED PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES; RESIDENTIAL.
   (a)   The traffic committee may, upon application from a resident and where
circumstances warrant, designate parking spaces on City streets in residential
areas that are restricted to use by persons with a state-issued persons with
disabilities parking permit. State highways are not eligible to receive such a
designated parking space under this section. Designated spaces may be provided
only where such a designated space is necessary to provide reasonable access to
the vehicle by the disabled person.
   (b)   To be eligible for a designated parking space under this section,
there must be a person with a recognized disability residing at a nearby
dwelling for which the space is to be provided and the applicant shall describe
how designation of the parking space on that street will improve access
compared to the current parking situation. The designated parking space should
be along the frontage of the property where the disabled person resides, if
possible, under the circumstances there existing. Designated parking spaces for
persons with disabilities should not be provided where it is feasible to
provide off-street parking to meet the needs of the disabled person.
   (c)   Where approved, the City shall furnish and install signage designating
the parking spot. All other capital improvements of any and every kind that
shall be necessary or useful to improve access to and from the designated
parking spot shall be at the sole expense of the applicant.
   (d)   Following approval and installation, the applicant shall annually
file, on or before the anniversary of the approval, a letter addressed to the
director of public works setting forth the applicant's continuing need for the
designated parking space. In the event that the City does not receive such a
letter setting forth the continuing need for the designation, and upon fifteen
(15) calendar days' written notice to the applicant of the City's intent to do
so, the signage and designation may be removed.
(Ord. No. 99-3-1; §20-5126 repealed; new §20-5126 enacted; 03/02/99) (Ord. No.
3059-2004; Sec. 20-5126 repealed; new Sec. 20-5126 enacted; 08/17/04; Ord. No.
3026-2019; Sec. 20-5126 repealed; new Sec. 20-5126 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 20-5127.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   (a)   The accounts and finance officer is hereby appointed to act as parking
administrator. Such parking administrator (or designee) is authorized to adopt,
distribute and process parking violation notices and other notices required by
this section, collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of
parking ordinances, and operate an administrative adjudication system. The
parking administrator is also authorized, either personally or by designee, to
make certified reports to the Secretary of State of Illinois as directed under
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
   (b)   Any violation of the Moline Traffic Code, Article V, shall be subject
to the following procedures:
      1.   A "hang-on" parking violation notice shall be attached to the
windshield of the illegally parked vehicle or to any other obvious place on the
vehicle if there is no windshield or handed to the operator of such vehicle if
he or she is present. The notice shall state the following:
         a.   date, time and place of the violation;
         b.   regulation violated;
         c.   fine/penalty for late payment assessed;
         d.   vehicle make and state registration   number;
         e.   signature and I.D. number of the person issuing the notice;
         f.   a statement that payment of the fine indicated, and any
applicable penalty for late payment, will operate as a final disposition of the
matter;
         g.   information regarding the opportunity to contest the violation on
its merits within    15 days of receipt of "hang-on" notice on written request
to the parking    administrator;
         h.   information that if there is a written request for a hearing, it
will be scheduled by the parking administrator not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days from date of receipt of the request for a hearing, which hearing
shall be held at the parking administrator's office, at which time any relevant
evidence may be presented for consideration.
         i.   information that if the owner of the vehicle is a lessor under a
written lease agreement, said owner may avoid responsibility for any violation,
during the period of the lease, by providing the City with a copy of said lease
and the name and the address of the lessee within 60 days of receipt of a
request by the City, which request shall be within 120 days after the violation
occurred. The City may at a subsequent time request from the lessor the
driver’s license information of the lessee if needed for enforcement.
         j.   if the owner/lessee is a non-resident of the City of Moline,
Illinois, in lieu of appearing before the parking administrator, such person
may file a written petition which shall detail the reasons for protesting in
the form as provided in Section (j)(1) hereinbelow. Such petition must be
received by the City no later than the date of the proposed hearing in order to
be effective.
   (c)   The parking administrator or the chief of police shall authorize
persons to issue and serve parking violation notices. Any person so authorized
shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the parking
violation notice by signing said person's name to the notice at the time of
service or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, by
signing a single certificate to be kept by the parking administrator attesting
to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under his
or her control. The original or a facsimile of the parking violation notice
shall be retained by the parking administrator, and shall be a record kept in
the ordinary course of business. A parking violation notice issued, signed and
served in accordance with this section, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima
facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
shown on the notice. The notice or copy shall be admissible in any subsequent
administrative or legal proceedings.
   (d)   The registered owner of the vehicle shall have an opportunity for a
hearing at which time said owner may contest the merits of the alleged
violation, and during which formal or technical rules of evidence shall not
apply; provided that the lessee of a vehicle cited in the parking violation
notice likewise shall be provided an opportunity for a hearing of the same type
as is provided an owner. The hearing shall be recorded. The parking
administrator and any person conducting the hearing on behalf of the parking
administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena
both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant
books and papers. Persons appearing at a hearing under this section may be
represented by counsel at such person's expense.
   (e)   A second notice of violation shall be sent by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the
cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State or, under 625 ILCS 5/11-
1306, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the
lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease. The service shall be deemed
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. Information in
the second notice shall be identical with that in the original "hang-on" notice
with the addition of the following:
   Failure either to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to
appear at a hearing on the merits in the time and manner specified, will result
in a final determination of parking violation liability for the cited violation
in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated. Upon the occurrence of a final
determination of parking violation liability for the failure, and the
exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial
procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due
and owing the City.
   (f)   A notice of final determination of parking violation shall be sent
following a final determination of parking violation liability and the
conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under this Section.
   (1)   The notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the Secretary of State or, under 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, to the
lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of lease. The service shall be deemed complete as of
the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (2)   The notice shall state that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due
and owing the City.
   (3)   The notice shall contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or
penalty due and owing the City within the time specified may result in the
City's filing of a petition in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine/
penalty rendered a judgment as provided by this section, or may result in
suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for five (5) or more parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.6.
   (g)   Each final decision rendered through this administrative process may
be subject to judicial review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review
Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. in the manner set forth below:
   (1)   The action shall be commenced by the filing of a complaint and the
issuance of summons within 35 days from the date that a copy of the decision
sought to be reviewed was served upon the party affected thereby.
   (2)   Failure to file a complaint within the requisite time period shall
result in any fine still outstanding becoming a debt due and owing the City and
may be collected by a judgment procedure initiated by the City of Moline.
   (3)   A notice of final determination of liability shall be mailed to the
violator. The notice shall contain warnings that failure to pay any fine within
10 days may result in the City of Moline filing a petition in court in order to
receive a judgment against the violator or may result in suspension of a
driver's license for failure to pay five (5) or more violations.
   (h)   A Notice of Impending Drivers License Suspension shall be sent by
first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address, as required in
subsection (f) hereinabove, of the person liable for any fine or penalty that
remains due and owing on five (5) or more parking violations. The service shall
be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The
notice shall state that failure to pay the fine/penalty owing within 45 days of
the notice's date will result in the City notifying the Secretary of State that
the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 ILCS
5/6-306.5.
   (i)   Final determinations of parking violation liability shall occur
following failure to pay the fine/penalty after a hearing officer's
determination of parking violation liability and the exhaustion of or failure
to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided hereinabove. When a
person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the
time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's
determination of parking violation liability shall become final:
   (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
   (2)   Upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing
having been made.
   (j)   A Petition to Set Aside a determination of parking violation liability
may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty. The petition shall be
filed with and ruled upon by the parking administrator in the manner and within
the time specified herein. Grounds for the petition shall be limited to:
   (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on
the date the parking violation       notice was issued,
   (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the parking
violation in question, and
   (3)      Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (k)   Procedures for non-residents. Any person who is a non-resident of the
City of Moline may contest the merits of the alleged violation without
attending a hearing;
   (1)   This procedure may be done by petitioning, in writing, the parking
administrator. The petition shall include all of the form set below:
PETITION
   NAME:                      
   ADDRESS:                   
   VEHICLE MAKE/LICENSE #/STATE:          
   TICKET #:                  
   VIOLATION DATE:                
   ORDINANCE VIOLATION:             
   REGISTERED OWNER OF VEHICLE:          
   DATE OF HEARING:                
   DATE OF PETITION:                
____________________________________________
             SIGNATURE
   PLEASE INDICATE IF ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING ARE THE BASIS OF YOUR
PETITION:
   1.   Not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle.
   2.   Fine has already been paid for the parking violation in question.
      
   3.   Excusable failure to appear at the scheduled hearing or request a new
hearing date. (Give excuse in space provided below).
_________Approved
_________Not approved
__________________________________________
             Parking Administrator
   (2)   The parking administrator shall render a determination based on the
petition as well as other evidence within 10 business days of the date of the
hearing in the same manner as provided in Section (f) hereinabove.
   (3)   The final determination shall be subject to Judicial Review by the
filing of a complaint in Circuit Court pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
SEC. 20-5128.   IMPOUNDMENT FOR UNPAID VIOLATIONS
   (a)    Whenever it is determined that the owner of any vehicle has
accumulated five (5) tickets or One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more worth of
accumulated parking violations as defined in the provisions of this Code, the
parking administrator (or designee), shall serve notice of such condition to
the registered owner of the vehicle. Service may be made by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. The notice
shall state the date and nature of each ticket and the amount presently due and
shall inform the vehicle owner of the following procedures:
   (1)   The vehicle owner may obtain a review of the tickets by giving written
notice to the Accounts and Finance Officer within fifteen (15) days of the date
of receipt of the notice of unpaid tickets, requesting a conference with the
Accounts and Finance Officer (or designee).
   (2)   If the vehicle owner has not either given written notice requesting a
conference or paid the full amount of the unpaid tickets within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the receipt of the notice of unpaid tickets, it shall be
deemed that said owner has waived the right to a conference, and the full
unpaid amount of the tickets shall be due immediately.
   (3)   If the vehicle owner fails to either give written notice requesting a
conference or to pay the full amount of the unpaid tickets within the
prescribed time period, such vehicle shall be subject to impoundment.
   (b)   The parking administrator (or designee) shall schedule a conference to
be held not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after
receiving written notice from the vehicle owner requesting the conference.
After a review of the tickets at the conference, the parking administrator, (or
designee,) shall determine the amount due up to the full amount of the unpaid
tickets and shall inform the vehicle owner of the decision. Unless other
arrangements for the payment are approved by the parking administrator, the
amount shall be paid within fifteen (15) days. If an agreement concerning
payment of the tickets is made and the vehicle owner fails to make any payment
called for in such agreement when due, the entire outstanding balance remaining
on said agreement, plus any additional outstanding tickets, becomes immediately
due and payable and the vehicle of such owner shall thereupon be subject to
impoundment until all payments then due are made. The parking administrator,
(or designee,) shall have full authority to make binding agreements concerning
payments due, if any, and may agree to payments and other terms which are
deemed to be in the best interests of the City.
   (c)   When any vehicle owner within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt
of the notice of unpaid tickets required by subsection (a) has not either paid
the full amount of the unpaid tickets or given written notice to the parking
administrator requesting a conference, or when any vehicle owner after an
agreement with the City as described in subsection (b) fails to make any
payment when due and such payment has not yet been made, the vehicle of such
owner thereafter found parked and unattended on a public right-of-way in the
City, within the municipal parking ramp or within a City parking lot, by any
agent or employee of the City designated to enforce the parking ordinances of
the City may be impounded.
   (d)   Impoundment shall constitute either impoundment by immobilization or
by towing as hereinafter described.
   (1)   Impoundment by immobilization shall be accomplished by the attachment
of any mechanical device, such as a "Denver Boot," consisting of clamps or jaws
and a locking device, which, when attached to the wheel of a vehicle, prevents
the vehicle from being driven. If the vehicle that has been impounded by
immobilization has not been reclaimed within twenty-four (24) hours, the
immobilization device may be released and the vehicle may be impounded by
towing
   (2)   Impoundment by towing shall be accomplished by removing and conveying
such vehicle or by causing such vehicle to be removed and conveyed to a vehicle
pound. A vehicle pound is hereby declared to be any suitable place designated
by the City as a vehicle pound.
   (e)   A post immobilization and post-towing notice, as applicable, shall be
sent to the registered owner advising said owner of the right to a hearing to
challenge the validity of the impoundment;
   (1)   Said notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the Secretary of State or, under 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, to the
lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of lease. The service shall be deemed complete as of
the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (2)   Upon a written request, received by the City within 10 business days
of the date of the notice, a hearing will be scheduled by the parking
administrator not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from date of receipt
of the request for a hearing, which hearing shall be held at the parking
administrator's office, at which time any relevant evidence may be presented
for consideration.
   (3)   Failure to request a hearing within the time limits as provided above
will operate as a waiver of the right to a hearing.
   (4)   All non-residents of Moline, Illinois shall have the option of not
attending the hearing by filing a written petition with the parking
administrator, setting forth the reasons for contesting the basis for
impoundment, no later than provided in (2) above.
   (5)   No later than 10 business days following the date of the hearing, the
parking administrator shall render a final determination and notice of said
determination shall be sent as provided in (1) above.
   (6)   All final determinations shall be subject to judicial review by the
filing of a complaint in the circuit court pursuant to 735 ILCS 3-101 et seq;
   (f)   Any vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions herein may be
reclaimed by the registered owner or operator by appearing at the accounts and
finance department during regular business hours. At such time, the owner or
the operator shall sign a certificate that he/she is the owner or operator of
the impounded vehicle, pay all charges and costs incurred in impounding the
vehicle, and pay all outstanding parking fines and late payment penalties. In
lieu of paying these charges, costs, fines, and penalties, the owner or
operator may execute a binding payment agreement. The agreement shall be a
standard agreement prepared in advance by the parking administrator and it
shall contain a payment schedule and the penalties for failure to fulfill the
conditions of the agreement. No agreement shall be entered into unless all
impoundment charges plus at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
remaining amount then due is paid prior to execution. Upon the owner/operator
complying with all of the requirements of this subsection, and not before, the
vehicle shall be released to the owner/operator. Should the owner/operator have
previously entered into a payment agreement with the City and failed to
complete said agreement fully, the parking administrator has the option of
denying the request for a payment agreement and require all fines, penalties
and costs be paid in full prior to release of the vehicle.
   (g)   The parking administrator may designate others to exercise powers and
perform functions provided in this section.
   (h)    The fee for impoundment by immobilization shall be One Hundred Fifty
dollars ($150.00) and the fee for impoundment by towing shall be as follows:
   (1)   Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) for passenger cars or vehicles less than
one ton;
   (2)   One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00) for vehicles of one (1) ton
weight and over – single axle;
   (3)   Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for vehicles of one (1) ton weight
and over – tandem axle;
   (4)   Plus Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) additional towing fee if a dollie is
used for an immobile vehicle;
   (5)   Plus Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) per one-half hour of use of a small
wrecker in an extraordinary event requiring additional equipment;
   (6)   Plus One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00) per hour of use of a
medium wrecker in an extraordinary event requiring additional equipment;
   (7)   Plus Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per hour of use of a large
wrecker in an extraordinary event requiring additional equipment.
   In addition to said towing charges listed above, there shall be an
additional charge for inside or outside storage of said impounded vehicle of
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for each day or part thereof that an impounded
vehicle is stored. All fees for storage or impoundment, whether by
immobilization or towing, shall be exclusive of all other fees, fines,
penalties, or costs.
   (i)   Fines and penalties for violations of vehicular stopping, standing and
parking regulations shall be as set forth pursuant to Sec.
20-5119.
(Ord. No. 98-10-1; §20-5128 (i) repealed; new §20-5128 (i) enacted; 10/06/98)
(Ord. No. 3005-2006; Sec. 20-5128(i) repealed; new Sec. 20-5128(i) enacted; 02/
21/06)
(Ord. No. 3028-2009; Sec. 20-5128 repealed; new Sec. 20-5128 enacted; 10/13/09)
(Ord. No. 3014-2012; Sec. 20-5128(h) repealed; new Sec. 20-5128 enacted; 08/10/
12; scrivener’s error corrections to (f) (amended “impoundment changes” to
“impoundment charges) and (h) (corrected the fee for impoundment by
immobilization from $35.00 to $100.00 per Ord. No. 3014-2012); 10/13/14)
(Ord. No. 3032-2017; Sec. 20-5128(a) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 20-5128
(a) enacted; 10/17/17)
(Ord. No. 3029-2017; Sec. 20-5128(h) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 20-5128
(h) enacted; 10/17/17)
DIVISION 2. SNOW REMOVAL
SEC. 20-5200.   ESTABLISHMENT OF SNOW ROUTES.
   The snow routes of the City shall be those streets designated as such in
Appendix 31, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in
full.
SEC. 20-5201.   WHEN PARKING ALONG SNOW ROUTES IS UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, allow a vehicle to be
parked, allow a vehicle to remain parked, or to attempt to park a vehicle on a
Snow Route withing the City after the Mayor declares a “Snow Emergency.” The
Mayor may declare a Snow Emergency when: two (2) or more inches of snow have
fallen on the streets; when the Mayor, in consultation with Public Works,
determines that two (2) or more inches of snow are reasonably expected to fall;
or when the Mayor, in consultation with Public Works and the Chief of Police,
determines that it is in the best interests of the City to prepare for a storm
event involving snow, rain, ice or any mix thereof.
(Ord. No. 3003-2021; 03/16/21)
SEC. 20-5202.   NOTICE WHEN PARKING ALONG SNOW ROUTES IS RESTRICTED.
   Once the Mayor has declared a Snow Emergency, the Mayor shall give
constructive notice to the public that it is illegal to park on the snow routes
or to leave vehicles parked on the snow routes, by communicating the
declaration to the local media and asking them to broadcast a message that the
Mayor has declared a Snow Emergency and that it is necessary to implement the
parking ban on the Snow Routes due to the accumulation or expected accumulation
of snow and ice. The communication to the media shall be a prerequisite to any
prosecution for violation of this division, but the fact of actual publication
of the Mayor's declaration by the media shall not be an element of the case.
(Ord. No. 3003-2021; 03/16/21)
SEC. 20-5203.   ENFORCEMENT OF AND PENALTIES FOR VEHICLES PARKED IN VIOLATION
OF THIS DIVISION.
(a)   Once the Mayor has declared a Snow Emergency, the Mayor shall advise the
police department of such determination; thereafter, the Chief of Police, or
such other sworn officer designated by the Chief of Police, shall be authorized
to take the following action or any combination thereof:
   (1)   Authorize the Main Parking Attendants to issue courtesy warning
notices;
   (2)   Authorize the Main Parking Attendants to issue summonses for
violations of this Section in accordance with the schedule of penalties set
forth in Section 20-5119 (as amended);
   (3)   Cause the towing or other removal of vehicles parking in violation of
this division.
The Chief of Police shall, for any specific Snow Emergency, have the discretion
to select those specific Snow Routes to receive any or all of the enforcement
actions set forth herein.
(b)   The removal of a vehicle as authorized by subsection (a) shall be done as
provided in Section 20-7400, et seq.
(c)   In the event that ownership of a vehicle removed pursuant to this section
cannot be ascertained, the provisions of Section 20-7400 et seq. shall be
followed as in the case of abandoned and inoperative motor vehicles.
(d)   The owner of the vehicle or the person otherwise entitled to possession
thereof shall pay the reasonable costs of towing and storage occasioned by
removal of the vehicle removed hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3003-2021; Sec. 20-5203 repealed; Sec. 20-5203 enacted; 03/16/21)
SEC. 20-5204.   TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   Police officers of the City shall be authorized to have vehicles parked in
violation of this division towed from snow routes by towing firms located
within the City and to have the vehicles stored by those firms after the police
department has been authorized to remove vehicles pursuant to this division.
SEC. 20-5205.   SIGNS.
   The mayor, through the public works director, is authorized to cause snow
route signs to be placed along snow routes for informational purposes. The
signs shall read: "Snow Route - Tow Away Zone." Proof of the presence of such a
sign shall not be an element of the prosecution for parking on a snow route in
violation of this division, but this division, together with the mayor's
request for the broadcasts required by this division, shall be deemed
constructive notice to the public of the fact that parking is illegal.
SEC. 20-5206.   RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
(Ord. No. 3007-2016; repealed Sec. 20-5206, “UNATTENDED VEHICLES PARKED ON
STREETS IN EXCESS OF FORTY-EIGHT HOURS SUBJECT TO REMOVAL BY POLICE; COSTS OF
REMOVAL;” reserved Sec. 20-5206 for future use; 03/22/16)
DIVISION 3. PARKING METERS
SEC. 20-5300.   OPERATION OF PARKING METERS.
   (a)   Except in a period of emergency as determined by an officer of the
fire department or the police department or in compliance with the directions
of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal, when any vehicle shall
be parked in any parking space alongside or next to which a parking meter is
located, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking meter
space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in the meter such proper
coin of the United States as is required for the parking meter and as is
designated by proper directions on the meter, and failure to deposit a proper
coin shall constitute a violation of this Traffic Code.
   (b)   Upon the deposit of a coin pursuant to subsection (a), the parking
meter space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of time
which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which the parking meter
space is located; provided, however, any person placing a vehicle in a parking
meter space adjacent to a meter which indicates that unused time has been left
in the meter by the previous occupant of the space shall not be required to
deposit a coin so long as such person's occupancy does not exceed the indicated
unused parking time.
SEC. 20-5301.   DAYS EXEMPTED FROM PARKING METER OPERATION.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), parking meters shall not be in
operation on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; provided, however, within the
meaning of this section the term "holiday" shall include the following days
only: The first day of January, the day celebrated as Memorial Day, the Fourth
of July, the first Monday in September, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
   (b)   Parking meters in the special parking meter zone shall be operated at
all times, with no exception for Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
(Ord. No. 3001-2006; Sec. 20-5301 repealed; new Sec. 20-5301 enacted; 01/17/06)
SEC. 20-5302.   HOURS OF OPERATION.
   On those days when parking meters are to be operated, they shall be operated
between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
SEC. 20-5303.   PARKING WHEN METERS ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BE OPERATED.
   When parking meters are not required to be operated by this division,
vehicles may be parked without inserting any coin in the parking meter, but the
parking lines adjacent to the parking meter shall be adhered to in the same
manner as is required during other times.
SEC. 20-5304.   IMPROPER COINS OR TOKENS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited, in
any parking control device, any slug, device or metal substance or other
substitute for coins of the United States or legally authorized tokens.
SEC. 20-5305.   TIME LIMITS IN ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   One-hour limit . It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays excepted, in any parking meter zone in which a "one-hour limit"
meter has been installed for a period of time in excess of one (1) hour. It
shall also be unlawful for any person to deposit more coins in such a meter
than are necessary to purchase one (1) hour of parking time. Areas subject to
the one-hour limit imposed by this subsection shall be as described in the
Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in this subsection as if
set out herein in full.
   (b)   Two-hour limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, in any parking meter zone in which a “two-hour limit” meter has been
installed, for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to deposit more coins in such a meter than are
necessary to purchase two (2) hours’ parking time. Areas subject to the two-
hour limit imposed by this subsection shall be as described in
Appendix 19 or the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in
this subsection as if set out herein in full.
   (c)   Three-hour limit . It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, and
legal holidays excepted, in any parking meter zone in which a "three-hour
limit" meter has been installed, for a period of time in excess of three (3)
hours. It shall also be unlawful for any person to deposit more coins in such a
meter than are necessary to purchase three (3) hours' parking time. Areas
subject to the three-hour limit imposed by this subsection shall be as
described in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in this
subsection as if set out herein in full.
   (d)   Ten-hour limit. Certain areas may be designated by the City Council as
ten-hour metered zones in which, upon the deposit of the appropriate coins, a
vehicle may remain legally parked for the time limit established therefore.
Areas subject to the ten-hour parking restrictions imposed by this subsection
shall be as described in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is
incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in full.
   (e)   Twenty-four-minute limit . It shall be unlawful for any person,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays excepted, to park for more than twenty-four (24) minutes in any
parking meter zone in which a "twenty-four-minute limit" meter has been
installed. It shall also be unlawful for any person to deposit more coins in
any such meter than are necessary to purchase twenty-four (24) minutes' parking
time. Areas subject to the twenty-four (24) minute limit imposed by this
subsection shall be as described in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which
is incorporated in this subsection as if set out herein in full.
   (f)   Twelve-minute limit. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle at any time for more than twelve (12) minutes in any parking meter zone
in which a "twelve-minute limit" parking meter has been installed. It shall
also be unlawful for any person to deposit in such meter more coins than are
necessary to purchase more than twelve (12) minutes' parking time. Areas
subject to the twelve-minute limit imposed by this subsection shall be as
described in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book, which is incorporated in this
subsection as if set out herein in full.
(Ord. No. 3001-2006; Sec. 20-5305 repealed; new Sec. 20-5305 enacted; 01/17/06)
SEC. 20-5306.   RATES.
   (a)   Rates charged at parking meter devices shall be as follows:
   (1)   For those meters with maximum time limits of three (3) hours or less,
the rate shall be twenty (20) cents per hour;
   (2)   For those meters with maximum time limits greater than three (3)
hours, the rate shall be twelve and one-half (121/2) cents per hour.
SEC. 20-5307.   METER HOODS.
   (a)   Parking meter hoods may be issued by the accounts and finance officer
to individuals, firms or organizations for emergencies or other uses in the
public interest, as determined by the accounts and finance officer. Parking
meter hoods shall exempt the person renting them from charges and time limits
in any parking meter zone.
   (b)   The charge for a parking meter hood issued pursuant to this division
shall be two dollars ($2.00) per day. A day will be charged if a hood is
returned after 1:00 p.m., whether it was used for that day or not. The daily
charge imposed by this subsection may be waived by the accounts and finance
officer for good cause shown where a not-for-profit charitable organization is
making the request; provided, however, the deposit for the hood, key and
padlock required by subsection (c) shall be collected in every case.
   (c)   A five-dollar ($5.00) deposit shall be made for each hood, key and
padlock that is rented. The deposit shall be collected in advance and shall be
returned if the rented items are returned in good shape; provided, however, in
the event a hood, key and padlock is not returned or is damaged, the deposit
shall be retained by the City.
SEC. 20-5308.   USE OF PARKING METER FUNDS.
   The coins deposited in parking control devices shall be deposited in a fund
to be designated as the "motor vehicle parking system fund," which fund shall
be used to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation and control of
parking vehicles in parking meter zones and to cover the cost of the purchase,
supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operating, maintenance,
control and use of parking control devices; any funds not necessary or required
for such purposes shall be used to provide off-street parking facilities.
SEC. 20-5309.   VANDALISM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or
willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking control device
installed under the provisions of this division, unless authorized to do so by
the City Council.
ARTICLE VI. PEDESTRIANS
SEC. 20-6100.   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to such pedestrian, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
   (b)   Pedestrians shall be subject to official traffic and pedestrian-
control signals, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the
privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
SEC. 20-6101.   RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   (b)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
   (c)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections,
pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles.
SEC. 20-6102.   CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Pedestrian crossings at other than designated and marked crosswalks or
at intersections are prohibited.
   (b)   Notwithstanding other provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code or the
provisions of any City ordinance, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due
care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person operating a bicycle
or other device propelled by human power and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or intoxicated person.
(Ord. No. 3008-2021; Sec. 20-6102 repealed; Sec. 20-6102 enacted; 04/20/21)
SEC. 20-6103.   TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
SEC. 20-6104.   RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
(Ord. No. 3031-2010; Sec. 20-6104(b), (c) repealed; new Sec. 20-6104(b), (c),
(d) enacted; 07/201/10)
(Ord. No. 3009-2019; Sec. 20-6104, “SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS,” repealed in
its entirety; reserved for future use; 04/02/19)
SEC. 20-6105.   WALKING ON ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Any person walking along and upon any roadway shall keep on the left
of the roadway or on the left shoulder thereof, and upon meeting a vehicle
shall step off to the left.
   (b)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway except at a crosswalk.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian who is under influence of
intoxicating liquors to be upon any highway of the City.
SEC. 20-6106.   BLIND PEDESTRIANS.
   Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or
walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street or highway,
whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this Traffic Code to the contrary notwithstanding. The
driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying
such a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or
highway shall bring such vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall
take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person.
The provisions in this section shall not apply to a blind person who is not so
carrying such a cane or walking stick or who is not guided by a dog, but the
other provisions of this Traffic Code relating to pedestrians shall then be
applicable to such person; provided, however, the failure of a blind person to
so use or carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog
when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence
of contributory negligence.
SEC. 20-6107.   SKATEBOARDING, IN-LINE SKATING AND ROLLER-SKATING.
   (a)   Skateboarding, in-line skating and roller-skating shall be prohibited
on any roadway or in a bike lane of any roadway:
   (1)   Having a grade of six (6) percent or more;
   (2)   Where the volume or speed of the vehicular traffic or the width of the
roadway renders the roadway unsafe or unsuitable for skateboarding, in-line
skating or roller-skating;
   (3)   Bordering or adjacent to a bike path or sidewalk where skateboarding,
in-line skating or roller-skating is not prohibited; or
   (4)   In any portion of the City designated as a business district and
designated in
Appendix 12, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in
full.
   (b)   The public works director is authorized to designate and cause signs
to be erected prohibiting skateboarding, in-line skating and roller-skating on
roadways or bike lanes meeting the requirements of subparagraph (a)(1) or (2)
of this section. No signs shall be required for roadways or bike lanes meeting
the requirements of subparagraph (a) (3) or (4) of this section.
   (c)   Skateboarding, in-line skating and roller-skating shall be prohibited
upon any sidewalk in any portion of the City designated as a business district
and designated in
Appendix 12, which is incorporated in this section as if set out herein in
full. Skateboarding, in-line skating and roller-skating shall be permitted on
bike paths and all other sidewalks within the City.
   (d)   Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, skateboard operators, in-
line skaters and roller skate operators upon sidewalks and bike paths shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicular and to all other pedestrian (non-
skateboard, non-in-line skate or non-roller skate) traffic upon the sidewalk or
bike path.
   (e)   Skateboard operators, in-line skaters and roller skate operators on
roadways or bike lanes shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to non-skateboard, non-roller blade, and non-
roller skate pedestrians.
   (f)   Skateboard operators, in-line skaters and roller skate operators shall
wear protective coverings for their hands, knees, elbows, and heads when
operating a skateboard, in-line skates and/or roller skates and shall not
operate a skateboard and/or roller skates while barefoot.
   (g)   No more than one (1) person shall operate or ride on a skateboard at
one time.
(Ord. No. 98-7-7; §20-6107 repealed; new §20-6107 enacted; 07/28/98)
SEC. 20-6108.   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, a motorized skateboard is defined as
a board or other horizontal surface having attached thereto wheels, which
wheels are operated by some type of motor and steered by the use of the
individual standing on said board’s limbs.
   (b)   No person shall use, operate, or be in control of a motorized
skateboard on a public or private street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike path or
other area open to the public. Driving a motorized skateboard may be permitted
on private property with the permission of the property owner, or in other
areas where signs are posted permitting the motorized skateboard.
(Ord. No. 2000-09-05; new Sec. 21-6108 enacted; 09/19/00)
SEC. 20-6109.   IMPEDING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
No person shall completely or substantially impede the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic in, on, or around any sidewalk or public property, way, or
place. No person shall have the exclusive right to any sidewalk or public
property, way, or place, nor the right to establish a stationary location
therein without a license agreement, right-of-way permit, or other applicable
City approval.
(Ord. No. 3008-2021; Sec. 20-6109 enacted; 04/20/21)
ARTICLE VII. MOTOR VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-7100.   DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES.
   License plates shall be firmly affixed to all vehicles required to have
license plates and shall be kept clean, legible and undefaced.
SEC. 20-7101.   WINDSHIELD AND WINDOWS NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle in the City
with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's
clear view of the street.
DIVISION 2. EQUIPMENT
SEC. 20-7200.   BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle upon any
street in the City unless the vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient
brakes in good working condition, as required by the Illinois Vehicle Code, or
to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready
access to the mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicle.
SEC. 20-7201.   LIGHTS ON VEHICLES OTHER THAN MOTORCYCLES.
   When operated on any street in the City between sunset and sunrise or at any
other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use of lights for
safety, a motor vehicle other than a motorcycle shall display the following
lights:
   (1)   Head lamps. At least two (2) white lighted lamps, or lamps of a yellow
or amber tint, visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in the direction
that the vehicle is proceeding. Parking lamps may be used in addition to, but
not in lieu of, the lamps required by this subsection.
   (2)   Tail lamps. At least two (2) lighted lamps, commonly known as tail
lamps, which shall be mounted on the left rear and right rear of the vehicle so
as to throw a red light visible for five hundred (500) feet in the reverse
direction, except that a truck manufactured prior to January 1, 1968 need be
equipped with only one (1) tail lamp.
   (3)   Registration plate lamp. Either the tail lamps, as required by
subsection (2), or a separate lamp, shall be so constructed and placed as to
illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when required and
render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear.
SEC. 20-7202.   LIGHTS ON MOTORCYCLES.
   When operated on any street in the City at any time, a motorcycle shall
display the following lights:
   (1)   Head lamp. One (1) lighted lamp, showing a white light, commonly known
as a driving lamp or head lamp, visible for at least five hundred (500) feet in
the direction the motorcycle is proceeding. A parking lamp may be used in
addition to, but not in lieu of, a driving lamp or head lamp.
   (2)   Tail lamp. At least one (1) lighted lamp, commonly known as a tail
lamp, which shall be mounted on the rear of the motorcycle so as to throw a red
light visible at least five hundred (500) feet in the reverse direction.
   (3)   Registration plate lamp. Either the tail lamp, as required by
subsection (2), or a separate lamp, shall be so constructed and placed as to
illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when required and
render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet.
SEC. 20-7203.   USE OF HEAD LAMPS.
   (a)   Whenever the driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving
or head lamp or head lamps, is within five hundred (500) feet of another
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, such driver shall dim or drop
such head lamp or head lamps.
   (b)   The driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving or head
lamp or head lamps shall dim or drop such head lamp or head lamps when there is
another vehicle traveling in the same direction less than three hundred (300)
feet to the front of him.
SEC. 20-7204.   ADDITIONAL LAMPS ON CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   In addition to the lighting requirements established in this division, all
vehicles required by state law to have other lamps or lighting devices, shall
have such lamps or lighting devices while being operated on City streets.
SEC. 20-7205.   SPOT LAMPS AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LAMPS.
   The number, positioning, and use of spot lamps and auxiliary driving lamps
shall be in conformity with state law.
SEC. 20-7206.   MUFFLERS; PREVENTION OF NOISE.
   (a)   Each motor vehicle driven or operated in the City shall at all times
be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation
and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No person
shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will
amplify or increase the noise of the vehicle above that emitted by the muffler
originally installed on the vehicle.
   (b)   Any one of the following constitutes evidence of a prima facie
violation of this section:
   (1)   the use of a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor
vehicle;
   (2)   equipment marked with either “off road use” or “not for street use;”
   (3)   excessive revving and/or acceleration which can be heard at a distance
of at least two hundred feet (200’);
   (4)   the operation of a vehicle making excessive noise so as to be audible
at a distance of at least two hundred feet (200’) from the motor vehicle.
   (c)   Noise measurements, as set forth in Section
35-5409(d), are not required to establish a violation of this section. However,
noise measurements may be introduced as corroborating evidence when alleging a
violation of this section. If noise measurements are collected, manufacturer’s
instructions for the equipment used should be followed and Section
35-5409(d) may be, but is not required to be, used as guidance in gathering
data.
   (d)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.   
(Ord. No. 3023-2016; Sec. 20-7206 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 20-7206
enacted; 09/27/16)
SEC. 20-7207.   EMISSION OF SMOKE AND FUMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle which emits dense
smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of
persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.
SEC. 20-7208.   WINDSHIELD WIPER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to drive a motor vehicle that is not
equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the
windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled by the
driver of the vehicle, and shall be maintained in proper working order.
SEC. 20-7209.   WARNING DEVICES.
   (a)   Each motor vehicle, when operated on a street in the City, shall be
equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting a sound
audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred
(200) feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud
or harsh sound or whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably
necessary to insure safe operation, give audible warning with a horn, but shall
not otherwise use such horn upon a street.
   (b)   No vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle shall be quipped
with a siren, whistle or bell; provided, however, a siren, whistle or bell
shall not be used by an authorized emergency vehicle except when the vehicle is
operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law in either of which events, the driver
of the vehicle shall sound the siren, whistle or bell when necessary to warn
pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
SEC. 20-7210.   TIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on any street any motor
vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
SEC. 20-7211.   NONSKID DEVICES.
   Except for those types of devices permitted by state law, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon the streets equipped
with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion
thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
DIVISION 3. SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
SEC. 20-7300.   MAXIMUM WEIGHT.
   The maximum weight of any vehicle operated in the City shall be as
prescribed by state law, and where a special permit is required to operate a
vehicle of a certain weight over state highways, such a permit shall also be
required for the operation of the vehicle on City streets.
SEC. 20-7301.   MAXIMUM VEHICLE WIDTH.
   Except as expressly provided by state law, the maximum width of any vehicle
and its load shall not exceed eight (8) feet except for the following:
   (1)   Loads of unbaled hay or straw, or other similar farm products or
implements of husbandry being transported during the period from sunrise to
sunset;
   (2)   Portable buildings designed and used for livestock raising operations
which are being transported in conformity with 625 ILCS 5/15-102(b).
   (3)   Mirrors required by state law may project up to six (6) inches beyond
each side of a vehicle.
SEC. 20-7302.   PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle, nor
extending more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right
side thereof.
SEC. 20-7303.   LENGTH.
   The maximum length of vehicles and combinations of vehicles shall not exceed
that permitted by the Illinois Vehicle Code.
SEC. 20-7304.   PROJECTIONS BEYOND FRONT OF VEHICLE.
   No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three (3) feet in
front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle.
SEC. 20-7305.   WARNING DEVICES ON PROJECTING LOADS.
   Between the period of sunset to one (1) hour before sunrise, all vehicles
loaded with projecting materials must carry a red light at the extreme rear end
of the material and at all other hours, a red flag at least twelve (12) inches
by twelve (12) inches must be displayed.
DIVISION 4. ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
SEC. 20-7400.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Abandonment, abandoning and abandoned auto refers to any motor vehicle
or part thereof which a reasonable person would consider dumped, discarded or
abandoned under the circumstances.
   (2)   Antique vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle or other vehicle thirty
(30) years of age or older.
   (3)   Inoperable motor vehicle shall mean and refer to any motor vehicle
which cannot presently be operated on a street or highway of the City either
due to physical defects in the motor vehicle or due to legal prohibitions,
including, but not limited to, want of licenses, defective parts, absence of
required parts, etc.
   (4)   Lawfully occupied refers to premises occupied under a lease, contract,
license or other consent.
   (5)   Motor vehicle shall mean an auto, car, motorcycle, truck, truck
trailer, auto trailer, camper or any other vehicle for use on the streets or
highways, as well as any constituent part thereof.
SEC. 20-7401.   VEHICLES EXEMPT FROM THIS DIVISION.
   The requirements of this division shall not apply to:
   (1)   Vehicles specifically exempt from local licensing pursuant to the laws
of the United States or this state;
   (2)   Vehicles owned or operated by the City, provided that the vehicles are
so designated by the legend "City of Moline" lawfully painted on the sides of
the vehicle;
   (3)   Antique vehicles in operable condition.
SEC. 20-7402.   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall engage in any of the following acts:
   (1)   The abandonment of any motor vehicle on any street, highway, tollway,
expressway, alley or other public way within the City;
   (2)   The abandonment of any motor vehicle on any public property or on any
private property within the City;
   (3)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any street, highway,
tollway, expressway, alley or other public way (collectively “public way”)
within the City where the same constitutes a hazard or dangerous condition for
persons and property lawfully using the public way;
   (4)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any street, highway,
tollway, expressway, alley or other public way within the City for more than
ten (10) hours;
   (5)   The parking of any inoperable motor vehicle on any private property,
except property owned or lawfully occupied or on public property, without the
consent of the owner or lawful occupant for more than twenty-four (24) hours;
   (6)   The parking of any abandoned or inoperable motor vehicle on private
residentially zoned property for more than seven (7) days, if the vehicle is
open to the view of the public.
(Ord. No. 3005-2004; Sec. 20-7402 (6) repealed; new Sec. 20-7402 (6) enacted;
02/03/04)
SEC. 20-7403.   REMOVAL OF ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (a)   Public Property . Whenever any act prohibited by this division is
perpetrated on public property, thereby constituting a nuisance under this
Code, the police department shall have the right to authorize removal of the
vehicle concerned by causing the vehicle to be towed as follows:
   (1)   The police may remove a motor vehicle abandoned on any street,
highway, toll way, expressway, alley, other public way or public property
immediately upon a determination of abandonment by the police.
   (2)   The police may remove an inoperable motor vehicle from any street,
highway, toll way, expressway, alley, other public way or public property
within the City immediately upon a determination by the
police that said vehicle is inoperable, and that it constitutes a hazard or a
danger to persons and property lawfully using the street, highway, toll way,
expressway, alley, other public way or public property.
   (3)   The police may remove an inoperable motor vehicle from any street,
highway, toll way, expressway, alley, other public way or public property
within the City where the vehicle has been parked for more than ten (10) hours
and is apparently inoperable.
   (b)   Private property . Whenever any act prohibited by this division is
committed on private property, thereby constituting a nuisance under this Code,
the police shall have the right to authorize removal of the vehicle concerned,
by causing said vehicle to be towed. Before a vehicle can be towed from private
property, the police shall deliver or mail a notice to the registered owner and
to the lawful owner or occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located
and the police shall obtain a warrant for such removal. The notice shall notify
the recipient of an opportunity for a pre-tow hearing to determine whether the
vehicle is abandoned or inoperable and subject to removal from the property.
   (1)   Notice.
      a.   Notice shall be given personally to the owner or occupant of the
premises or, if the owner or occupant is not available, the notice shall be
left at the premises. The notice shall provide notice of intent to tow,
information regarding the opportunity for hearing, the earliest date upon which
the tow may occur if no hearing is requested, and the police department
address, contact name, and phone number.
      b.   Additionally, notice shall be given by placement of a sticker on the
vehicle which provides notice of intent to tow, information regarding the
opportunity for hearing, the earliest date upon which the tow may occur if no
hearing is requested, and the police department address, contact name, and
phone number.
      c.   If the vehicle is not removed within seven days from the date of the
original notice, notice shall be sent to the registered owner of the vehicle if
the registered owner of the vehicle does not reside at nor owns the premises
where the vehicle is located.
   (2)   Opportunity for hearing. The registered owner or lawful owner or
occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located shall have seven (7) days
from the notice’s mailing date or personal delivery to request a pre-tow
hearing in writing. If the recipient of the notice does not file a written
request for hearing within the seven (7) day period, any hearing rights under
this division will be deemed waived, and the vehicle will be towed from the
property. Hearings will be held through circuit court.
   (3)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within seven (7) days of the mailing or personal delivery of the
notice or longer upon request by the parties but no longer than thirty (30)
days.
   (4)   Request for pre-tow hearings. The registered owner or lawful owner or
occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located may request a pre-tow
hearing by submitting a written letter of request to the police department.
Upon receipt of the request, the person making the request will be provided a
hearing date and time by mail or in person, as the circumstance warrants.
   (5)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any nuisance citation issued pursuant to the vehicle. After
receiving all relevant evidence, the court shall make a written decision based
upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is
authorized by the laws of the state or this division, with a specific statute
or ordinance section cited therein. The registered owner or the lawful owner or
occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located will be provided a copy
of the pre-tow hearing decision.
   (6)   Decision to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing
and compliance with the provisions of this division, the court shall direct
that the vehicle be towed from the premises.
   (7)   Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the court shall direct that the vehicle not be
towed. The City shall furnish a copy of the decision to the registered owner or
the lawful owner or occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located with
the recommendation that said copy be placed inside the vehicle in a location
that is plainly visible from the outside. The City shall tow no vehicle about
which such a decision has been rendered unless the circumstances under which
the decision was rendered subsequently changes. If, pursuant to altered
circumstances, the City determines removal of the vehicle is necessary, it
shall follow the same procedures set forth in this section.
   (c)   Impoundment. Following impoundment of a motor vehicle pursuant to this
section, the registered owner or person responsible for abandoning the vehicle
or parking an inoperable vehicle in violation of this division shall be charged
with all towing, storage, advertising, disposal and related costs. In the event
such person cannot be located, the costs shall be paid by the City.
   (d)   Nuisance violation. Within ninety-six (96) hours of having a vehicle
towed pursuant to this section, the officer initiating the tow shall cause a
complaint to be filed charging the registered owner thereof with a violation of
this Code, and the registered owner shall be responsible for said violation in
all cases except when, and only when, a stolen vehicle report has been filed
with an authorized law enforcement agency prior to the tow.
(Ord. No. 2003-11-03; Sec. 20-7403 repealed; new Sec. 20-7403 enacted; 10/28/
03)
SEC. 20-7404.   APPLICATION TO COURT FOR WARRANT TO REMOVE.
   (a)   In order to tow a vehicle from private property, the police shall
apply to the circuit court for a determination that a vehicle has been
abandoned or is inoperative and request the circuit court to issue a warrant to
remove the vehicle. The police may also request a warrant to remove a vehicle
from public property in lieu of making the determination to tow themselves.
   (b)   The proceeding held pursuant to subsection (a) shall be an in rem
proceeding against the vehicle.
   (c)   The application to the court shall be verified and shall state facts
sufficient to allow the court to make a determination that there is probable
cause to consider the vehicle abandoned or inoperative, and that the vehicle is
parked in violation of this division.
   (d)   In the proceedings under this section, the sole questions before the
court shall be whether there is probable cause to believe the vehicle is
abandoned or inoperable and whether the vehicle is parked in violation of this
division.
   (e)   If the court enters an order finding that there is probable cause to
believe the vehicle is abandoned or inoperable and that this division is being
violated, a warrant to remove the vehicle shall issue and the police shall
thereafter proceed in accordance with this division as regards towing.
(Ord. No. 2003-11-03; Sec. 20-7404 repealed; new Sec. 20-7404 enacted; 10/28/
03)
SEC. 20-7405.   REPORTS ON TOWED VEHICLES.
   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away
pursuant to this division, the police department shall keep and maintain a
record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, the year of manufacture, the
manufacturer's trade name, the manufacturer's series name, the body style, the
vehicle identification number and the license plate year and number displayed
on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of the tow, the
location towed from, the location towed to, the reason for the towing and the
name of the officer authorizing the tow.
SEC. 20-7406.   RECORD SEARCHES.
   (a)   When the police department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
   (b)   The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
state police to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for
stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the state police files are
searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police. The
information determined from these record searches will be used by the police
department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally
entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be
made and setting forth public sale information.
SEC. 20-7407.   IDENTIFYING AND TRACING VEHICLE OWNERSHIP BY STATE POLICE.
   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession
of a motor vehicle or other vehicle impounded pursuant to this division cannot
be identified from the registration files of this state or from the
registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department
shall notify the state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The
information obtained by the state police will be immediately forwarded to the
law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of the
owner.
SEC. 20-7408.   RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES.
   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided in this division, the owner or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police
department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
SEC. 20-7409.   DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or
other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided in this
division, the police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it
to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place
of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days
prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a
notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner or other person known by the police department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
   (b)   In those instances where the certified notification specified herein
has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to the
addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the
registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required.
SEC. 20-7410.   DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE WITHOUT NOTICE.
   (a)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven
(7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in
this division, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the
manner authorized by this division without notice to the registered owner or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
   (b)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is
impounded as specified by this division, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the U. S. mail, public service or in
person for a determination of disposition and, an examination of the state
police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
SEC. 20-7411.   POLICE REPORT AFTER VEHICLE IS     RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED OF.
   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police
department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this division, a report of the transaction will be maintained by
the police department for a period of one (1) year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
SEC. 20-7412.   DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the City is authorized
to be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this
division, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the City treasury.
SEC. 20-7413.   LIABILITY.
   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or legal representative, or any other person
legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the
vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this division.
DIVISION 5. TRUCK, BUS AND TRAILER REGULATIONS
SEC. 20-7500.   DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   The definition of words and phrases used in this division shall be those
used in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., except when
another definition is set forth in this division, and shall apply only within
this division.
   (1)   Highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-126).
   (2)   House trailer shall mean (a) a trailer or semi-trailer equipped and
used for living quarters for human habitation (temporarily or permanently)
rather than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise; or
(b) a house trailer or semi-trailer which is used commercially (temporarily or
permanently), that is, for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of
merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose except
transportation for hire or for the transportation of property for distribution
by a private carrier.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-128).
   (3)   Owner shall mean a person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or in
the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or
lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions
stated in the agreement with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-169).
   (4)   Person shall mean every natural person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-159).
   (5)   Public property shall mean property owned by the municipality
including but not limited to unimproved street or alley right-of-ways, parks,
playgrounds, parking lots, drainage ditches, bicycle paths, levies, and public
building grounds and parking lots.
   (6)   Road tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon
either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(State law reference- 625 ILCS 5/1-178).
   (7)   Special mobile equipment shall mean every vehicle not designed or
primarily used for transportation of persons or property and only incidentally
operated or moved over a highway, including but not limited to: street
sweepers, ditch digging apparatus, well boring apparatus and road construction
and maintenance equipment such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket
loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditchers, leveling graders,
finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earthmoving
carryalls and scrapers, power shovels and drag lines, and self-propelled cranes
and earth moving equipment.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-191).
   (8)   Trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power in operation,
other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight
and that of its load rests or is carried by another vehicle.
(State law reference-625 ILCS 5/1-209).
   (9)   Vehicle shall be as defined in Sec.
20-1101 (27)(b) of the Code.
SEC. 20-7501.   PARKING OF TRUCKS AND OTHER VEHICLES ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle (Second
Division), truck tractor, bus, trailer, house trailer, recreational vehicle,
special mobile equipment, boat, or airplane within any alley, highway, street,
right-of-way or public property located with the City.
   (b)   Every vehicle, trailer, boat or airplane parked in violation of this
section is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by any police
officer by removing and impounding such vehicle.
SEC. 20-7502.   EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION OF PARKING TRUCKS AND OTHER VEHICLES
ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The prohibitions in this division shall not apply:
   (a)   In case of emergency situations or vehicle breakdowns; provided,
however, the disabled vehicle shall be moved within forty-eight (48) hours;
   (b)   When the vehicle is actively engaged in deliveries, lawn maintenance,
construction or other trade activity upon property immediately abutting the
parked vehicle. However, at all times, the roadway shall be left free for the
passage of other vehicles, traffic control signs and signals not obstructed,
and sight lines at intersections shall not be obstructed;
   (c)   In a commercial or industrial area for a period of not more than 60
minutes when the operator is on meal or break;
   (d)   To all noncommercial pickup trucks and commercial pickup trucks, with
a manufacturer's rated load capacity not exceeding one ton in weight.
SEC. 20-7503.   PENALTY.
   Penalty for violation of any part of this division shall be as provided for
in Sec.
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 98-10-4; Article VII amended by adding new Division 5; 10/27/98)
DIVISION 6. FLEEING VEHICLES
SEC. 20-7600.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (a)   Impound or Impoundment shall mean either impoundment by immobilization
or by towing as hereinafter described.
   (1)   Impoundment by immobilization shall be accomplished by the attachment
of any mechanical device, such as a “Denver Boot,” consisting of clamps or jaws
and a locking device, which, when attached to the wheel of a vehicle, prevents
the vehicle from being driven. If the vehicle that has been impounded by
immobilization has not been reclaimed within twenty-four (24) hours, the
immobilization device may be released and the vehicle may be impounded by
towing.
   (2)   Impoundment by towing shall be accomplished by removing and conveying
such vehicle or by causing such vehicle to be removed and conveyed to a vehicle
pound. A vehicle pound is hereby declared to be any suitable place designated
by the City as a vehicle pound.
   (b)   Flee or Elude shall have the meaning provided by the Illinois Criminal
Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-204 et seq.
SEC. 20-7601.   AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND FLEEING VEHICLES.
   A motor vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee or elude police
officers shall be subject to impoundment under the procedures of this section.
SEC. 20-7602.   POLICE REPORTS ON FLEEING VEHICLES.
   (a)   A police officer shall, if possible, record the vehicle make and color
and the issuing state and number of the license plate of a vehicle that the
officer has attempted to stop through use of the emergency signal equipment on
the officer’s vehicle. If the operator of the other vehicle fails or refuses to
stop, and if the police officer foregoes or abandons pursuit of the other
vehicle for reasons of public safety, the officer shall report the recorded
information as directed by the Chief of Police for delivery to appropriate
sections of the police department and the Public Works Department responsible
for impoundment and towing of vehicles.
   (b)   The police officer’s report shall also include: the date, approximate
time and approximate location of the attempted stop; the reason for the
attempted stop; the emergency signal equipment activated by the police
officers; the public safety considerations and/or department rule, regulation
or policy that caused the police officer to forego or abandon pursuit of the
described vehicle.
SEC. 20-7603.   NOTICE OF INTENT TO IMPOUND.
   The police department shall send a notice of intent to impound the vehicle
described in the police officer’s report to the owner of record of the vehicle.
The notice shall be sent either by first class mail or by messenger to the
address of the owner of record as indicated in state registration records. The
notice shall include the following: a statement that the operator of the
vehicle failed or refused to stop when ordered to do so by Moline Police
Officer; the date, approximate time and approximate location of the event; the
description of the vehicle as contained in the officer’s report; and notice of
an opportunity to contest eligibility for impoundment. A copy of the notice
shall be forwarded to the City Code Hearing Officer. A notice is presumed
delivered upon being deposited with the United States Postal Service with
property postage affixed.
SEC. 20-7604.   CONTESTING IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   An owner of record who receives a notice pursuant to Sec.
20-7603 may contest eligibility for impoundment by written request delivered to
the City Code Hearing Officer, postmarked within 14 days after the delivery of
the notice. The City Code Hearing Officer shall set a date for a hearing on the
eligibility of the vehicle for impoundment, and shall notify the owner of the
date, time and place of hearing. The hearing date must be no more than 30 days
after the request has been filed. At the hearing, the police officer’s report
shall be considered prima facie correct. In order to disprove the vehicle’s
eligibility for impoundment, the owner of record must prove that (1) at the
time and date of the attempted stop as described in the police officer’s
report, the described vehicle was not operated with the City of Moline; or (2)
at the time and date of the attempted stop, the vehicle had been reported
stolen; or (3) the license information described in the report does not match
the listed make of the described vehicle. If the owner of record prevails, the
notice of intent to impound the owner’s vehicle shall be withdrawn and the
vehicle shall not be eligible for impoundment under this section.
   (b)   If the vehicle owner receives a notice pursuant to Sec.
20-7603 and (1) fails to contest eligibility under Sec.
20-7604 (a) or (2) does not prevail in the contest of eligibility, the vehicle
described in the notice shall be eligible for impoundment if found on the
public way or within a parking lot under city ordinance control or parking lot
open to the general public or in a parking lot or on the public way of another
City with whom the City has an Intergovernmental Agreement to provide
assistance in conjunction with an incident involving multi-jurisdictional
problems within twelve (12) months following the conclusion of the contest, if
a contest was requested or following the last date to request a contest if none
was requested.
SEC. 20-7605.   PENALTY.
   The owner of a vehicle impounded under this section shall be subject to an
administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the cost of
towing and storage of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 2000-09-04; new Article VII, Div. 6 “FLEEING VEHICLES” enacted; 09/
12/00)
DIVISION 7. NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES
SEC. 20-7700.   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Except as expressly authorized in this division, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any street located
within the City.
SEC. 20-7701.   REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION.
   A person may operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any public street
located within the City in accordance with all of the following rules and
conditions:
   (1)   It shall be lawful for any person who holds a valid State of Illinois
driver’s license issued in his or her name by the Secretary of State to operate
a neighborhood electric vehicle on any street within the City.
   (2)   Any person operating a neighborhood electric vehicle shall comply with
the applicable requirements of Section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
625 ILCS 5/100 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the Illinois Vehicle Code,
and all applicable requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   Maximum Speed Limit. No person shall operate a neighborhood electric
vehicle on any public street in the City having a posted speed limit greater
than thirty-five (35) miles per hour, provided that nothing herein shall
prohibit a person from driving a neighborhood electric vehicle across a street
with a posted speed limit greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
   (4)   Equipment. No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on
any public street within the City unless it is equipped with the following, at
a minimum: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a “slow moving” emblem (as
required of other vehicles in Section
12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code) on the rear of the neighborhood electric
vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible from at least one hundred
(100) feet from the rear, a brake light, and turn signals. When operated on a
public street within the City, a neighborhood electric vehicle shall have its
headlight and tail lamps lighted as required by Section
12-201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
SEC. 20-7702.   PENALTY.
   Penalty for violation of any part of this division shall be as provided for
in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/100 et seq. and Section
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 3049-2008; new Division 7 enacted; 11/18/08)
ARTICLE VIII. BICYCLES
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 20-8100.   CONFORMITY WITH GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES.
   Each person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public
highway in the City shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable
thereto and shall turn only at intersections, shall signal for all turns, shall
ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, shall pass to the left
when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals that are moving slower, and
shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.
SEC. 20-8101.   MAXIMUM SPEED.
   It shall be unlawful for any bicycle to be ridden faster than is reasonable
and proper, but each bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the
safety of the operator and any person upon the streets and other public
highways of the City.
SEC. 20-8102.   MAXIMUM LOAD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle on a street
or other public highway of the City with another person riding thereon, unless
the bicycle is a tandem, in which case not more than two (2) persons shall ride
thereon at one time. A tandem is to include a bicycle with a small seat,
securely attached, and suitable for infants. The bicycle will be operated by an
adult or otherwise competent person.
SEC. 20-8103.   OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and traffic-control
signals and stop at all stop signs.
SEC. 20-8104.   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk within the central business
district, unless such sidewalk is designated a part of the City’s official bike
path and signed for such purpose. On a sidewalk designated and signed as a part
of the City’s official bike path, and in any residential district, a cyclist
must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on the sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 3074-2004; Sec. 20-8104 repealed; new Sec. 20-8104 enacted; 09/14/04)
SEC. 20-8105.   LIGHTS AND REFLECTORS.
   (a)   No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway of
the City after sunset and before sunrise without a headlight visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less than five
hundred (500) feet, indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly
attached to such bicycle and properly lighted, or without a yellow or red light
and reflector attached to each pedal and visible from two hundred (200) feet
from the rear thereof. Said headlight shall give a clear, white light. The
pedal reflectors shall be installed when replacing equipment after July 1,
1973, and shall be original equipment on all bicycles sold after July 1, 1973.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a bicycle without the
following reflectors:
   (1)   Rear. A red rear reflector must be displayed upon the rear of every
bicycle.
   (2)   Front; A clear reflex reflector must be displayed upon the front of
every bicycle that is sold after July 1, 1973.
   Such reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle from a
distance of five hundred (500) feet, and shall be red to the rear of the center
of the bicycle and amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. This also
applies to all bicycles sold after July 1, 1973.
   All reflectors shall be of the type approved by the Secretary of the State
of Illinois.
SEC. 20-8106.   BRAKES.
   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator
to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
SEC. 20-8107.   BICYCLES NOT TO BE RIDDEN MORE THAN TWO ABREAST.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle upon any
street or other public highway in the City abreast of more than one (1) other
person riding or propelling a bicycle.
SEC. 20-8108.   TAMPERING WITH THE BICYCLE OF ANOTHER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any bicycle, its serial
number or the lock or registration plates thereon, or to move a bicycle from
any place where it was lawfully placed by the owner or operator thereof,
without lawful authority.
SEC. 20-8109.   OPERATION WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle without the
consent of the registered owner thereof.
SEC. 20-8110.   ATTACHING TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle upon any street or
alley to cling to, attach to, or attach such bicycle to any motor vehicle or
wagon.
SEC. 20-8111.   PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any provision of this
article.
DIVISION 2. BICYCLES-BICYCLE SALES-REGISTRATION
SEC. 20-8200.   BICYCLE DEALER'S LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful to deal in sales of three (3) or more bicycles within
any calendar year without a bicycle dealer's license. "Bicycle," for the
purpose of this ordinance, shall be limited to any bicycle twenty inches (20")
or more in size.
SEC. 20-8201.   LICENSE PROCEDURE.
   (a)   License application. The application for a license hereunder shall be
made in writing to the accounts and finance office on a form provided. Licenses
are non-transferable.
   (b)   License fee. There shall be no fee for a bicycle dealer's license and
the license shall remain in effect from the date of issue until the business is
closed, sold, or ownership is transferred.
SEC. 20-8202.   MANDATORY REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES.
   (a)   It shall be mandatory for all bicycle dealers dealing in the retail
sale of bicycles within the City of Moline, to register all bicycles at the
time of sale. The registration forms and bicycle license plates shall be made
available to the businesses at no cost through the police department. The
completed registration forms shall be picked up twice a month by a member of
the police department. It shall be the responsibility of the business owner
and/or manager to notify the police department if they are in need of
additional registration forms and/or license plates.
   (b).   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this ordinance relating to bicycle dealer's license and procedures shall be
subject to a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than
Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00).
SEC. 20-8203.   OPERATION OF A BICYCLE WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   No person who resides within this City shall ride or propel a bicycle on any
street, highway, road, etc. or upon any public way set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is
attached thereto as provided herein. Should any bicycle be purchased outside
the corporate limits of the City of Moline or sold within the City and not
processed for a license plate as set forth above, the bicycle shall be licensed
through the procedure set forth below:
   (1)   Registration Agency: Applications for registration should be issued by
the police department.
   (2)   Application Form: The application for a bicycle license shall be on a
form provided by the City.
   (3)   Proof of Ownership: The chief of police, or an officer assigned such
responsibility, shall refuse to issue a license where such officer has reason
to believe the applicant is not the owner of, or entitled to possession of, the
bicycle.
   (4)   Inspection: The chief of police, or an officer assigned such
responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall
refuse a license for any bicycle which such officer determines is in unsafe
mechanical condition.
   (5)   Registration Plate or Tag: Upon issuing a bicycle license, the police
department must also issue a plate or tag, which shall be firmly attached to
the bicycle in a manner as to be plainly visible from the rear.
   (6)   Records: The police department shall keep a record of the number of
each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a
record of all bicycle license fees collected by it.
   (7)   Duration-Transfer of Ownership: Renewal: A bicycle license shall
remain valid as long as the bicycle remains the property of the initial owner.
If sold, traded, given away, etc., the new owner shall re-register the bicycle
in said new owner's name.
   (8)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section
20-8203 shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the event a person
accused of violating this section does not wish to contest the allegation prior
to the time that complaint is issued for said violation, said person may pay to
the City at the Moline accounts and finance office a penalty in the sum of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation. In the
event a person is found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section
20-8203 a second or more time, he or she shall be fined in an amount equal the
minimal fine.
(Ord. No. 97-8-7; Chapter 20, Div. 2 repealed; new Div. 2 enacted; 09/02/97)
APPENDIX 1. TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS
As provided in this Traffic Code, traffic-control signals shall be installed
and maintained at the following intersections in the City:
   First Street A at Nineteenth Avenue.
   Fourth Street at Fifth Avenue.
   Seventh Street at Nineteenth Avenue.
   Seventh Street at Thirty-second Avenue.
   Seventh Street at John Deere Road.
   Tenth Street at Fifth Avenue.
   Tenth Street at Sixteenth Avenue, South branch.
   Twelfth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street at River Drive.
   Fifteenth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street at Seventh Avenue/Eighth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street at Sixteenth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street Place at Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Sixteenth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Seventh Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Nineteenth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Thirty-sixth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Thirty-ninth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at John Deere Road.
   Sixteenth Street at Forty-fourth Avenue Drive.
   Sixteenth Street at Forty-sixth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Forty-seventh Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street at Fifty-second Avenue
   Seventeenth Street at River Drive.
   Seventeenth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street at Seventh Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street at Seventh Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street at River Drive.
   Nineteenth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street at Seventh Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street at Twelfth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street, northbound, at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street, southbound, at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street, southbound, at Twenty-sixth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street, northbound, at Twenty-seventh Avenue/Twenty-fifth Avenue
B.
   FAI Seventy-four at River Drive.
   FAI Seventy-four at Seventh Avenue.
   FAI Seventy-four at Sixty-ninth Avenue.
   Twenty-third Street at River Drive.
   Twenty-third Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Twenty-third Street at Sixth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Twelfth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Thirty-six Avenue/Thirty-eighth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at North Mall Entrance.
   Twenty-seventh Street at South Mall Entrance.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Fifty-second Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Sixty-ninth Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street A at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street (U.S. Route 150) at Sixty-ninth Avenue (U.S. Route 6).
   Thirty-sixth Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-eighty Street at John Deere Road.
   Forty-first Street at Fourth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at Twelfth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at Twenty-sixth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at Thirty-second Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at Thirty-eighth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street at John Deere Road.
   Forty-second Street Drive at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street at Twelfth Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street at John Deere Road.
   Sixtieth Street at John Deere Road.
   Seventieth Street at Thirty-fourth Avenue.
   Seventieth Street at John Deere Road.
(Ord. No. 3046-2022; 11/29/2022)
APPENDIX 2. LEFT TURN RESTRICTION INTERSECTION
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for vehicles to make a
left turn at any intersection with a “No Left Turn” sign posted, or at any
intersection with a signal device which has a left turn green arrow and is
posted “Left Turn on Green Arrow Only,” except during the time said arrow is
lighted or as otherwise directed by a police officer:
16 Street at 36 Avenue             Northbound turning westbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
19 Street southbound and 23 Avenue Westbound turning southbound
19 Street at 7 Avenue              Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
FAI 74 at 3 Avenue                 Westbound turning southbound
27 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
27 Street at 36 Avenue             Northbound turning westbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Eastbound turning northbound
34 Street at 4 Avenue              Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
34 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
34 Street at 25 Avenue             Westbound turning northbound
From 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.         
36 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
37 Street at 23 Avenue.            Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
38 Street at John Deere Road       Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
41 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
41 Street at John Deere Road       Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
42 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
48 Street and 23 Avenue            Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
53 Street at 23 Avenue             Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
53 Street at John Deere Road       Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
                                  Southbound turning eastbound
                                  Northbound turning westbound
60 Street at John Deere Road       Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
70 Street at John Deere Road       Eastbound turning northbound
                                  Westbound turning southbound
 
(Ord. No. 3017-2018; 4/17/18)
APPENDIX 2A. RIGHT TURNS ONLY
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for vehicles to make a
left turn or to proceed forward at any intersection with a “Right Turn Only”
sign posted, or at any intersection with a signal device and posted “Right Turn
Only,” except during a time as otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Ord No. 3004-2016; new Appendix 2A enacted; 03/22/16)
 
7 Street at 32 Avenue  Westbound turning northbound
                       On school days when children are present
                       (Ord. No. 3006-2016; enacted 03/22/16)
41 Street at 16 Avenue Westbound turning northbound
                       On school days when children are present
                       (Ord. No. 3018-2018; enacted 04/17/18)
 
APPENDIX 3. PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SIGNALS
As provided in this Traffic Code, pedestrian crossing signals shall be erected
and maintained at the following places:
   Midblock on River Drive between Fourth and Fifth Streets extended.
   Midblock on Fourth Avenue between Third and Fourth Streets.
   Midblock on River Drive between Eighth and Ninth Streets extended.
   Midblock on River Drive 450 feet west of the 34th Street intersection.
   Midblock on Fourth Avenue between Tenth and Eleventh Streets.
   Midblock on River Drive, 935 feet east of Twenty-fifth Street.
   Midblock on River Drive on the west side of the intersection of Forty-first
Street.
   Midblock on Sixteenth Avenue between Thirteenth and Fourteenth Streets.
   Midblock on Sixteenth Street between Sixteenth and Seventeenth Avenues.
   Midblock on Thirty-fourth Avenue, 1000 feet west of the Seventieth Street
intersection.
   Midblock on Thirty-fourth Avenue, 1080 feet west of Seventh Street (East
Moline).
   Midblock on Fifty-third Street, 175 feet north of Nineteenth Avenue.
   Midblock on Fifty-third Street, 200 feet north of Thirty-sixth Avenue Court.
   Midblock on Forty-eigth Street, 675 feet south of Twelfth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street at Sixteenth Avenue.
   Midblock on Forty-first Street between Fifteenth and Sixteenth Avenues. This
page intentionally left blank
(Ord. No. 3027-2020; 9/22/20; Ord. No. 3031-2022; 10/18/22)
APPENDIX 4. THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS
As provided in this Traffic Code, all vehicles shall stop upon approaching the
intersections of the following streets and avenues:
   Seventh Street and Twelfth Avenue.
   Twelfth Avenue and Tenth Street, except southbound traffic.
   Twelfth Avenue and Twelfth Street, except southbound traffic.
   Seventeenth Avenue and Fifteenth Street.
   Eighteenth Street and Second Avenue, except westbound traffic
   Twenty-fifth Avenue and Eighteenth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Street and Thirty-sixth Avenue Frontage Road, except south-
bound traffic.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue and Twenty-ninth Street.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue and Thirtieth Street.
   Twenty-seventh Street and Twenty-fourth Avenue, all way.
   Twenty-seventh Street and Twenty-fifth Avenue, all way.
   Thirtieth Avenue and Fifty-sixth Street.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue and Eightieth Street.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue and Fourteenth Street.
   Thirty-sixth Avenue Frontage Road and Turnstyle Northwest Exit.
   Thirty-seventh Avenue and Thirty-fifth Street.
   Fifty-third Street and Forty-seventh Avenue, all way.
   Valley View Drive – west of Seventh Street.
(Ord. No. 3009-2022; 5/24/22; Ord. No. 3005-2025; 2/4/25)
APPENDIX 5. ALL-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS
As provided in this Traffic Code, all vehicles shall be stopped when
approaching the following intersections from any direction:
   Third Street and Twenty-Third Avenue.
   Fourth Street and Twenty-Eighth Avenue.
   Fifth Avenue and Thirteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue and Fourteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue and Fifteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue and Sixteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue and Seventeenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue and Eighteenth Street.
   Fifth Street and Eighteenth Avenue.
   Fifth Street and Twenty-third Avenue.
   Seventh Street and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Seventh Street at Eighteenth Avenue.
   Seventh Street and Fifty-second Avenue.
   Eighth Avenue and Thirty-sixth Street.
   Ninth Street and Twenty-fourth Avenue.
   Ninth Street and Thirty-first Avenue.
   Ninth Street and Thirty-second Avenue.
   Eleventh Avenue and Twenty-ninth Street.
   Twelfth Avenue and Thirty-fourth Street.
   Twelfth Avenue and Forty-eighth Street A.
   Twelfth Street and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street and Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street and Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street and Twenty-fifth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street and Twelfth Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street and Second Avenue.
   Nineteenth Avenue and Twelfth Street.
   Twenty-first Avenue and Fifteenth Street A.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue and Fourteenth Street.
   Twenty-ninth Street and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street and Twenty-fourth Avenue.
   Thirty-second Street and Eighteenth Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue and Fifty-third Street.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue and Sixtieth Street.
   Thirty-ninth Avenue and Twenty-sixth Street.
   Thirty-ninth Street and Fifth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street and Forty-ninth Avenue.
   Forth-third Street and Fifth Avenue, north and south branches.
   Forty-eighth Street and Fifth Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street and Eleventh Avenue C.
   Fifty-third Street and Fifth Avenue, south branch.
   Eighteenth Street and Fifth Avenue.
(Ord. No. 3012-2022; 6/28/22; Ord. No. 3013-2022; 6/28/22; Ord. No. 3046-2022;
11/29/2022; Ord. No. 3001-2025; 1/7/25; Ord. No. 3005-2025; 1/21/25; Ord. No.
3050-2025; 10/21/25)
APPENDIX 6. YIELD INTERSECTIONS
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following intersections are hereby
designated yield-right-of-way intersections, and preference shall be given to
the designated thoroughfare:
   Second Avenue to have preference over Thirty-fifth Street.
   Second Street Court to have preference over Thirty-third Avenue.
   Third Street to have preference over Railroad Avenue.
   Third Street to have preference over Twenty-fourth Avenue.
   Third Street to have preference over Thirty-first Avenue.
   Fourth Street to have preference over Thirtieth Avenue.
   Sixth Street to have preference over Railroad Avenue.
   Seventh Street to have preference over Fifth Avenue.
   Fifth Avenue to have preference over Twenty-sixth Street
   Tenth Avenue to have preference over Thirty-ninth Street Court.
   Tenth Avenue to have preference over Fortieth Street Court.
   Eleventh Avenue to have preference over Thirty-eighth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue to have preference over Thirty-ninth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A to have preference over Twenty-second Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A to have preference over Twenty-third Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A to have preference over Twenty-fourth Street, both
branches.
   Eleventh Street to have preference over Thirteenth Avenue.
   Eleventh Street to have preference over Fourteenth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Avenue to have preference over Seventeenth Street.
   Thirteenth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street to have preference over Fourteenth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street to have preference over Eighteenth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street to have preference over Thirteenth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street to have preference over Fourteenth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street to have preference over Eighteenth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street to have preference over Twentieth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Avenue to have preference over Seventeenth Street.
   Fifteenth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street.
   Fifteenth Avenue to have preference over Thirty-second Street B.
   Sixteenth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street A.
   Seventeenth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street.
   Seventeenth Street to have preference over Fourth Avenue A.
   Seventeenth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue.
   Eighteenth Avenue to have preference over Eleventh Street.
   Eighteenth Street to have preference over Twenty-fourth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street to have preference over Twenty-fifth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street to have preference over westbound Twenty-sixth Avenue.   
   Eighteenth Street B to have preference over Twenty-second Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street C to have preference over Twenty-second Avenue.
   Nineteenth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street A.
   Twentieth Avenue to have preference over Fifteenth Street A.
   Twentieth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street C.
   Twenty-first Avenue to have preference over Forty-eighth Street.
   Twenty-third Street to have preference over Fourth Avenue.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue to have preference over Thirteenth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue to have preference over Fourteenth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue to have preference over Sixth Street
   Twenty-fourth Street Place to have preference over Twenty-fifth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue to have preference over Tenth Street Place.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue to have preference over Thirteenth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue to have preference over Fourteenth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue to have preference over Twenty-eighth Street.
   Twenty-seventh Avenue to have preference over Thirty-fifth Street.
   Twenty-eighth Avenue to have preference over Seventeenth Street.
   Twenty-eighth Avenue to have preference over Eighteenth Street A.
   Twenty-eighth Avenue to have preference over Twenty-eighth Avenue Place.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue A.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue B.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over Eleventh Avenue C.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over Thirteenth Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street to have preference over frontage road.
   Thirtieth Avenue to have preference over Fifteenth Street.
   Thirtieth Avenue to have preference over Fifteenth Street A.
   Thirty-second Avenue to have preference over Fourth Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue to have preference over Sixth Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue to have preference over Thirtieth Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue to have preference over Fifty-third Street B.
   Thirty-second Street to have preference over Fifteenth Avenue.
   Thirty-third Street to have preference over Sixteenth Avenue.
   Thirty-third Avenue to have preference over Second Street Court.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue to have preference over Fourteenth Street.
   Thirty-sixth Street to have preference over Twenty-second Avenue.
   Thirty-eights Street to have preference over Tenth Avenue Place.
   Forty-third Avenue to have preference over Forty-ninth Street.
   Fifty-fourth Street to have preference over Third Avenue.
   Railroad Avenue to have preference over 5th Street.
(Ord. No. 3024-2020; 9/1/20)
APPENDIX 7. ONE-WAY STREETS
As provided in this Traffic Code, there shall be one-way traffic only on the
avenues, streets or in the alleys in the directions indicated and described:
NORTHBOUND
   Fourth Street, from Fourth Avenue to Railroad Avenue.
   An alley east of Tenth Street, between Sixth Avenue and Eleventh Avenue.
   An alley bounded by Tenth Street and Eleventh Street and Sixteenth and
Fourteenth Avenue.
   An alley east of Fifteenth Street, from Tenth Avenue to Eighth Avenue.
An alley east of Sixteenth Street, between Ninth Avenue and Eighth Avenue.
(Ord. No. 3025- 2020; 9/1/20)
   Eleventh Street, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Eleventh Street from Fourteenth Avenue to Sixteenth Avenue.
   Eleventh Street from Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-second Avenue, for the
hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days.
   Thirteenth Street, from Eleventh Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, from Tenth Avenue to Eighth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, from Thirteenth Avenue to Twelfth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, between Nineteenth Avenue and Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Twenty-seventh Street, from Sixth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
   The alley immediately east of Twenty-fifth Street, from Ninth Avenue to
Seventh Avenue.
   The alley east of Forty-sixth Street, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth
Avenue.
   Fifty-first Street east of drainage ditch, Forty-seventh Avenue to Forty-
fourth Avenue.
EASTBOUND
An alley between Fifteenth Street Place and Sixteenth Street, and Seventeenth
Avenue and Eighteenth Avenue A. (Ord. No. 3014-2022; 6/28/22)
   The alley east of Fifth Street, between Fifteenth and Sixteenth Avenue.
   The alley going east between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue, from Sixteenth
Street to Seventeenth Street.
   The alley going east between Sixteenth Street and Seventeenth Street and
between Fifth Avenue and Sixth Avenue.
   The alley south of the Avenue of the Cities, between Eighteenth Street and
Sixteenth Street.
   The alley south of Twenty-third Avenue, between Thirty-first Street and
Thirty-first Street A.
   Fourth Avenue A, from Seventeenth Street to Eighteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, from First Street to Eleventh Street.
   Fifth Avenue, from a point 300 feet east of Twenty-seventh Street to Thirty-
fourth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, from Thirty-fourth street to Thirty-fifth Street.
   Fifth Avenue Place, from Sixth Street to Seventh Street.
   Fifth Avenue Place, from Eleventh Street to Twelfth Street.
   Fifth Avenue Place, from Twenty-seventh Street to a point 300 feet east of
Twenty-seventh Street.
   Sixth Avenue, from Eleventh Street to Twenty-seventh Street.
   Eighth Avenue, between Fifteenth Street and Fifteenth Street B.
   Sixteenth Avenue, between Fifteenth Street and Sixteenth Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, between Twenty-Fifth Street and Twenty-Seventh Street,
traveling eastbound for the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:
30 p.m. on school days.
   Seventeenth Avenue, from Seventh Street to Ninth Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue A, from Seventh Street to Eighth Street.
   Twenty-second Avenue, from Eleventh to Twelfth Streets, for the hours of 7:
30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days.
SOUTHBOUND
   Tenth Street, from Fourteenth Avenue to Sixteenth Avenue, traveling
southbound for the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
on school days.
   Fifteenth Street, from Sixteenth Avenue to Nineteenth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, from Eleventh Avenue to Twelfth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.
   Eighteenth Street, from Twelfth Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street, between Nineteenth Street northbound and Nineteenth
Street southbound.
   Fifty-first Street, west of drainage ditch, from Forty-fourth Avenue to
Forty-seventh Avenue.
   Fifty-fourth Street, between Eleventh Avenue C and Twelfth Avenue, traveling
southbound for the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
on school days.
WESTBOUND
   Fourth Avenue, from First Street to Thirty-fourth Street.
   Fourth Avenue Place, from Seventh Street to Eighth Street.
   Fifth Avenue Place, from a point 320 feet east of Tenth Street to a point
300 feet west of Twelfth Street.
   Ninth Avenue, from Seventeenth Street to Sixteenth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue, from Fifteenth Street A to Sixteenth Street.
   The alleys between Fourteenth Street and Fifteenth Street, from Fourth
Avenue to Sixth Avenue.
   An alley west of Sixteenth Street and north of Twenty-fifth Avenue, for 150
feet west of Sixteenth Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, from Sixteenth Street to Seventeenth Street, for the hours
of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 p.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days.
   Seventeenth Avenue, between Fifteenth Street Place and Sixteenth Street.
   Seventeenth Avenue, from Seventh Street to Fifth Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue A, from Seventh Street to Fifth Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue A, from Sixteenth Street to Fifteenth Street Place.
   Twentieth Avenue, from Fifteenth Street A to Sixteenth Street.
   Thirty-Second Avenue, from Seventh Street to Fourth Street, traveling
westbound for the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
school days.
(Ord. No. 3028-2020; 10/6/20)
   The alley north of Twenty-third Avenue, between Twenty-third Street A and
Twenty-fourth Street.
   An alley south of Twenty-ninth Avenue from Fifteenth Street A to Fifteenth
Street.
OTHER
   Thirty-sixth Avenue Court, counterclockwise, east of Fifty-third Street.
   Eleventh Street from Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue, effective
only during school drop off and pick up times to be maintained by John Deere
Middle School. (Ord. No. 3085-2004; 10/12/04)
APPENDIX 8. PLAY STREETS
As provided in this Traffic Code, there shall be play streets only on the
following streets:
APPENDIX 9. STREETS CLOSED TO COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following streets are closed to
commercial vehicles, except for the purpose of making deliveries:
   An alley, the western half thereof, north of Third Avenue between Fifty-
fourth and Fifty-fifth Streets.
   An alley running east-west, lying south of Fifth Avenue, from Twentieth to
Twenty-first Streets.
   All streets in Morgan Park, including: Eighth Street Place; Ninth Street;
Tenth Street; Tenth Street Place; Eleventh Street; Twelfth Street; Twelfth
Street Place; Twenty- fourth Avenue; Twenty-fifth Avenue; Twenty-fifth Avenue
   Place; Twenty-fifth Avenue Court; and Twenty-sixth Avenue.
   Fifth Avenue, from Thirty-fourth Street to Fifty-fifth Street.
   Ninth Street, from Eighteenth Avenue to Nineteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, from Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirteenth Avenue, from Sixteenth Street to Eighteenth Street A.
   Fifteenth Street, from Sixteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, from Thirtieth Avenue to Thirty-fifth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street, from Twelfth Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street B, north of Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-fifth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Avenue, from Thirty-fourth Street to Forty-first Street.
   Twenty-second Avenue, from Thirty-seventh Street to Forty-first Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, from First Street to Seventh Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, from Twelfth Street to Sixteenth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, from Forty-first Street east.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, from Sixteenth Street to Eighteenth Street B.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, from Twenty-seventh Street to Thirtieth Street.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, from Forty-first Street to Forty-seventh Street.
   Twenty-sixth Street, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street, from Ninth Avenue to Eleventh Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street, alley north of Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-third
Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh Street, from Twenty-second Avenue North to Fortieth Street
Court.
   Forty-fourth Avenue, from Forty-eighth Street to Fifty-third Street.
   Forty-fourth Street, from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-fifth Avenue.
   Forty-seventh Avenue, from Forty-eighth Street to Fifty-third Street.
   Forty-eighth Street, from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-sixth Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street, from Fourth Avenue to Twelfth Avenue.
   Fifty-fourth Street, from Twenty-fourth Avenue to Twenty-fifth Avenue.
APPENDIX 10. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ANY TIME
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit
a vehicle to stand at any time in any of the following places, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a policeman or a traffic signal:
(a)   Parking shall be prohibited at the following locations without the
necessity of posting signs:
   (1)   In any intersection;
   (2)   In any alley:
   (3)   In any paved turnaround, except those with a forty-foot paved radius
or more and which do not have center islands;
   (4)   On a crosswalk or within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an
intersection;
   (5)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or approach thereto;
   (6)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway;
   (7)   At any place within six (6) feet from the rail of any railroad switch
or main track;
   (8)   At any curb within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
   (9)   In any bus stop zone properly marked and designated;
   (10)   On any boulevard in the City; a "boulevard" for the purpose of this
paragraph is designated as any part of a street or avenue not open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic;
   (11)   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.
   (12)   On any sidewalk unless otherwise posted.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the following
types of streets when appropriate signs are posted:
   (1)   On any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty
(20) feet or upon the north and west sides of a street when the width of the
roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a distance of
one hundred (100) feet on either side of the center of the main entrance of the
following schools when the curb is marked by curb painting:
School Location or Address
School                         Location or Address
Jane Addams School             3520 Fifty-third Street
Butterworth School             4205 Forty-eighth Street
John Deere Jr. High School     2035 Eleventh Street
Ericsson School                335 Fifth Avenue
Benjamin Franklin School       5312 Eleventh Avenue C
Garfield School                1518 Twenty-fifth Avenue
Alexander Hamilton School      700 Thirty-second Avenue
Lincoln-Irving School          1015 Sixteenth Avenue
Logan School                   1602 Twenty-fifth Street
George Washington School       1550 Forty-first Street
Willard School                 1616 Sixteenth Street
Woodrow Wilson Jr. High School Twelfth Avenue and Forty-eighth Street
 
(d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the following
streets or portions of streets when appropriate signs are posted:
   First Street, on the east side, from Railroad Avenue, north 90 feet.
   First Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue to Sixth Avenue.
   First Street A, east side, from Nineteenth Avenue to Eighteenth Avenue A.
   First Street A, both sides, Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Second Avenue, on the north side, from Seventeenth Street to Nineteenth
Street.
   Second Avenue, on both sides, from Twentieth Street west to Nineteenth
Street.
   Second Avenue, on both sides, from Thirty-fourth Street to Thirty-fifth
Street.
   Second Avenue, from Fifty-third Street, west to the alley.
   Second Street, on the east side, from Fifth Avenue, north for a distance of
50 feet.
   Second Street, on the east side, between Sixteenth Avenue and Nineteenth
Avenue.
   Second Street, on the east side, between Twenty-fourth Avenue and Twenty-
eighth Avenue.
   Second Street, on both sides, Twenty-seventh Avenue Court to dead end.
   River Drive, on both sides, between First Street and Fifty-fifth Street,
except on the south side in front of McLaughlin Body Co.
   Third Avenue Frontage Road (north of River Drive), on both sides, between
Twenty-first Street and Twenty-third Street.
   Third Street, on both sides, from Third Avenue, south to the railroad.
   Third Street, east side, from Fifth Avenue south 70 feet.
   Third Street, on both sides, between Sixth Avenue and Eleventh Avenue.
   Third Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue north for a distance of
30 feet.
   Third Street, on the east side, from Sixteenth Avenue north for a distance
of 70 feet.
   Third Street, on the east side, from the entrance of 4602 Third Street,
south for a distance of 100 feet.
   Third Street, on the west side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to Second
Street.
   East Side of the cul-de-sac of Third Street off of Fifty-Second Avenue.
   Third Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue, south for a distance of
30 feet.
   Third Street A, on the east side, from Sixteenth Avenue north to dead end.
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, for a distance of 30 feet east of First
Street.
   Fourth Avenue, from Second Street east 50 feet.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Fourth Street east 62 feet.
   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from Fourth Street west to the school
driveway.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Fourth Street west 80 feet.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Eleventh Street to a point 100 feet
east.
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, from Fourteenth Street to 450 feet east of
Twenty-third Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-third Street to Twenty-fourth
Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-sixth Street to Thirty-fourth
Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from a point 175 feet east of Twenty-third
Street to Twenty-seventh Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from the east line of Twenty-third Street,
east to a point 100 feet east thereof.
   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from a point 400 feet east of the east
line of Twenty-seventh Street fourth-fourth Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, between Twenty-seventh Street and Fifty-fifth
Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Tenth Street east for a distance of
30 feet.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, for a distance of 200 feet west of Thirty-
fourth Street.
   Fourth Avenue, south side from Thirteenth Street east 40 feet.
   Fourth Avenue A, on the south side, between Seventeenth Street and
Eighteenth Street.
   Fourth Street, on the west side, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Fourth Street, on the west side, from 100 feet south of 30th Avenue Court to
30th Avenue Court.
   Fourth Street, on both sides, between Fifth Avenue and Thirteenth Avenue.
   Fourth Street, east side, Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Fourth Street, east side, Twenty-eighth Avenue to Thirty-second Avenue.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, between First Street and Fourth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, between Fourth Street and Sixth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, between Seventh Street and Eighth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on south side, between Seventh Street and Twelfth Street
except from a point 358 feet east of Tenth Street east to a point 214 feet east
of Eleventh Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, from Ninth Street west to the alley.
   Fifth Avenue, on north side, between Tenth Street and Twelfth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, from Eleventh Street west 60 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, from the east line of Twelfth Street, east
for a distance of 95 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Thirteenth Street,
west for a distance of 60 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, between Fifteenth Street and Sixteenth
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, between Nineteenth and Twentieth Streets.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-first Street, west to 70 feet
east of the center line of I-74.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, from the east line of Twenty-second Street,
east for a distance of 50 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from the west line of Twenty-third Street, west
for a distance of 30 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from 70 feet west of Twenty-seventh Street to
Thirty-sixth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, between Thirty-sixth Street and Fifty-fifth
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from Fifty-third Street to Fifty-fifth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, both sides, from Fourteenth Street east to FAI 74 (except 5-
minute "pull-out zones" in
Appendix 12).
   Fifth Avenue, both sides between Thirty-Fifth Street and Thirty-ninth
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-fourth Street, east 25 feet.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-fifth Street, east 25 feet.
   Fifth Avenue Place, on both sides, between Sixth Street and Seventh Street.
   Fifth Avenue Place, on both sides, from the intersection of Sixth Avenue and
Twenty-seventh Street to a point 350 feet east of Twenty-seventh Street on
Fifth Avenue.
   Fifth Avenue Place, on both sides, from Twelfth Street to Eleventh Street.
   Fifth Street, on both sides, between Third Avenue and the railroad tracks to
the south.
   Fifth Street, on both sides, north of the railroad tracks and south of Third
Avenue.
   Fifth Street, on the east side, from Third Avenue to Fourth Avenue.
   Fifth Street, on the east side, between Nineteenth Avenue and Twenty-third
Avenue.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, from First Street to Third Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on both sides, between Eleventh Street and Twentieth Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, east of Tenth Street to dead end.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from Twelfth Street to Eighteenth Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on both sides, between Sixteenth Street and Seventeenth
Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on both sides, from Eighteenth Street to Twenty-first Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-second Street to a point 100
feet west of Twenty-second Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Twenty-third Street,
west for a distance of 90 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-second Street, east to Twenty-
fourth Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-fifth Street, west for a
distance of 200 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-fifth Street, west for a
distance of 40 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-sixth Street, west for a
distance of 120 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-sixth Street, west for a
distance of 100 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-sixth Street, west for a
distance of 50 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Twenty-seventh
Street, west for a distance of 180 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, from the west line of Twenty-seventh
Street, west for a distance of 100 feet.
   Sixth Avenue Place, on both sides, from Twelfth Street west to the first
alley east of Tenth Street on Fifth Avenue.
   Sixth Avenue Place, on the north side, from the west line of Eleventh
Street, northwesterly for a distance of 80 feet.
   Sixth Avenue Place, on the south side, from a point 250 feet east of Tenth
Street, southeasterly to a point 300 feet west of Twelfth Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, for 15 feet east and west of the centerline
of the 53rd Street Drive intersection.
   Sixth Street, on both sides, from Third Avenue to Railroad Avenue.
   Sixth Street, on both sides, between Fifth Avenue and Tenth Avenue.
   Sixth Street Place, on both sides, between Tenth Avenue and Twelfth Avenue.
   Seventh Avenue, on the south side, from First Street east to the dead end.
   Seventh Avenue, on the north side, between Twelfth Street and Twelfth Street
Place.
   Seventh Avenue, on the south side, between Twelfth Street and Fifteenth
Street.
   Seventh Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Fourteenth Street,
west for a distance of 56 feet.
   Seventh Avenue, on both sides, from Sixteenth Street to Twenty-fourth
Street.
   Seventh Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-fourth Street to Twenty-
seventh Street.
   Seventh Street, on both sides, between Tenth Avenue and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Seventh Street, on both sides, between Eighteenth Avenue A and Fifty-second
Avenue.
   Eighth Avenue, on both sides, between Fifteenth Street B and Sixteenth
Street.
   Eighth Avenue, on the south side, from Seventeenth Street to Eighteenth
Street.
   Eighth Avenue, on both sides, between Twenty-first Street A and Twenty-
second Street.
   Eighth Avenue, on the south side, 20 feet to the east and west of Fifteenth
Street A.
   Eighth Avenue, on the north side, beginning 50 feet east of Sixteenth Street
for a length of 40 feet.
   Eighth Street, on the west side, from Fifth Avenue south to the first alley.
   Eighth Street, on the west side, from Twelfth Avenue north to the dead end.
   Eighth Street, on the west side, between Twentieth Avenue and Twenty-First
Avenue.
   Eighth Street, on the east side, from Twentieth Avenue north to the alley.
   Eighth Street, on the east side, 60 feet south of Eleventh Avenue, for a
distance of 46 feet.
   Eighth Street, on the east side, 60 feet south of Eleventh Avenue, for a
distance of 46 feet.
   Eighth Street, on both sides, from the dead end, for a distance of 20 feet
south of 2929 Eighth Street.
 
   Ninth Avenue, on the south side, from Seventeenth Street east to the end of
Ninth Avenue.
   Ninth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-seventh Street to Twenty-ninth
Street.
   Ninth Street, on the east side, from the alley south of Thirteenth Avenue
north a distance of 75 feet.
   Ninth Street, on the east side, from Railroad Avenue south for a distance of
60 feet.
   Ninth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-sixth Avenue to Twenty-seventh
Avenue.
 
   Tenth Avenue, on both sides, from Sixth Street west to the dead end.
   Tenth Avenue, on the south side, between Fifteenth Street and Fifteenth
Street A.
   Tenth Avenue, on the south side, between Fifty-first Street, west to the
dead end.
   Tenth Avenue, on the north side, between Fortieth Street and Forty-first
Street.
 
   Tenth Street, on the west side, between Fifth Avenue and Eleventh Avenue.
   Tenth Street, on the east side, from Fifth Avenue south for a distance of
150 feet.
   Tenth Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue to Sixteenth Avenue.
   Tenth Street, on the west side, from Eighteenth Avenue to Nineteenth Avenue.
 
   Eleventh Avenue, on the south side, from Third Street to Third Street A.
   Eleventh Avenue, on the south side, between Seventh Street and Eighth
Street.
   Eleventh Avenue, on the south side, from Eighth Street east to the alley
   Eleventh Avenue, south side, from Sixteenth Street to Eighteenth Street A.
   Eleventh Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-second Street to Forty-third
Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A, on the south side, from Twenty-fifth Street, west for a
distance of 40 feet.
   Eleventh Avenue A, on both sides, from Forty-second Street to Forty-third
Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A, on the south side, from Fifty-third Street west to the
dead end.
   Eleventh Avenue B, on the south side, a distance of 35 feet each side of the
alley east on Twenty-sixth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue B, on the south side, from Twenty-sixth Street A, west a
distance of 60 feet.
   Eleventh Avenue B, south side, from Fifty-third Street, west to dead end.
   Eleventh Avenue C, south side, 3100 block.
   Eleventh Avenue C, on the south side, between Fifty-third Street and Fifty-
fourth Street.
 
   Twelfth Avenue, on the south side, between Seventh Street and Fifteenth
Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from Twelfth Street, west a distance of
70 feet.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from Twelfth Street, east for a distance
of 150 feet.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from a distance of 30 feet west to a
distance 40 feet east of the alley between Thirteenth Street and Fourteenth
Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from a distance of 90 feet east to a
distance 40 feet west of Fifteenth Street A.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the south side, from a distance of 30 feet east to a
distance 35 feet west of Fifteenth Street A.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from Seventh Street east for a distance
of 75 feet.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from Eighteenth Street to Nineteenth
Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the south side, from Nineteenth Street, for a distance of
west 600 feet.
   Twelfth Avenue, on both sides, between Nineteenth Street and Thirty-first
Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, between Thirty-first Street and Thirty-
third Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on both sides, from Thirty-third Street to a distance of 100
feet east of Thirty-fourth Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, on the north side, from 100 feet east of Thirty-fourth
Street to Thirty-sixth Street Court.
   Twelfth Avenue, on both sides, from Thirty-sixth Street Court to the East
Moline border.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, between River Drive Avenue and Fourth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on the east side, from Seventh Avenue, south a distance of
165 feet.
   Twelfth Street, on the east side, 410 feet from south of Seventh Avenue to
Eleventh Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on the west side, from Seventh Avenue, south a distance of
115 feet.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, from a point 60 feet north of Twelfth Avenue
to a point 60 feet south of Twelfth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, from a point 50 feet north of Seventeenth
Avenue to a point 50 feet south of Seventeenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, 60 feet north of Sixteenth Avenue to a point
60 feet south of Sixteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, from Eighteenth Avenue, south a distance of
50 feet.
   Twelfth Street, on the east side, from a point 60 feet north of Nineteenth
Avenue to a point 120 feet south of Nineteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on the west side, from a point 120 feet north of Nineteenth
Avenue to a point 100 feet south of Nineteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on the west side, from Thirty-fourth Avenue to Thirty-sixth
Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on the east side, from Thirteenth Avenue, north for a
distance of 95 feet.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, from Fourteenth Avenue, north a distance of
25 feet.
   Twelfth Street A, on the east side, from Seventh Avenue north to the
turnaround.
 
   Thirteenth Street, on the east side, between Thirteenth Avenue and
Nineteenth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-
sixth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, east side, 40 feet from the north side of Twelfth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, east side, from Twelfth Avenue north for a distance of 25
feet.
   Thirteenth Street, on the east side, at the Eleventh Avenue intersection for
a distance of 78.5 feet.
 
   Fourteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-sixth Street and
Twenty-seventh Street.
   Fourteenth Street, on the east side, from Seventh Avenue south to the alley;
and from 90 feet south of the alley, south for a distance of 150 feet to the
north line of a private drive.
   Fourteenth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-
sixth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street, on the east side from 30 feet north of Twentieth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street, on the east side from 30 feet south of Twentieth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Street A, on the east side, from Thirty-fourth Avenue to Thirty-
fifth Avenue.
 
   Fifteenth Avenue, on the south side, from a point 40 feet west of the center
line of the alley east of Eighteenth Street, east for a distance of 80 feet.
   Fifteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Third Street to Fourth Street.
   Fifteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-fifth Street and Twenty-
seventh Street.
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, between driveways to municipal parking
Lot (Uptown Lot).
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, from Third Avenue, south a distance of
72 feet.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue south to private
drive.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from 60 feet south to 25 feet north of
the first alley south of Eighth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, from Sixteenth Avenue, north for a distance
of 60 feet.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from the south curb line of Nineteenth
Avenue, south for a distance of 60 feet.
   Fifteenth Street A, on both sides, from 10th Avenue South to alley between
10th and 11th Avenues.
   Fifteenth Street A, on the east side, from a point 250 feet north of Tenth
Avenue to Eighth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, on the east side, 35 feet at Tenth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, on the east side, between Eleventh Avenue and Twelfth
Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street A, on the north side, from 10th Avenue south 175 feet.
   Fifteenth Street D, on the east side from Thirty-ninth Avenue south to
private parking facility.
   Fifteenth Street Place, on both sides, from Sixteenth Avenue to Seventeenth
Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street Place, west side, Seventeenth Avenue to Eighteenth Avenue
A.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the north side, 50 feet east of Third Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the north side, from the east line of Third Street east
55 feet.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the south side, from the west line of Third Street east
65 feet.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, from 55 feet west to 55 feet east of the
north leg of Fourth Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the north side, between Seventh Street and Ninth
Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, south side, from Tenth Street north branch west 100 feet
to Tenth Street south branch.
   Sixteenth Avenue, north side, from Tenth Street to Eleventh Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, from Twelfth Street west 80 feet.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, from Twelfth Street east 60 feet.
   Sixteenth Avenue, north side, from Fourteenth Street west 130 feet.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Thirteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the north side, from Fifteenth Street west to the first
alley.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Sixteenth Street and Eighteenth
Street B.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, between Eighteenth Street B and Eighteenth
Street C.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-fifth Street and Twenty-
seventh Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-first Street to Forty-fifth
Street.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, from River Drive to railroad.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, north of River Drive.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, from Fourth Avenue south to the first
alley.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, from alley north of Sixth Avenue to Sixth
Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue north to the first
alley.
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, between the alley south of Sixth Avenue
to Seventh Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, between Eighth Avenue and Twelfth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue south 50 feet.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Fifteenth Avenue to Seventeenth
Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Fifteenth Avenue to Sixteenth
Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street on the west side, between alley south of Fifth Avenue to
Sixth Avenue (Courthouse).
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, Twelfth Avenue to Fifty-second Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, Sixteenth to Fifty-second Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, between Eighteenth Avenue A and North
Shore Drive.
   Park Sixteenth Street, on the east side, from Thirtieth Avenue to 60 feet
south of Thirty-first Avenue.
 
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the south side, from Fourth Street to Seventh Street.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the south side, from Seventh Street east 65 feet.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the north side, from Thirteenth Street east 100 feet.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the north side, from Fourteenth Street west 84 feet.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the south side, from Fifteenth Street west for a
distance of 60 feet.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on both sides, between Fifteenth Street and Fifteenth
Street Place.
   Seventeenth Avenue, on the south side, from Fifty-third Street to Fifty-
fifth Street Place.
   Seventeenth Street, on both sides, from Second Avenue to Third Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, from Third Avenue south 60 feet.
   Seventeenth Street, on both sides, from Fourth Avenue to Fourth Avenue A.
   Seventeenth Street, on both sides, between Eighth Avenue and Ninth Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street, on the east side, from Ninth Avenue to Eleventh Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street, on the east side, Fifteenth Avenue to Eighteen Avenue A.
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue,
with the exception of the motorist space on the north end.
   Eighteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Fifth Street and Seventh
Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Thirty-first Street A to Thirty-
fourth street.
   Eighteenth Avenue A, on both sides, between Fifteenth Street and Sixteenth
Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue A, on the south side, from Sixteenth Street east to the
alley.
   Eighteenth Street, on both sides, between Second Avenue and Third Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street, on the west side, between Third Avenue and the IIRR
Railroad right-of-way.
   Eighteenth Street, north of Twelfth Avenue, on the east side, for a distance
of 50 feet.
   Eighteenth Street, on the east side, between Twenty-third Avenue and Twenty-
fifth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street A, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue north to dead
end.
   Eighteenth Street A, on the east side, from Twentieth Avenue north 30 feet.
   Eighteenth Street B, on the east side, between Twentieth Avenue and Twenty-
fifth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street B, on the west side, from Twenty-fifth Avenue north 40
feet.
   Eighteenth Street C, for turnaround at Sixteenth Avenue.
   Eighteenth Street C, east side, from Sixteenth Avenue to Eighteenth Avenue.
   Nineteenth Avenue, on both sides, between First Street A and Sixteenth
Street.
   Nineteenth Avenue, on the north side, from Sixteenth Street east to the
alley.
   Nineteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Sixteenth Street and
Eighteenth Street B.
   Nineteenth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-third Street and
Twenty-fifth Street.
   Nineteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-eighth Street Place west to
the first drive.
   Nineteenth Street, on both sides, from a point 150 feet north of Second
Avenue to Twenty-seventh Street.
   Twentieth Avenue, on the south side, from Seventh Street to Ninth Street.
   Twentieth Avenue, on the south side, between Sixteenth Street and Eighteenth
Street B.
   Twentieth Avenue, on the north side, from the east line of Sixteenth Street,
east for a distance of 50 feet.
   Twentieth Avenue, on the north side, from Eighteenth Street “A,” west for a
distance of 80 feet.
   Twentieth Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-first Street to Forty-third
Street.
   Twenty-first Avenue, on the south side, from Eighth Street to Ninth Street.
   Twenty-first Avenue, on the south side, between Eleventh Street and Twelfth
Street.
   Twenty-first Avenue, on the south side, between Forty-sixth Street and
Forty-fifth Street.
   Twenty-first Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-sixth Street west to its
terminus.
   Twenty-first Avenue A, on the south side, from Forty-eighth Street to
Twenty-second Avenue.
   Twenty-first Street, on the east side, between Fifth Avenue and Sixth
Avenue.
   Twenty-first Street, on both sides, from Sixth Avenue, north to the dead
end.
   Twenty-first Street A, on the west side, from Seventh Avenue to Eighth
Avenue.
   Twenty-second Avenue, on the south side, from Fifth Street to Seventh
Street.
   Twenty-second Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-first Street to Fifty-
third Street.
   Twenty-second Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-first Street east to the
dead end.
   Twenty-second Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-eighth Street to Twenty-
first Avenue Court.
   Twenty-second Avenue, on both sides, from Fifty-third Street east to the
corporate limits.
   Twenty-second Street, on both sides, from Fifth Avenue north to the dead
end.
   Twenty-second Street, on the east side, between Fifth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue.
   Twenty-second Street, on the east side, south of Eleventh Avenue.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on the south side, from Seventh Street west 140 feet.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on the north side, between Twelfth Street and Fifteenth
Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on both sides, between Fifteenth Street and Twenty-
eighth Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on both sides, at each street and alley intersection
between Twenty-seventh Street and Thirty fourth Street, for a distance of 30
feet east of the east line of each intersection and a distance of 30 feet west
of the west line of each intersection.
   Twenty-third Avenue, north side, from Twenty-seventh Street to Thirtieth
Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on the north side, from the alley between Thirtieth
Street and Thirty-first Street to Thirty-second Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-ninth street west 70
feet.
   Twenty-third Avenue, on both sides, between Thirty-third Street and Fifty-
third Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue B, on the south side, from Twenty-fourth Street to
Twenty-seventh Street.
   Twenty-third Street, on both sides, from Third Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Twenty-third Street, on the west side, from Tenth Avenue Court, south to the
terminus of the street.
   Twenty-third Street, on the east side, from Eighteenth Avenue A north 60
feet.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, on the south side, from a point 150 feet east of east
line of Sixteenth Street, west to a point 70 feet west of the west line of
Sixteenth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-seventh Street and
Thirty-first Street.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-first street east.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Twenty-seventh Street, east
for a distance of 30 feet.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Thirty-first Street, west for
a distance of 30 feet.
   Twenty-fourth Avenue A, on the south side, from Twenty-ninth Street to
Thirtieth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Twenty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue A south to
dead end.
   Twenty-fourth Street, on both sides, from Thirty-ninth Avenue to Fortieth
Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, on both sides, from Seventh Street to Twelfth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, on the south side, from Twelfth Street to Sixteenth
Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, on the south side, from the east line of Sixteenth
Street, east for a distance of 70 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, on the south side, from Thirty-second Street to Thirty-
fourth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue A, on the north side, from Twenty-ninth Street west to
the dead end.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue Court, on the south side, from Twelfth Street, west to
the terminus of the street.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from a distance of 115 feet north of
Avenue of the Cities.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, the first 55 feet south of Avenue of
the Cities.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the west side, from a distance of 25 feet south of
Avenue of the Cities, to a distance of 150 feet north of Avenue of the Cities.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the west side, 120 feet to 146 feet south of Avenue
of the Cities.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, north of Fourth Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from the south sidewalk line of
Seventh Avenue, south for a distance of 40 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, for a distance of 50 feet starting
150 feet south of Seventh Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue north 60 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from a distance of 20 feet south of
the first alley north of Twelfth Avenue, north 21 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, east side, from a distance of 50 feet south of Twelfth
Avenue to a distance of 50 feet north of Twelfth Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from Sixteenth Avenue to Eighteenth
Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from Eighteenth Avenue south 100
feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, east side, 30 feet north and south of Eleventh Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the west side, from Eighteenth Avenue north 90 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side, from Thirty-sixth Avenue to Thirty-
ninth Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on both sides, from Fifty-second Avenue to North Shore
Drive.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the west side from Nineteenth Avenue, north 60 feet.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on the east side from Nineteenth Avenue, south 60 feet.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue from Thirtieth Street to Thirty-first Street, on both
sides.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, south side, from Thirty-fourth Street to Thirty-eighth
Street;
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, south side, from Forty-first Street west 290 feet.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, south side, from Forty-seventh Street west 60 feet.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, north side, from Thirty-fourth Street to Forty-first
Street.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue A, on the south side, from Twelfth Street to Thirteenth
Street.
   Twenty-sixth Street, on the east side, between Sixth Avenue and Seventh
Avenue.
   Twenty-sixth Street, west side, from Sixth Avenue south a distance of 50
feet .
   Twenty-sixth Street, west side, from Seventh Avenue north a distance of 50
feet.
   Twenty-sixth Street, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue and Eleventh
Avenue B.
   Twenty-seventh Avenue, on the south side, from Thirty-second Street to
Thirty-fifth Street.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on the east side, between Fourth Avenue and Sixth
Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on the east side, from the first alley south of
Twelfth Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on the west side, from the alley south of Fourth
Avenue south for a distance of 50 feet.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on the west side, from Seventeenth Avenue to Twenty-
third Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on both sides, from Seventh Avenue to Twelfth Avenue.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on both sides, from Thirteenth Avenue south for a
distance of 50 feet.
   Twenty-seventh Street, on both sides, from Twenty-third Avenue to the south
City limits.
   Twenty-eighth Avenue, on the south side, between Fourth Street and Seventh
Street.
   Twenty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Eighth Street to Ninth Street.
   Twenty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to
dead end.
   Twenty-ninth Avenue Court, on the north and east side, from Fourteenth
Street west.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the west side, between Eighth Avenue and Twenty-
fourth Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-fourth Avenue to Twenty-
sixth Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street, east side, from Eleventh Avenue B south 50 feet.
   Twenty-ninth Street, east side, from Twelfth Avenue, south to alley.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the west side, from a point 30 feet south of 30th
Avenue to a point 102 feet south of 30th Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the east side, from Thirty-eighth Avenue north to
Thirtieth Street.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the west side, from Thirty-eighth Avenue to 352 feet
south of Thirtieth Avenue.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the east side, 143 feet north of Avenue of the
Cities.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the east side, beginning 592 feet north from the
point of intersection of the NE corner right-of-way lines of Avenue of the
Cities and 29th Street extending north 59 feet.
   Thirtieth Avenue, on the south side, between Fourteenth Street and Sixteenth
Street.
   Thirtieth Street, on the east side, from a distance of 50 feet north Twenty-
third Avenue to a distance of 50 feet south of Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirtieth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-sixth Avenue north 100 feet.
   Thirtieth Street, on the east side, from Thirty-second Avenue to Twenty-
ninth Street.
   Thirty-first Avenue, on the south side, from Fifteenth Street C to Park
Sixteenth Street.
   Thirty-first Street, on the east side, Eleventh Avenue to Eleventh Avenue A.
   Thirty-first Street, on the east side, between Twelfth Avenue and Eleventh
Avenue C.
   Thirty-first Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue to the first
alley south of Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street A, on the east side, between the alley north of Twenty-
third Avenue and Twenty-fourth Avenue.
   Thirty-second Avenue, on the north side, from Fourth Street to Seventh
Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue, on the north and south sides, from Seventh Street to
Ninth Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue Court, on the north and south sides, from Ninth Street
east to the dead end.
   Thirty-second Street, on the east side, from a distance of 50 feet north of
Avenue of the Cities.
   Thirty-third Avenue, on both sides, between Sixteenth Street and Park
Sixteenth Street.
   Thirty-third Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue, south for a
distance of 55 feet.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue, on the south side, from Seventh Street to Ninth Street
A.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-first Street to Eightieth
Street.
   Thirty-fourth Avenue A, on the south side, from Fourteenth Street A to
Fifteenth Street.
   Thirty-fourth Street, on both sides, from River Drive to Sixteenth Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street, on the east side, between Twenty-third Avenue and
Twenty-sixth Avenue.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue, south side, from Thirteenth Street to Twelfth Street.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue, south side, from Forty-first Street east 75 feet.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue, on the east side, from a point 325 feet east of 38th
Street, southeasterly to end of cul-de-sac.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue, on the north side, from 38th Street east 325 feet.
   Thirty-fifth Street, on the east side, between Nineteenth Avenue and Twenty-
third Avenue.
   Thirty-fifth Street, on the east side from Thirty-seventh Avenue to Thirty-
eighth Avenue.
   Thirty-fifth Street, east side, from Thirty-seventh Avenue north 60 feet.
   Thirty-fifth Street, on the west side, from the north line of Twenty-third
Avenue, north for a distance of 150 feet.
   Thirty-fifth Street Court, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue north
to the dead end.
   Thirty-sixth Avenue, on both sides, Seventh Street to Twenty-seventh Street.
   Thirty-sixth Avenue, on the north side, for a distance of 80 feet from the
stop sign at Forty-first Street East.
   Thirty-sixth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-first Street to Forty-
fourth Street.
   Thirty-sixth Avenue, on both sides, from Seventieth Street to Seventy-fifth
Street.
   Thirty-sixth Street, on both sides, from the north line of Twenty-third
Avenue, north for a distance of 150 feet.
   Thirty-sixth Street, west side, beginning 150 feet north of Avenue of the
Cities, continuing north to 19th Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh Avenue, on the south side, from Thirty-fourth Street to
Thirty-fifth Street.
   Thirty-seventh Avenue, on both sides, between Forty-first Street and Forty-
third Street.
   Thirty-seventh Street, on the east side, from the south line of Fourth
Avenue, south to Fifth Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue, south for a
distance of thirty (30) feet.
   Thirty-seventh Street, on both sides, from Twenty-second Avenue to Twenty-
third Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh Street Place, on both sides, from Thirty-seventh Street
(north of Nineteenth Avenue), west to the terminus of the street.
   Thirty-eighth Avenue, on both sides, from Twenty-seventh Street to
Seventieth Street.
   Thirty-eighth Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-first Street to Thirty-
eighth Street.
   Thirty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Thirty-second Avenue south to
the end of Thirty-eighth Street.
   Thirty-ninth Avenue, on both sides, from Sixteenth Street to Twenty-seventh
Street.
   Thirty-ninth Street, on both sides, from River Drive, south to the railroad
tracks.
   Thirty-ninth Street, on both sides, from the south line of Fourth Avenue,
south for a distance of 90 feet.
   Thirty-ninth Street, on the east side, a distance of 200 feet south of Fifth
Avenue to Tenth Avenue.
   Thirty-ninth Street, on the west side, a distance of 200 feet south of Fifth
Avenue to a distance of 200 feet north of Tenth Avenue east branch.
   Fortieth Avenue, on both sides, from Twenty-fourth Street to Twenty-fifth
Street.
   Fortieth Street, on east side, from Second Avenue to Fourth Avenue.
   Fortieth Street, on west side, from Fourth Avenue, north 208 feet to the
property line between properties of 235 40th Street and 225 40th Street.
   Fortieth Street, on the east side, from Twelfth Avenue north to first
driveway.
   Forty-first Avenue (frontage road), on both sides, from Forty-first Street
west to its terminus.
   Forty-first Street, on the east side, between Tenth Avenue east branch and
Forty-ninth Avenue, with the exception of bus parking only where signs are
posted, north of Sixteenth Avenue, for a distance of 350 feet.
   Forty-first Street, on the west side, a distance of 150 feet south of Tenth
Avenue east branch to Forty-ninth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue south for a
distance of 138 feet.
   Forty-second Avenue, on both sides, from Thirty-fourth Street west to the
dead end.
   Forty-second Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue, south for a
distance of 42 feet.
   Forty-second Street, on the east side, between Eighth Avenue and Tenth
Avenue, from parking lot north 30 feet.
   Forty-second Street, on the east side, between Tenth Avenue and Eleventh
Avenue.
   Forty-second Street, on the east side, from the Springbrook Courts parking
area (approximately 100 feet north of Eleventh Avenue), north for a distance of
60 feet.
   Forty-third Avenue, on both sides, from Seventh Street to Twelfth street.
   Forty-third Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
   Forty-third Street, on the east side, from Thirty-seventh Avenue, north and
south to the cul-de-sac.
   Forty-third Street, on both sides, from Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Forty-fourth Street, on the east side, south of Twenty-third Avenue for a
distance of 90 feet.
   Forty-fourth Street, on both sides, from Forty-sixth Avenue to Forty-ninth
Avenue.
   Forty-fifth Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
   Forty-sixth Avenue, on both sides, from Forty-first Street to Forty-fourth
Street.
   Forty-sixth Avenue, on the south side, 250 feet west of 48th Street.
   Forty-sixth Avenue Drive, on the south side, from 430 feet east of Fifty-
third Street to 880 feet east of Fifty-third Street.
   Forty-sixth Street, on the east side, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth
Avenue.
   Forty-sixth Street, on both sides, north of Eleventh Avenue.
   Forty-sixth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-sixth Avenue north a
distance of 90 feet.
   Forty-sixth Street, east side, from Twenty-sixth Avenue south 100 feet.
   Forty-sixth Street, on both sides, at a distance of 75 feet north of 21st
avenue for a distance of 200 feet north.
   Forty-eighth Street, on the west side, from the south line of Twelfth
Avenue, south for a distance of 600 feet.
   Forty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-first Avenue Court to
Twenty-third Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street, on the east side, from the northeast corner of Twelfth
Avenue, north for a distance of 60 feet.
   Forty-eighth Street A, on the west side, from Forty-fifth Avenue to Forty-
ninth Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street A, on the west side, from Fiftieth Avenue to Fifty-
second Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street Place, on the west side, from Nineteenth Avenue to
Twentieth Avenue.
   Forty-ninth Avenue, on the north side, from Forty-first Street to Forty-
eighth Street.
   Forty-ninth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-first Street to a point
300 feet west of Forty-eighth Street.
   Forty-ninth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-eighth Street west for a
distance of 135 feet.
   Forty-ninth Street, from Second Avenue to Fourth Avenue.
   Forty-ninth Street, on the east side, between Thirty-fifth Avenue and
Thirty-eighth Avenue.
   Forty-ninth Street Court, west side, north and south of Forty-sixth Avenue
to middle of cul-de-sac.
   Fiftieth Avenue, south side, from 60th Street east to the east end of the
dog park.
   Fiftieth Avenue, north side, between Forty-eighth Street A and Fiftieth
Street.
   Fiftieth Street Court, 75 feet from the back of curb to the first driveway
on the east side, north of 48th Avenue.
   Fifty-first Street, on both sides, from Forty-fourth Avenue to Forty-seventh
Avenue.
   Fifty-second Avenue, on both sides, from Third Street to Twenty-seventh
Street.
   Fifty-second Street Court, south of Thirty-Fourth Avenue, in the cul-de-sac.
   Fifty-third Street, on the east side, from Fifth Avenue to Sixth Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue B to Eleventh
Avenue C
   Fifty-third Street, on both sides, from Eleventh Avenue C to John Deere
Road.
   Fifty-third Street A, on both sides from Twenty-third Avenue south some 50
feet.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue, north to the
alley.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Fourth Avenue, south for a
distance of 110 feet.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Tenth Avenue north to its
terminus.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue C to 12th
Avenue.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the west side, from a point 150 feet north of 12th
Avenue.
   Fifty-fourth Street Court, east side, north and south of Eighteenth Avenue
to cul-de-sac.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the west side, at 1025 54th Street south, for a
distance of 42 feet to the alley.
   Fifty-fifth Street, on both sides, from River Drive to Fourth Avenue.
   Fifty-sixth Street, on the east side, from Thirtieth Avenue to Thirty-fourth
Avenue.
   Sixtieth Street, on the east side, from the driveway at 3520 for a distance
of 150 feet north.
   Sixtieth Street, on the east side, two feet south of Thirty-sixth Avenue
Court to 89 feet south of Thirty-sixth Avenue Court.
   Sixtieth Street, on both sides, from John Deere Road south to Fifty-sixth
Avenue.
   Sixtieth Street, on the east side, from Coal Town Road, at a distance of 675
feet north.
   Sixtieth Street, on the west side, from Coal Town Road north to the East
Moline border.
   Seventieth Street, on both sides, from Thirty-fourth Avenue to John Deere
Road.
   Seventy-sixth Street, on the east side, from Thirty-sixth Avenue to Thirty-
seventh Avenue.
   Frontage Road south of Thirty-sixth Avenue, on the south side, from Twenty-
fifth Street to Twenty-sixth Street on the south side thereof.
   Railroad Avenue, on both sides, from Eighth Street to Eleventh Street.
   River Drive on both sides, between First Street and Fifty-fifth Street.
   John Deere Expressway (Forty-first Avenue), on both sides, from the western
corporate limits to the eastern corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 3004-2018; 2/27/18; Ord. No. 3010-2018; 4/10/18; Ord. 3011-2018; 4/
10/18; Ord. No. 3024-2019; 9/24/19; Ord. No. 3033-2019; 12/10/19; Ord. No.
3034-2019; 12/10/19; Ord. No. 3035-2019; 12/10/19; Ord. No. 3015-2020; 7/7/20;
Ord. No. 3042-2020; 12/15/20; Ord. No. 3012-2021; 5/25/21; Ord. No. 3015-2021;
6/15/21; Ord. No. 3021-2021; 8/24/21; Ord. No. 3004-2022; 3/1/22; Ord. No.
3008-2022; 5/24/22; Ord. No. 3030-2022; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3045- 2022; 11/15/22;
Ord. No. 3051-2022; 11/29/22; Ord. No. 3055-2022; 12/13/2022; Ord. No. 3007-
2023; 03/21/23; Ord. No. 3015-2023; 04/25/23; Ord. No. 3046-2023; 11/14/23;
Ord. No. 3047-2023; 11/14/23; Ord. No. 3055-2023; 12/12/23; Ord. No. 3014-2024;
4/9/24; Ord. No. 3031-2024; 9/24/24; Ord. No. 3002-2025; 1/7/25; Ord. No. 3033-
2025; 8/26/25; Ord. No. 3060-2025; 12/2/25)
APPENDIX 11. PARKING PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES
ON ANY DAY:
12:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   Forty-second Street on the east side, from Eighth Avenue to Tenth Avenue.
ON MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY:
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m.
   Twelfth Avenue, on both sides, from Thirty-first Street to Thirty-Fourth
Street.
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
   Fifty-fourth Street, on the west side, starting on the North edge of Third
Avenue to the South for 200 feet.
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   Ninth Street, on the east side, beginning at a point 60 feet south of
Railroad Avenue, extending south for 53 feet.
   Thirtieth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-sixth Avenue north 35 feet.
   826 Eighteenth Avenue: two-hour parking for two on-street parking stalls in
front of Top Ten Nails and Hair Salon
ON SCHOOL DAYS:
7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. – Two-hour parking only
   Twenty-sixth Avenue, north side, from a point 70 feet east of Thirty-eighth
Street to a point 330 feet west of Forty-first Street.
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
   Twenty-first Avenue, north side, from Eleventh Street to Twelfth Street.
   Forty-eighth Street, east side, from Forty-fourth Avenue to Forty-sixth
Avenue.
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-Fifth Avenue, south to the
alley.
   Forty-fourth Avenue, on the south side, from Forty-eighth Street east for a
distance of 65 feet.
(Ord. No. 3033-2025; 8/26/25; Ord. No. 3060-2025; 12/2/25)
APPENDIX 12. SKATEBOARDING, IN-LINE SKATING AND ROLLER-SKATING PROHIBITED IN
BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
As provided in this Traffic Code, skateboarding, in-line skating and roller-
skating shall be prohibited in the following business districts:
   An area east of the rear lot lines fronting the west side of 12th Street,
north of 8th Avenue, west of F A I Route 74. This page intentionally left blank
APPENDIX 13. RESERVED
APPENDIX 14. FIFTEEN-MINUTE PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN NONMETERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a longer period than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, in
nonmetered parking spaces on the following streets and portions of streets:
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Fourteenth Street to Nineteenth Street
where properly posted.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, from Fifth Avenue south to the alley.
   Fifteenth Street, between the addresses of 817 and 821 on the west side.
   N-Lot, Northwest Corner space.
   Seventeenth Street, on east side, from Sixth Avenue north to the alley.
   831 18th Avenue            One On-Street Stall
   905 18th Avenue            One On-Street Stall
   As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle for a longer period than fifteen (15) minutes, on any day, 7
days a week, 24 hours a day, in any of the following places:
   1509 15th Street            One On-Street Stall
(Ord. No. 3058-2022; 1/10/23; Ord. No. 3003-2025; 1/7/25)
APPENDIX 15. THIRTY-MINUTE PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN NONMETERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a longer period than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Tuesdays through Saturdays, in nonmetered spaces on the
following streets and portions of streets:
1518 15th Street         One On-Street Stall
(Ord. No. 3051-2025; 10/21/25)
APPENDIX 16. ONE-HOUR PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN NONMETERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a period longer than sixty (60) minutes between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, in
nonmetered parking spaces on the following streets or portions of streets:
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, between Sixth Street and Seventh Street.
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, between Sixth Avenue and Seventh Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, between Fourteenth Avenue and a point 150
feet north of Sixteenth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, between Sixteenth Avenue and Seventeenth
Avenue.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Fifteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street A.
   1721 Fifth Avenue, two on-street stalls.
(Ord. 3016-2025; 4/8/25)
APPENDIX 17. TWENTY-FOUR MINUTE PARKING RESTRICTION IN METERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a longer period than twenty-four (24) minutes between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, in a
parking meter space on any of the streets and portions of streets as designated
in the Parking Meter/Lot Location Book.
   Seventeenth Street from Fifth Avenue south to the first alley.
APPENDIX 18. TWO-HOUR PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN NONMETERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a longer period than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, in a nonmetered
parking space on the following streets and portions of streets:
Non-Numbered Avenues and Streets:
   Avenue of the Cities, on both sides, from Twenty-seventh Street to Thirty-
fourth Street (except no-parking zones).
   Avenue of the Cities, on the south side, from Thirty-first Street “A” to
Thirty-Second Street.
   Ben Butterworth Memorial Parkway Lot Numbers 3201 and 3301.
   River Drive, from the west line of Twenty-fifth Street, west 600 feet.
Numbered Avenues and Streets:
   First Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from Thirteenth Street to Fourteenth
Street.
   Fourth Avenue A, on the north side, between Seventeenth Street and
Eighteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from Twelfth Street to Fourteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Fourteenth Street and Seventeenth
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Twenty-first Street and Twenty-fourth
Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, between Fourteenth Street and Sixteenth
Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, between Fourteenth Street and Eighteenth
Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, between Seventeenth Street and Eighteenth
Street.
   Seventh Street, on both sides, from Sixteenth Avenue to Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Eighth Avenue, on the north side, from Fifteenth Street to Fifteenth Street
A.
   Twelfth Street, both sides, from Fifth Avenue to Sixth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, on both sides, from Fourth to Fifth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, on both sides, from Fifth to Sixth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, on the east side from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Fourteenth Avenue, on the south side, from Fourteenth Street to Fifteenth
Street.
   Fourteenth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Seventh Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from 6th Avenue north to the first
alley.
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on the west side, from Thirteenth Avenue to Fourteenth
Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, between Fourteenth Avenue and Sixteenth
Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street Place, on the west side, from Seventeenth Avenue to
Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, the first 80 lineal feet south of Third
Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, from Sixth Avenue south to the first
alley.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, from Fifth Avenue south to the first alley.
   Sixteenth Street, on both sides, from Fifth Avenue south to the first alley.
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, between Second Avenue and Third
Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, from Fifth Avenue south to the first
alley.
   Seventeenth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Seventeenth Street, on the east side, from Fifth Avenue south to the first
alley.
   Seventeenth Street, on the east side, between Sixth Avenue and Seventh
Avenue.
   Eighteenth Avenue, on both sides, from Seventh Street to Eighth Street.
   Eighteenth Street, west side, north of Fifth Avenue.
   Twenty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue to alley
south of Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirtieth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue north to alley.
   Thirty-first Street, on the west side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to
alley.
   Thirty-second Street, on the east side from Avenue of the Cities south to
alley.
   Thirty-second Street, on the east side from Avenue of the Cities north to
alley.
   Thirty-second Street, on the west side from Avenue of the Cities south to
alley.
   Thirty-third Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to the
alley.
   Thirty-fourth Street, on the west side, from the railroad tracks 75 feet
south.
(Ord. No. 3009-2018; 4/10/18)
APPENDIX 19. TWO-HOUR LIMIT IN ZONES ESTABLISHED.
The City shall post signs designating two (2) hour parking which will be
enforced from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, at the
following locations:
   The northernmost Forty (40) spaces located in the public parking lot located
immediately north of the John Deere Collectors Center.
   Forty plus/minus (40 +/-) on-street parking spaces located on 17th Street
north of River Drive.
APPENDIX 20. THREE-HOUR PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN NONMETERED ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle for a longer period than three (3) hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, in any parking
space on any of the following non-metered streets and portions of streets:   
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, from Sixth Street to Seventh Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from the west line of Eleventh Street,
west to the first alley.
   Fifth Avenue, on the south side, from Twentieth Street to Twenty-first
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from Twenty-third Street to Twenty-fourth
Street.
   Eighth Avenue, on the south side, between Twenty-eighth Street and Twenty-
ninth Street.
   Tenth Avenue, on the south side, between Fortieth Street and Forty-first
Street.
   Eleventh Street, on the west side, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
   Twelfth Street, on both sides, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
   Fourteenth Avenue, on the south side, from the alley west of Fifteenth
Street to Fifteenth Street.
   Fifteenth Street, on the east side, from River Drive to Fourth Avenue.
   Fifteenth Street B, on the east side, from Eighth Avenue south 65 feet.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue A to Eleventh
Avenue B.
   Railroad Avenue, on the south side, for a distance 225 feet east of First
Street.
   Railroad Avenue, on the north side, from Third Street to Fourth Street.
APPENDIX 21. RESERVED
APPENDIX 22. RESERVED
APPENDIX 23. OFF-STREET LOTS
   (a)   The following constitutes off-street parking lots owned by the City
that are regulated by special ordinance describing provisions of this Traffic
Code that are applicable to specified lots. Therefore, it shall be unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle in the off-street lots in a manner different than
authorized by said special ordinance and so posted.
   FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING:
      Midtown Parking Ramp – 4 spaces on Ground Floor, 17th Street side as
posted
   ONE HOUR LOTS:
      City Hall Annex Lot – 600 block of Sixteenth Street
   TWO HOUR LOTS:
      B-Lot – 1500 block of Seventh Avenue, spaces 26-50
   THREE HOUR LOTS:
      M-Lot – 500 block of Fourteenth Street
      T-Lot – 1400 block of Fourth Avenue
      U-Lot – 500 block of Fifteenth Street
      W-Lot – 400 block of Sixteenth Street, spaces 28-95
      Y-Lot – City Hall, 600 Sixteenth Street
      Midtown Parking Ramp – Ground Floor
   LEASED LOTS:
      B-Lot – 1500 block of Seventh Avenue, spaces 1-25 and 51-72
      G-Lot – 1800 block of Fifth Avenue
      S-Lot – 1400 block of Sixth Avenue
      W-Lot – 400 block of Sixteenth Street, spaces 1-27
      Midtown Parking Ramp – second, third and fourth floors
   (b)   The public works director may make, without prior City Council
approval, temporary changes to regulate or test alternate parking schemes, and
to handle emergencies or special conditions. No experimental regulation of
traffic shall remain in effect for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. No
such temporary change shall be effective until the public works director files
in writing with the city clerk such change and appropriate signing is in place.
APPENDIX 24. RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
(Ord. No. 3026-2019; Appendix 24 repealed; reserved for future use; 11/19/19)
APPENDIX 25. ANGLE PARKING
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle with the left side of the vehicle to the curb, except in the following
places where the vehicle may be parked at an angle to the curb:
   First Avenue, on the north side, from First Street to Second Street.
   Second Street, on the west side, from Sylvan Island to First Avenue.
   Fourth Avenue A, on the north side, from Seventeenth Street to Eighteenth
Street.
   Seventh Street, on west side, between Railroad Avenue and Fourth Avenue.
   Thirteenth Street, on both sides of the 300 block.
   Fourteenth Street, on both sides, from Third Avenue south one-half block.
   Sixteenth Street, on the west side, from River Drive to the first alley
south of River Drive.
   Seventeenth Street, east-west alley, south to Sixth Avenue, east side.
   Eighteenth Street between Fifth Avenue and Fourth Avenue A.
   Twenty-fourth Street, on the west side, between Sixth Avenue and Seventh
Avenue.
   Twenty-eighth Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to
alley.
   Twenty-ninth Street, on the west side, six spaces south of Twenty-third
Street.
   Thirtieth Avenue, on the south side, between Park Sixteenth Street and the
first alley west of Park Sixteenth Street.
   Thirty-first Street A, on the west side, from Twenty-third Avenue south to
the alley.
   Thirty-seventh Street, on the east side, from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-
second Avenue.
   Thirty-seventh street, on the west side, from Fourth Avenue south 80 feet.
APPENDIX 26. PERMIT PARKING
RESERVED.
APPENDIX 27. LOADING ZONES
As provided in this Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful for the driver to stand
a motor vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the active
loading or unloading of passengers, materials, supplies, or freight, as
described in Sec.
20-1101(23) of this Code; provided however that such loading or unloading does
not violate Sec.
20-5102, on any day, seven days a week, 24 hours a day in any of the following
places:
   (1)   any public alley;
   (2)   a thirty-foot space directly in front of the entrance to any theater;
   (3)   a twenty-foot space directly in front of the entrance to any public
building; and
In addition to the foregoing described loading zones, the following described
portions of streets are hereby established as loading zones:
   River Drive, on the south side, at approximately the 2400 block, in front of
the McLaughlin Body Company, for a distance of 90 feet, commencing 30 feet east
of the McLaughlin Body Company driveway;
   350 Third Street
   Fourth Avenue “A,” on the south side from Seventeenth Street, east 46 feet.
   Sixth Avenue, on the south side, first parking space west of Fifteenth
Street;
   Seventh Street, on the east side, beginning at a point 65 feet south of
Fourth Avenue Place, continuing south for 40 feet, for the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Saturday;
   Eighth Avenue, on the north side, from a point 58 feet east of Sixteenth
Street, east 50 feet;
   Twelfth Avenue, from Forty-First Street to Forty-Eighth Street, for the
hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days.
   Fourteenth Street, on the east side, first parking space north of Seventh
Avenue;
   Sixteenth Street, on the east side, the first space south of the alley
between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue;
   Sixteenth Street, east side, one parking space north of Fifth Avenue;
   Seventeenth Street, west side, one parking space north of alley to the south
of Fifth Avenue;
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, 33 feet south of the first alley south
of Third Avenue;
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, north of the first alley south of
Fifth Avenue, first parking space;
   Seventeenth Street, on the west side, from the alley south of Sixteenth
Avenue, 45 feet north;
   Twentieth Avenue, on the south side, from a point 30 feet east of Sixteenth
Street, east 50 feet;
   Thirty-first Avenue, on the north side, from Sixteenth Street west to the
first driveway;
   Thirty-first Street, on east side, 100 feet south of Twenty-third Avenue;
   Thirty-eighth Street, east side, south of River Drive adjacent to loading
docks.
(Ord. No. 3029-2020; 10/6/20; Ord. No. 3047-2024; 11/19/24)
APPENDIX 28. RESERVED
APPENDIX 29. ALTERED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES – NO WARRANT OR STUDY
20 MPH Speed Limits:
4700 Block of 18th Avenue Court
4700 Block of 19th Avenue
4700 Block of 20th Avenue
1800 & 1900 Blocks of 47th Street Court
APPENDIX 30. NO TRUCK PARKING
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following areas are designated as No
Truck Parking:
   First Street, on the east side, from First Avenue to Third Avenue.
APPENDIX 31. SNOW ROUTES
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following streets are hereby designated
snow routes and no parking shall be allowed in the event of two (2) inches or
more of snow:
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between First Street and Eleventh Street.
   Seventh Avenue, on both sides, between Twelfth Street and Twenty-third
Street.
   Seventh Street, on both sides, between Eleventh Avenue and Thirty-sixth
Avenue.
   Tenth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Twelfth Avenue, on both sides, between Seventh Street and Fifty-fifth
Street.
   Fifteenth Street, on both sides, between Third Avenue and Sixteenth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Avenue, on both sides, between First Street and Sixteenth Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue, on both sides, between Seventh Street and Tenth Street.
   Twenty-fifth Street, on both sides, between Sixth Avenue and Sixteenth
Avenue.
   Twenty-sixth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Seventh
Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street, on both sides, between River Drive and Twenty-sixth
Avenue.
   Forty-first Street, on both sides, between River Drive and Fifth Avenue.
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, between First Street and Thirteenth Street.
   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, between Twenty-Fourth Street and Twenty-Fifth
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Eleventh Street and Nineteenth Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Twenty-First Street and Twenty-Seventh
Street.
   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, between Thirty-Six Street and Fifty-Fifth
Street.
   Sixth Avenue, on both sides, between Twelfth Street and Eighteenth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue B, on both sides, between Twenty-Fifth Street and Twenty-
Seventh Street.
   Fifteenth Street Place, on both sides, between Seventeenth Avenue and
Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Twenty-Third Avenue, on both sides, between Fifteenth Street A and Twelfth
Street.
   Twenty-Sixth Avenue, on both sides, between Thirty-Fourth and Forty-Eighth
Street.
   Twenty-Seventh Street, on both sides, between Eleventh Avenue B and Twenty-
Third Avenue.
   Thirty-Ninth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Sixth Avenue.
   Forty-First Street, on both sides, between Tenth Avenue and Eleventh Avenue.
   Twenty-Sixth Avenue, on both sides, between Thirty-Sixth Street and Forty-
Eighth Street.
   Forty-Eighth Street, on both sides, between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.
   Forty-Eighth Street, on both sides, between Eleventh Avenue A and Fourteenth
Avenue.
   Forty-Eighth Street, on both sides, between Twenty-Third Avenue and Twenty-
Sixth Avenue.
(Ord. 3005-2021; 04/13/21)
APPENDIX 32. FIRE LANES
As provided in this Traffic Code, fire lanes shall be located at the following
premises and shall be further shown on maps on file in the offices of the City
clerk, the traffic engineer and the traffic sergeant:
Premises and Address:
   Venture, 2000 Thirty-sixth Avenue.
   Target, 4218 Twenty-third Avenue.
   King Plaza, 3800 Twenty-third Avenue.
   K-Mart, 5000 Twenty-third Avenue.
   City Line Plaza, 160 Nineteenth Avenue.
   Spring Valley, Forty-first Street and Twelfth Avenue.
   Trinity Medical Center, East Campus, 501 Tenth Avenue.
   Springbrook Courts, 1000 Block, Forty-first Street.
   Homewood Manor, Sixtieth Street and Thirty-fourth Avenue.
   John Deere Collection Center, 320 Sixteen Street.
   Southpark, 4500 Sixteenth Street.
   Moline High School, 3600 Twenty-third Avenue.
   John Deere Collector Center, 320 Sixteenth Street.
APPENDIX 33. REGULATIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
As provided in this Traffic Code, contracts for enforcement of traffic
regulations on private property are in effect at the following locations:
Premises and Address:
   Crown Center, 4000 Avenue of the Cities.
   Donut Delite Plaza, 3606 Avenue of the Cities.
   King Plaza, 3624 and 3644 Avenue of the Cities.
   Moline Housing Authority, 825 17th Street, 4141 11th Avenue A, and 1150 41st
Street.
   Moline School District, all school district properties.
   Rock River Plaza, 3901 to 3941 41st Avenue Drive and 3900 to 3930 44th
Avenue Drive.
(Ord. No. 3010-2021; 5/11/21)
APPENDIX 34. FIRE CROSSING SIGNALS
Fire crossing signals shall be erected and maintained at the following
intersections and places:
APPENDIX 35. ALTERED SPEED LIMITS
20 MPH Speed Limit
   Twelfth Street Place from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-fifth Avenue
   Eighteenth Street, between First and Second Avenues.
   Twenty-third Avenue, between Thirty-fourth Street to Thirty-sixth Street.
   Eleventh Avenue A, east of Forty-first Street in Springbrook Courts.
   Twenty-fifth Avenue, Seventh Street to Twelfth Street.
   Thirty-fifth Avenue, from Thirteenth Street east to Thirty-Sixth Avenue.
   Forty-fourth Avenue, Forty-eighth Street to Fifty-third Street.
   Forty-seventh Avenue, Forty-eighth Street to Fifty-third Street.
   Fifty and Fifty-first Avenue, from Sixtieth Street east to Green Valley
Park.
35 MPH Speed Limit
   Fifty-third Street, Twenty-third Avenue to Thirty-fourth Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street, between Fifth Avenue and Twelfth Avenue.
40 MPH Speed Limit
   Avenue of the Cities, from Forty-first Street to the East Moline Border.
   Sixteenth Street, Thirty-sixth Avenue to Fifty-second Avenue.
   Nineteenth Street, from Seventh Avenue to Avenue of the Cities.
   Thirty-eighth/Thirty-sixth Avenue (Harvest Road) from Sixteenth Street to
the East Moline border.
   Fifty-second Avenue, Third Street to Sixteenth Street.
School Speed Limit
20 MPH on school days when school children are present. No person shall drive
motor vehicle in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing the
following designated school zones on a school day between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. when school children are present:
   Seventh Avenue, from Twenty-third Street to Twenty-fourth Street.
   Seventh Avenue, from Twenty-fourth Street to Twenty-fifth Street.
   Seventh Street, from 250 feet south of Thirty-second Avenue to 240 feet
north of Thirty-second Avenue.
   Tenth Street, from 250 feet south at Fourteenth Avenue to Fifteenth Avenue.
   Eleventh Street, from Nineteenth Avenue to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Twelfth Avenue from 1,125 feet west of Forty-eighth Street to 300 feet east
of Fifty-fourth Street.
   Twelfth Street from Nineteenth to Twenty-third Avenue.
   Sixteenth Street from 150 feet south of Fourteenth Avenue to 200 feet south
of Eighteenth Avenue.
   Sixteenth Avenue from Ninth Street to 130 feet east of Twelfth Street.
   Sixteenth Avenue from Twelfth Street to 200 feet east of Fourteenth Street.
   Eighteenth Avenue from the intersection of Twenty-fifth Street 200 feet
west.
   Nineteenth Avenue from Ninth Street to Thirteenth Street.
   Avenue of the Cities, from Thirty-fourth Street to Thirty-sixth Street.
   Twenty-fourth Street, from Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue.
   Twenty-fifth Street from the alley south of Eighteenth Avenue to 150 feet
south of Eighteenth Avenue A.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue from 650 feet east of Thirty-fourth Street to 650 feet
east of Thirty-sixth Street.
   Twenty-sixth Avenue between Twenty-ninth and Thirty-first Streets.
   Twenty-seventh Street from 100 feet south of Fifteenth Street to Seventeenth
Avenue.
   Thirty-fourth Street from Twenty-third Avenue to Twenty-fifth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street from 300 feet north of Fifteenth Avenue to Seventeenth
Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street from 100 feet north of Forty-fourth Avenue to Forty-
sixth Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street from Eleventh Avenue D to Forty-ninth Street.
   Fifty-third Street from Eleventh Avenue B to 250 feet south of Twelfth
Avenue.
(Ord. No. 3008-2018; 4/10/18; Ord. No. 3059-2022; 1/10/23; Ord. No. 3034-2023;
9/12/23; Ord. No. 3054-2023; 12/12/23; Ord. No. 3032-2025; 8/26/25; Ord. No.
3061-2025; 12/2/25)
APPENDIX 36. NO U-TURN
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following points are designated as No U
turns:
APPENDIX 37. NO TURN ON RED
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following approaches at the designated
intersections are hereby designated as No Turn on Red:
   Twelfth Avenue, westbound at Fifty-third Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, eastbound at Thirty-sixth Street.
   Twenty-third Avenue, westbound at Thirty-sixth Street.
   Twenty-seventh Street, northbound at Twelfth Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street A, northbound at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-first Street A, southbound at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-sixth Street, northbound at Twenty-third Avenue.
   Thirty-sixth Street, southbound at Twenty-third Avenue.
APPENDIX 38. NO TURN ON RED WHEN CHILDREN ARE PRESENT
As provided in this Traffic Code, the following approaches at the designated
intersections are hereby designated as No Turn on Red when Children are
Present:
   Twelfth Avenue, eastbound at Forty-eighth Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, westbound at Forty-Eighth Street.
   Twelfth Avenue, westbound at Fifty-third Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue, eastbound at Seventh Street.
   Thirty-second Avenue, westbound at Seventh Street.
   Forty-first Street, northbound at Twelfth Avenue.
   Forty-first Street, southbound at Twelfth Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street, northbound at Twelfth Avenue.
   Forty-eighth Street, southbound at Twelfth Avenue.
   Fifty-third Street, northbound at Twelfth Avenue.
CHAPTER 21
NUISANCES IN GENERAL
   Art. I.   General Provisions, §21-1100 - §21-1104
   Art. II.   Chronic Nuisance Property and Aggravated Chronic Nuisance
Property, §21-2101 - §21-2107
   Art. III.   Registration of Vacant Properties and Properties with Defaulted
Mortgages, §21-3100 - §21-3114
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 21-1100.   DEFINED.
   Within the City, it is hereby declared a nuisance for any person:
   (1)   Nuisances defined by state law; nuisances in fact . To cause any of
those acts or omissions that are declared to be nuisances by the laws of the
state, and such as are known as nuisances to the common law, not hereinafter
enumerated in this section or this Code; or to cause those acts or omissions
which are nuisances in fact.
   (2)   Nuisances defined by this Code . To cause any of those acts or
omissions that is declared by this Code to be nuisances.
   (3)   Unsafe, unsightly structures . To maintain any building, structure,
street, sign or billboard in an unsafe, hazardous, or unsightly condition.
   (4)   Distillery, slaughterhouse, etc . To carry on, use, or occupy any
distillery or slaughtering establishment, or establishment for steaming or
rendering lard, tallow, offal, dead animals, or other substance of like nature,
without the permission of the City Council.
   (5)   Odors . To engage in any activity which causes or produces
unreasonably offensive odors, except that this subsection shall not apply to
those activities carried on in the public interest.
   (6)   Putrid substances . Maintain or permit any substance on the premises
which is, or may become, putrid or create an unhealthy condition.
   (7)   Noises .
      a.   To cause or allow unreasonably loud noises tending to cause alarm or
to disturb the public peace and quiet.
      b.   Noise measurements, as set forth in Section
35-5409(d), are not required to establish a violation of this subdivision.
However, noise measurements may be introduced as corroborating evidence when
alleging a violation of this subsection.
      c.   If noise measurements are collected, manufacturer’s instructions for
the equipment used should be followed and Section
35-5409(d) may be, but is not required to be, used as guidance in gathering
data.
(Ord. No. 3001-2015; Sec. 21-1100(7) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 21-1100
(7) enacted; 01/27/15; corrected scrivener’s error by amending the reference to
Section
35-5409(e) herein to Section
35-5409(d); 08/09/16)
   (8)   Licenses . To fail or refuse to obtain and possess any license
required by this Code or other ordinance of the City.
   (9)   Continuing violations of this Code . To continue to do any act, acts,
omission or omissions which constitutes a violation of this Code or other
ordinance of the City.
   (10)   Attractive nuisances . For the owner or occupant of any premises to
create, maintain, or suffer an attractive nuisance to remain on the premises.
   (11)   Zoning violations . To violate the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
   (12)   Unhealthy conditions . To create, allow, maintain, or permit any
condition which may endanger the public health.
   (13)   Encroachments . To cause, allow, permit, or suffer any encroachment
upon public ways or upon public grounds without obtaining a permit therefor.
   (14)   Unlawful assemblies . To organize, lead, or participate in any
unlawful assembly of persons.
   (15)   Violation of technical Codes . To cause, allow, permit, or suffer the
violation of the Building Code of the City, the Electrical Code of the City,
the Fire Prevention Code of the City, the Heating and Air Conditioning Code of
the City, the Plumbing Code of the City, or any other technical Code adopted by
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City.
   (16)   Abandoned refrigerators . To leave or permit standing outside of any
structure, or within any abandoned structure, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or
other container which has an air tight door or lid with a snap lock or other
locking device which cannot be released from the inside; except that it shall
not be a nuisance under the subsection if the door is first removed from the
device.
   (17)   Littering . To allow, suffer, permit, or cause to be dropped, thrown,
discarded, placed, or deposited on any public way or public place, or on any
private property when public property may be affected thereby, any paper,
glass, plastic, wood, metal, solid or liquid vegetable or animal compound,
rubbish, garbage, waste, effluent, junk, debris, litter, solid, or any
combination thereof, except in a refuse receptacle or landfill site of the
City.
   (18)   Construction and heavy equipment noise . To allow, suffer, permit or
cause to be operated, or, otherwise engaged vehicles licensed by the State of
Illinois or another state as a second division truck exceeding gross vehicle
weight of thirty thousand (30,000) pounds or unlicensed motor vehicles used in
the construction industry and commonly referred to as heavy construction
equipment (such equipment to include but not to be limited to road graders,
back hoes, steam rollers and crane) for the purpose of making commercial
deliveries or engaging in building construction, other construction, or making
commercial pickups, such as refuse collections, at any location within five
hundred (500) feet of a residential use, prior to 6:00 a.m. on any day and
after 9:00 p.m. on any day; however, this prohibition shall not apply in cases
where a repair is immediately required for the protection of life or property.
Nothing herein is intended to prohibit mere travel of legally authorized
vehicles upon the streets of the City.
   (19)   Graffiti .
      a.   Graffiti shall be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing,
name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter placed upon the real or
personal property of an owner without the owner's express, written permission;
provided, however, it shall not be a defense that the owner/occupant has given
permission where this graffiti tends to incite violence.
      b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the real
or personal, public or private, property of another.
      c.   It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of fixed real or
personal property located within the public view to place or give permission to
place graffiti, as otherwise defined in subsection a., on said real or personal
property if the graffiti tends to incite violence by referring to gang or
criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity as defined in
Chapter 22, Sec.
22-7200, of the Moline Code of Ordinances, or contains defamatory material
about a public or private person, except as otherwise allowed by law.
      d.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any public
building or facility, or while on private property, any of the following
materials with the intent to use such material(s) to violate subsection b. and/
or c. above: spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking pens containing non-
water soluble fluid, brushes, applicators or other materials for marking,
scratching or etching.
      e.   Upon being notified in writing by the City of Moline, the owner of
property upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the
graffiti within seven (7) days of the date of notice. By written request, this
time period may be extended due to weather conditions by the chief of police or
designee thereof. The property owner may also request assistance, in writing,
for the graffiti removal based on the owner's inability to perform removal.
Failure to remove the graffiti within the specified time shall cause the
summary abatement of this nuisance as prescribed in this chapter and costs
shall be assessed to the owner. The penalty upon conviction for the offense of
failure to remove graffiti shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense
and each day such failure shall continue shall be considered a separate offense
and fines shall be assessed accordingly.
      f.   Penalty for violating subsection b. shall be a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The
offender may also be ordered by the court, in addition to fines, to pay
restitution to the property owner for the costs of restoring the property to
its condition before the graffiti was applied.
      g.   Penalty for violating subsection c. shall consist of a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      h.   Penalty for violating subsection d. shall be a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      i.   Public service work including, but not limited to, cleaning graffiti
at locations within the City of Moline may be required by the court for persons
convicted of violating subsections b., c., or d., in addition to or in lieu of
fines or penalties described in subsections f., g., and h.
(Ord. No. 95-2-2, Sec. 21-1100 amended by enacting new subsection (19); 02/14/
95; Ord. No. 98-10-1; Sec. 21-1100(19) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 21-
1100 (19) enacted; 10/06/98; Ord. No. 3013-2018; Sec. 21-1100(19)e. repealed;
new Sec. 21-1100(19)e. enacted; 4/17/18)
   (20)   Barbed wire . To construct, create, allow, maintain or permit within
the City a fence or barrier, consisting or made of barbed wire, or of which
barbed wire is a part, unless the barbed wire commences at least eight feet
above the ground.
   (21)   Abandoned or Inoperable Vehicles .
      a.   To allow, cause or permit an abandoned or inoperable vehicle as
defined in Section
20-7400 to be present and open to the view of the public.
      b.   Penalty.   Any person violating Section
21-1100(21) shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
   (22)   Garbage and Debris .
      a.   Who is the owner of any parcel of private property to refuse or
neglect to remove garbage or debris from said parcel.
      b.   Except for garbage and debris set out for normal garbage collection
or that has been scheduled as a special bulky item or items pickup through the
City’s public works department per Section
15-2201(e) of the Code.
      c.   All provisions of Section
32-1100(e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and (j) shall apply.
(Ord. No. 3008-2004; Sec. 21-1100(21) enacted new; 02/03/04) (Ord. No. 3052-
2017; Sec. 21-1100(22) enacted new; 12/19/17)
SEC. 21-1101.   NUISANCES CONSTITUTE VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain or permit the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance as above defined upon property under such
person's control. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of
violation of this Code and such violation shall be punished as set forth within
each subsection unless no punishment is set forth in said subsection, in which
case the violation will be punished as set forth in
Chapter 1, Sec.1-1107 of this Code. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
injunctive or other equitable relief.
(Ord. No. 95-2-2; Sec. 21-1101 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 21-1101
enacted; 02/14/95)
SEC. 21-1102.   STANDING TO COMPLAIN.
   The following shall have standing to complain of any condition declared to
be a nuisance by this chapter:
   (1)   The City;
   (2)   Any person whose interest, rights or property are particularly
adversely affected by the nuisance.
SEC. 21-1103.   ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS IN GENERAL.
   Any person having standing to complain of a nuisance under this chapter, or
the head of any City department having cognizance of a nuisance, shall report
the fact of the nuisance and the details surrounding it to the city attorney
who shall, if it is justified under the circumstances, institute abatement
proceedings in accordance with the laws of the state.
SEC. 21-1104.   EMERGENCY ABATEMENT OF CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   When a nuisance as defined by this chapter exists and the nuisance causes or
threatens imminent danger or great peril to persons or property, the nuisance
may be immediately abated by the City, by using the following procedure:
   The city administrator shall find that the nuisance exists, and that the
nuisance causes or threatens imminent danger or great peril to persons or
property, and that an emergency exists.
(Ord. No. 92-6-1; Sec. 21-1104(1) repealed in its entirety; new subsection 21-
1104(1) enacted; 06/02/92)
   (2)   A copy of the city administrator's findings made under subsection (1)
shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 92-6-1; Sec. 21-1104(2) repealed in its entirety; new subsection 21-
1104(2) enacted; 06/02/92)
   (3)   The city clerk shall immediately issue a notice directed to the owner
or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists, directing the owner
or occupant to immediately abate the nuisance.
   (4)   The notice issued pursuant to subsection (3) shall be served upon the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which the nuisance exists. The notice
may be served by any officer or employee of the City. In the event that the
owner or occupant of the premises is not to be found, the notice may be posted
on the premises on which the nuisance exists.
   (5)   Upon being served with a notice to abate a nuisance as provided in
subsection (4), the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance is
located shall immediately abate the nuisance. The failure of the owner or
occupant to immediately abate the nuisance upon service or posting of the
notice shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punished as provided in
Sec.
1-1107 of this Code.
   (6)   In the event that the owner or occupant of a premises on which a
nuisance is ordered to be abated under this section does not immediately abate
the nuisance, the appropriate City department shall immediately abate the
nuisance. The cost of the abatement by the City shall be assessed against the
property on which the nuisance existed, and shall be collected as other special
assessments.
ARTICLE II. CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY AND AGGRAVATED CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
SEC. 21-2101.   VIOLATION OF THIS ARTICLE.
   (a)   Any certain property within the City of Moline which becomes a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property is in violation of
this article and is subject to its remedies.
   (b)   Any owner or person in charge who permits property under his or her
ownership or control to be a chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic
nuisance property shall be in violation of this article and subject to its
remedies.
SEC. 21-2102.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Chronic nuisance property. Property upon which three (3) or more of
the criminal or other offenses listed below have occurred during any 365-day
period, as a result of any three (3) separate and distinct events.
   (1)   First degree murder as defined in 720 ILCS 5/9-1;
   (2)   Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.;
   (3)   Criminal Housing Management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
   (4)   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices as defined in 720 ILCS
5/20-2;
   (5)   Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24 et
seq.;
   (6)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
   (7)   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.;
   (8)   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
   (9)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. or Section
22-1106 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (10)   Sale, delivery or possession of drug paraphernalia, as defined in 720
ILCS 600/3 or Section
22-1201, 22-1202, and 22-1203 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (11)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1 or Section
22-2100 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (12)   Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
   (13)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
12-1 et seq. or Section
22-2101 or Section
22-2102 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (14)   Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9;
   (15)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.;
   (16)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21 et seq. or
Section
22-3100 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (17)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS
5/1-1 et seq. or Section
4-5102 or Section
4-5104 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (18)   An order imposing a fine or other sanction for violation of 
Chapter 8 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, which order is issued by the
administrative hearing officer pursuant to Sections 
2-6100 through 
2-6117 of the Moline Code of Ordinances or by a Court;
   (19)   A violation of 
Chapter 32 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, which violation is not remedied
within the time allotted after service of a notice to abate or correct as
provided in
Chapter 32;
   (20)   Violation of the City nuisance ordinance, Sections
21-1100  and
21-1101, of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (21)   Violation of the City of Moline’s Liquor Ordinance as set forth in
Chapter 4 of the Moline Code of Ordinances or violation of the State of
Illinois Statute controlling or regulating the sale or use of alcoholic
beverages.
   (22)   Violation of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection
Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.;
   (23)   Exemptions. The following shall not be considered in the
determination of a chronic nuisance property:
      a.   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if (i) the
contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or
sexual violence; (ii) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to
respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (iii) the
contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a
disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
      b.   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence
or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the dwelling unit or on the premises; or
      c.   Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in the
dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence
or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household,
guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other
party.
(Ord. No. 3037-2018; new subsections enacted: 21-2102(a)(22), (a)(23); 10/09/
18)
   (b)   Aggravated chronic nuisance property. Property upon which two (2) or
more of the criminal offenses listed below have occurred during any 365-day
period, as a result of any two (2) separate and distinct events.
   (1)   First degree murder as defined in 720 ILCS 5/9-1;
   (2)   Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.;
   (3)   Criminal Housing Management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
   (4)   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices as defined in 720 ILCS
5/20-2;
   (5)   Any offense involving deadly weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24 et
seq.;
   (6)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1 (a)(1), (d), (e);
   (7)   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.;
   (8)   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
   (9)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture of delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and Section
22-1106 of the Moline Code of Ordinances;
   (10)   Sale, delivery or possession of drug paraphernalia, as defined in 720
ILCS 600/3 and Section
22-1201, 22-1202, and 22-1203 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (11)   Violation of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection
Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.;
   (12)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.;
   (13)   Exemptions. The following shall not be considered in the
determination of an aggravated chronic nuisance property:
      a.   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if (i) the
contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or
sexual violence; (ii) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to
respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (iii) the
contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a
disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
      b.   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence
or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the dwelling unit or on the premises; or
      c.   Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in the
dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence
or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household,
guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other
party.
(Ord. No. 3037-2018; new subsections enacted: 21-2102(b)(11), (b)(12), (b13);
10/09/18)
   (c)   Control . The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or
govern conduct that occurs on that property.
   (d)   Court . A court of competent jurisdiction in the State of Illinois or
the City’s system of administrative adjudication, commonly known as the
Municipal Code Enforcement System (“MUNICES”).
   (e)   Owner . Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any
legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited
to:
   (1)   A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested (a) all or part of the
legal title to the property; or (b) all or part of the beneficial ownership and
the right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises; or
   (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; or
   (3)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner.
   (f)   Permit. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent,
or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   (g)   Person . Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity capable of owning or using property in the City of Moline.
   (h)   Person in charge . Any person in actual or constructive possession of
a property, including but not limited to an owner, occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
   (i)   Property . Any real property, including that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including but not limited to any premises,
room, house, building or structure or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
SEC. 21-2103.   REMEDIES.
   (a)   In the event the court determines the property to be a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property, the court may
order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for
a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, or may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be
appropriate to abate the nuisance.
   (b)   In addition to Sec.
21-2103(a) above, the court may impose upon the owner a civil penalty in
accordance with Sec.
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances for each day the owner had actual
knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property or an aggravated
chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property.
   (c)   In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the court
may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
   (1)   The actions or lack of action taken by the owner to mitigate or
correct the problem at the property;
   (2)   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;
   (3)   The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
   (4)   The cooperation of the person in charge with the City;
   (5)   The cost to the City to investigate and correct or attempt to correct
the condition;
   (6)   The disturbance of neighbors;
   (7)   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises; and/or
   (8)   Repeated consumption of alcohol in public.
   (d)   The court may authorize the City of Moline to physically secure the
property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within
the time specified by the court or to take other steps necessary to abate a
chronic nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance.
   (e)   In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property or
otherwise abate a chronic nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance, all costs
reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure or abate the nuisance shall
be assessed against the owner.
   (f)   In the court's discretion, a tenant may be entitled to his or her
reasonable relocation costs from the owner, as those costs are determined by
the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property, after
the owner received notice as described herein of the neighborhood improvement
officer’s determination as described below.
   (g)   The City, in addition to any other remedies set forth herein, may, at
its discretion, charge an owner of a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated
chronic public nuisance with a violation of this article which may be processed
and prosecuted as an ordinance violation. Any person violating Section
21-2101 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) plus court costs.
   (h)   In addition to other remedies available, the court may order the owner
or person in control of the nuisance property to post a reasonable bond to
assure future compliance with the statutes of the State of Illinois and the
ordinances of the City of Moline for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed
one (1) year.
SEC. 21-2104.   NOTIFICATION OF PROCEDURE.
   (a)   When the neighborhood improvement officer receives three (3) or more
police or inspection reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity,
as defined by Section
21-2102(a) of this chapter, or two or more police or inspection reports
documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity, as defined by Section
21-2102(b) of this chapter, on or within a property, the neighborhood
improvement officer shall independently review such reports to determine
whether they describe acts set forth in Section
21-2102(a) or (b) of this chapter. Upon such findings, the neighborhood
improvement officer shall notify the owner or person in control in writing that
the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance or an aggravated
chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The street address or legal description sufficient for identification
of the property;
   (2)   A statement that the neighborhood improvement officer has determined
the property to be a chronic nuisance property or aggravated chronic nuisance
property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to his/
her findings;
   (3)   Demand that the owner respond within ten (10) days to the neighborhood
improvement officer and propose a course of action that the neighborhood
improvement officer agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to
the violation;
   (4)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the
address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the neighborhood improvement officer;
   (5)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as
shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or
the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons are different
than the owner, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid;
   (6)   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten
(10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner
and the owner has not contacted the neighborhood improvement officer.
   Nothing herein shall prohibit the neighborhood improvement officer from
sending a warning letter that a property is in danger of becoming a chronic
nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance property after receiving one or more
police or inspection reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity,
as defined in Section
21-2102(a) and (b) of this chapter. Such warning is not required.
   (b)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a
chronic nuisance property or aggravated chronic nuisance property shall not
invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this article.
   (c)   If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this article, an owner stipulates with the
neighborhood improvement officer that the owner will pursue a course of action
the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation, the neighborhood improvement officer may agree to postpone legal
proceedings for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days. If
the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance
activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within thirty (30)
days, the City of Moline shall commence a legal proceeding to abate the
nuisance.
SEC. 21-2105.   COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION, BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (a)   The City of Moline may commence an action to abate a chronic nuisance
or an aggravated chronic nuisance as described in Section
21-2102(a) and (b).
   (b)   In an action seeking abatement of a chronic nuisance property or
aggravated chronic nuisance property, the City shall have the initial burden of
showing by preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property.
   (c)   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance
property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property that the owner or person in
control of the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property, or could not, in
spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct
leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property or an
aggravated chronic nuisance property.
SEC. 21-2106.   EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court for
such interim relief, as is deemed by the city attorney to be appropriate. In
such an event, the notification provision set forth in Section
21-2104 above need not be complied with; however, the City shall make a
diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court hearing. In the
alternative, the City may proceed under Section
21-1104 for emergency abatement.
   (b)   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property and finds that the
property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the court may
order the remedies set forth in Section
21-2103 of this chapter.
SEC. 21-2107.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this article or its application, or any person or
circumstances held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
application of its provisions to the other persons or circumstances shall not
be in any way affected.
Note:
Chapter 21 repealed in its entirety and a new Chapter enacted in lieu thereof
per G.O. No. 3042-2012; 12/11/12
Prior and subsequent ordinance amendments are referenced by their ordinance
numbers and adoption dates at the end of the corresponding section or
subsection.
ARTICLE III. REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTIES AND PROPERTIES WITH DEFAULTED
MORTGAGES
SEC. 21-3100. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (a)   It is the purpose and intent of the corporate authorities to establish
a process to address the deterioration, crime, and decline in value of
neighborhoods within the City of Moline caused by vacant property and
properties with defaulted mortgages located within the corporate boundaries of
the City, and further, to establish a process to identify, regulate, limit and
reduce the number of these properties located within the City of Moline. The
corporate authorities have determined that owner-occupied structures are
generally better maintained when compared to vacant structures, even with a
diligent off-site property owner. Vacant structures or structures owned by
individuals who are under economic stress and unable to meet their mortgage
obligations are often not properly or diligently maintained, and consequently
contribute to blight and declining property values and have a negative impact
on social perception of the residential areas where they are located. The
corporate authorities further intend to establish a registry through a
registration program as a mechanism to help protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance of properties that are in
default or defaulted, as such terms are defined in this Article III, and to
provide a mechanism to avert foreclosure actions through timely intervention,
education, or counseling of property owners.
   (b)   This article shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes, and
the term "article" as used throughout shall mean this Article III.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3100 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3101.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      (1)   Default or defaulted shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied
with the terms of the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or
other evidence of the debt, referred to in the mortgage.
      (2)   Enforcement officer shall mean any law enforcement officer,
building official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector,
building inspector, or other person authorized by the City of Moline to enforce
the applicable code(s).
      (3)   Evidence of vacancy shall mean any condition that on its own, or
combined with other conditions present, would lead to a reasonable person to
believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned
vehicles, auto parts and/or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or
personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an
unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers and/or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or
government agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other
openings in violation of applicable code.
      (4)   Foreclosure or foreclosure action shall mean the legal process
under the Illinois Mortgage Foreclosure Law, 735 ILCS 5/15-1101 et seq., by
which a mortgagee, or other lienholder, terminates or attempts to terminate a
property owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable
title to the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property
subject to the lien. For purposes of this article, the process is not concluded
until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lienholder, or their designee, by
a deed in lieu of foreclosure, judicial sales deed, sheriff's deed, certificate
of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in a
subsequent arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
      (5)   Mortgage shall mean any consensual lien created by a written
instrument which grants or retains an interest in real estate to secure a debt
or other obligation. The term "mortgage" includes, without limitation:
         a.   mortgages securing "reverse mortgage" loans as authorized by
subsection (a) of Section 5 of the Illinois Banking Act;
         b.   mortgages securing "revolving credit" loans as authorized by
subsection (c) of Section 5 of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 1-6b of the
Illinois Savings and Loan Act, and Section 46 of the Illinois Credit Union Act;
         c.   every deed conveying real estate, although an absolute conveyance
in its terms, which shall have been intended only as a security in the nature
of a mortgage;
         d.   equitable mortgages; and
         e.   instruments which would have been deemed instruments in the
nature of a mortgage prior to the effective date of the Illinois Mortgage
Foreclosure Law.
      (6)   Mortgagee shall mean the creditor, including but not limited to,
trustees; mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any
agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage
agreement; or any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on
the real property, excluding governmental entities.
      (7)   Owner shall mean every person, entity, or mortgagee, who alone or
severally with others, has legal or equitable title to any real property as
defined by this article; has legal care, charge, or control of any such
property; is in possession or control of any such property; and/or is vested
with possession or control of any such property. The property manager shall not
be considered the owner.
      (8)   Property manager shall mean any party designated by the owner as
responsible for inspecting, maintaining and securing the property as required
in this article.
      (9)   Real property shall mean any residential, commercial, agricultural
or industrial land and/or buildings, leasehold improvements and anything
affixed to the land, or portion thereof identified by a property parcel
identification number, located within the City of Moline limits.
      (10)   Registrable property shall mean:
         a.   Any property that is vacant for more than ninety (90) days or
that is subject to any cancellation or termination of a utility or service,
whichever occurs first.
            1.   A prolonged absence from a property where the owner or tenant
has made arrangements to meet the maintenance requirements of Section
21-3106 shall exempt the otherwise vacant property from the registration
requirement herein. The owner or tenant shall, upon request of the City of
Moline, provide proof of such arrangements.
            2.   A rental property that is, at the time of the occurrence of
the vacancy, already listed on a registry maintained by the City of Moline,
shall not be considered a "registrable property."
            3.   The owner of a commercial “vacant property” that is under
contract for property management services shall register the property as
required by this Article but, upon provision of the contact information for the
property manager or management firm, be exempt from the fees otherwise required
herein.
         b.   Any real property located in the City of Moline, whether vacant
or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an
ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of
a foreclosure action by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgment of foreclosure
has been entered, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title
was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure
and said transfer has been confirmed by a court order, or any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a
"default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until
such time as the property is sold by the mortgagee, lienholder, or their
designee, to a non-related bona fide purchaser in a subsequent arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien in an arm's length transaction, or the
foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been
cured.
      (11)   Registry shall mean a web-based electronic database of searchable
real property records, used by the City of Moline to allow mortgagees and
owners the opportunity to register properties and pay applicable fees as
required in this article.
      (12)   Semi-annual registration shall mean the date of the initial
registration and every six (6) months thereafter until the property is occupied
for a period of no less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
      (13)   Utilities and services shall mean any utility and/or service that
is essential for a building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary
to comply with all the City of Moline codes. This includes, but is not limited
to, electrical, gas, water, sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance, and snow
removal.
      (14)   Vacant shall mean any parcel of land in the City of Moline that
contains any building or structure of which no part is lawfully occupied,
provided that such definition shall not include:
         a.   unoccupied buildings that are undergoing construction, renovation
or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable statutes,
ordinances, codes and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or
rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion;
         b.   unoccupied buildings that are used on an intermittent basis by
the Owner or tenant for legal uses permitted by applicable land use
regulations, and which continue to meet the maintenance requirements of Section
21-3106.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3101 enacted; 11/19/19: Ord. No. 3009-2021; Sec.
21-3101 amended; 04/27/21)
SEC. 21-3102.   APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   This article applies to vacant and defaulted properties within the City of
Moline.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3102 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3103.   ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY.
   The City of Moline, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging
each registrable property within the City of Moline, containing the information
required by this article.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3013 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3104.   INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO A MORTGAGE IN DEFAULT.
   (a)   Any owner of vacant property located within the City of Moline shall,
within ten (10) days after the property becomes vacant, or within ten (10) days
after assuming ownership of the property, whichever is later, register the real
property with the City of Moline registry.
   (b)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the owner, the mailing address of the owner, e-mail
address, and telephone number of the owner, and if applicable, the name and
telephone number of the property manager and said person's address, e-mail
address and telephone number.
   (c)   At the time of initial registration, each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each vacant property.
The fee for each subsequent semi-annual registration of a vacant property shall
increase by one hundred dollars ($100.00) over the amount of the fee most
recently paid and be due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous
registration. By way of example, the fee for the first renewal of the
registration shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); the fee for the
second renewal of the registration shall be three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00); and so forth. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to vacant properties; (3) for any related purposes as may be adopted in
the registry program set forth in this article. Said fees shall be deposited to
a special account in the City of Moline building department for the cost of
implementation and enforcement of this ordinance, and fulfilling the purpose
and intent of this article.
   (d)   If the property is sold or transferred, the new owner is subject to
all the terms of this article. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new
owner shall register the vacant property or update the existing registration.
The previous owner(s) will not be released from the responsibility of paying
all previous unpaid fees, fines and penalties accrued during that owner's
involvement with the vacant property, which shall be satisfied prior to the
issuance of any real estate transfer tax stamp or exempt stamp by the City.
   (e)   If the vacant property is not registered, or either the registration
fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of
when the registration or semi-annual registration is required pursuant to this
section, a late fee equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the semi-annual
registration fee shall be charged for every thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, that the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with
the registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and
registrations required by subsequent owners of the vacant property.
   (f)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this article as long as the property is vacant.
   (g)   Failure of the owner to properly register or to modify the
registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this ordinance
is a violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement by any of
the enforcement means available to the City of Moline.
   (h)   If any property is in violation of this article, the City of Moline
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on
the property in a fine amount imposed by a City hearing officer pursuant to the
City's system of administrative adjudication equivalent or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and any additional cost incurred by the City, including
legal fees, to bring the property into compliance.
   (i)   Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to
be registered again pursuant to the defaulted mortgage property section.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3104 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3105.   INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO A
MORTGAGE IN DEFAULT OR DEFAULTED.
   (a)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
City of Moline shall perform an inspection of the property upon it being in
default or defaulted by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of
default, provided that said mortgage authorizes such a right to inspect, a
lawful court order permits such an inspection, or consent to such an inspection
is given by a person of majority age with a legal right to occupy said
property.
   (b)   Property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above that remains in
default or is defaulted, shall be inspected every thirty (30) days by the
mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. If an inspection shows a change in the
property's occupancy status, the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
   (c)   Within ten (10) days of the date any mortgagee declares its mortgage
to be in default or defaulted, the mortgagee shall register the real property
with the City of Moline registry, and, at the time of registration, indicate
whether the property is vacant, and if so, shall designate in writing a
property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to
the mortgage in default or defaulted. A separate registration is required for
each defaulted property.
   (d)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the mortgagee' s name, mailing address, e-mail address and telephone
number, and the name of the property manager and said person's mailing address,
e-mail address, and telephone number.
   (e)   At the end of initial registration, each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each defaulted
property. The fee for each subsequent semi-annual registration of a defaulted
property shall increase by one hundred dollars ($100.00) over the amount of the
fee most recently paid and be due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the
previous registration. By way of example, the fee for the first renewal of the
registration shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); the fee for the
second renewal of the registration shall be three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00); and so forth. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to defaulted properties; (3) post-closing counseling and foreclosure
intervention limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which may not
include cash and mortgage modification assistance; and (4) for any related
purposes as may be adopted in the registry program set forth in this article.
Said fees shall be deposited to a special account in the City of Moline
building department for the purpose of funding the implementation and
enforcement of this ordinance, and fulfilling the purpose and intent of this
article. None of the funds provided for in this section shall be utilized for
the legal defense of foreclosure actions.
   (f)   If the defaulted mortgage and/or servicing on a property is sold or
transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all terms of this article. Within
ten (10) days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property or
update the existing registration. The previous mortgagee(s) will not be
released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and
penalties accrued during that mortgagee' s involvement with the defaulted
property.
   (g)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the defaulted property in a non-
arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this article. Within ten (10) days of the transfer,
the transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration.
Any and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including but not limited
to unregistered period during the foreclosure process, are the responsibility
of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The
previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's
involvement with the defaulted property.
   (h)   If the defaulted property is not registered, or the registration fee
is not paid within thirty (30) days of when the registration or renewal is
required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to ten percent (10%)
of the semi-annual registration fee shall be charged for every thirty-day
period (30), or portion thereof, the property is not registered and shall be
due and payable with the registration.
   (i)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as
any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure
or by any other legal means.
   (j)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property remains defaulted.
   (k)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances
required by this ordinance is a violation of this article and shall be subject
to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the City of Moline.
   (l)   If any property is in violation of this article, the City of Moline
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this article and/or
place a lien on the property in a fine amount imposed by a City hearing officer
pursuant to the City's system of administrative adjudication or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, and any additional cost incurred by the City, including
legal fees, to bring the property into compliance.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3105 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3106.   MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state or local law, discarded personal items, including but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed materials,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   (b)   Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior structure.
   (c)   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, of registrable
property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the
time registration is required.
   (d)   Registrable property yard maintenance shall include turf and grass and
maintenance of ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod so as not to create a nuisance.
Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not include weeds,
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
   (e)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and
removal of all trimmings.
   (f)   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the
applicable code(s).
   (g)   Failure of the mortgagee, owner, and transferees to properly maintain
the property as required by this article may result in a violation of the
applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the City of Moline. Pursuant to a
finding and determination by a City of Moline hearing officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the City of Moline may take the necessary action to
ensure compliance with this section.
   (h)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the City of Moline.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3106 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3107.   SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (b)   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
   (c)   Broken windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
   (d)   If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee and/or owner
to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the
applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular inspections
to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and any other
applicable laws.
   (e)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the City of Moline.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3107 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3108.   PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
   The provisions of this article are cumulative with and in addition to other
available remedies. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the City
of Moline from collecting on fees, fines and penalties in any lawful manner; or
enforcing its codes by any other means, including but not limited to,
injunction, abatements, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3108 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3109.   PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All registrable property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if such
property becomes vacant or blighted or is unregistered in violation of this
article, it is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, the abatement
of which pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to be necessary for
the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City of Moline.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3109 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3110.   ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   (a)   If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and may bring the
violations before a City hearing officer as soon as possible to address the
conditions of the property. Nothing herein shall limit the City of Moline from
abating any nuisance or unsafe condition by any other legal means available to
it.
   (b)   A City of Moline hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the authority to require the mortgagee or owner affected by this
section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures
including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other
openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
   (c)   If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a
serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the City of
Moline hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction may direct the City
of Moline to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee or owner with the
cost of the abatement. Without limitation on the foregoing, the City shall
additionally reserve to itself all nuisance abatement powers granted to it by
statute or at common law.
   (d)   If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the City of Moline for
the cost of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by
the City of Moline hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction within
thirty (30) days of the City of Moline sending the mortgagee or owner the
invoice, then the City of Moline may lien the property with such cost, along
with an administrative fee as determined in the City of Moline fee ordinance to
recover the administrative personnel services. In addition to filing a lien,
the City of Moline may pursue financial penalties against the mortgagee or
owner.
   (e)   The City of Moline may contract with an entity to implement this
article, and, if so, any reference to the enforcement officer herein shall
include the entity under contract to the City of Moline for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3110 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3111.   OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING, ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY.
   Any person who opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person of authority by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this article shall be subject to penalty as provided in the
applicable code(s) or a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3111 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3112.   IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City of Moline to
enforce the sections herewithin shall be personally immune from prosecution,
civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in
the discharge of duties imposed by this article.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3112 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3113.   PENALTIES.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this article, a violation of this article
is declared unlawful.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3113 enacted; 11/19/19)
SEC. 21-3114.   AMENDMENTS.
   Registration fees and penalties outlined in this article may be modified by
resolution, administrative order, or an amendment to this article, passed, and
adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2019; Sec. 21-3114 enacted; 11/19/19)
CHAPTER 22
OFFENSES - MISCELLANEOUS
   Art. I.   In General
      Div. 1.   Miscellaneous Offenses, §22-1100 - §22-1111
      Div. 2. Drug Paraphernalia, §22-1200 - §22-1205
      Div. 3. Parental Responsibilities, §22-1300 - §22-1304
      Div. 4. Truancy, §22-1400 - §22-1402
      Div. 5. Endangering the Life or Health of a Child, §22-1500
      Div. 6. Neglected and Delinquent Children Offenses, §22-1600 - §22-1603
      Div. 7. Look-A-Like Substances - §22-1700 - §22-1702
      Div. 8. Registration of Certain Offenders, §22-1800 - §22-1805
      Div. 9. Private Security Guards, §22-1900 - §22-1904
   Art. II.   Disorderliness and Offenses against a Person, §22-2100 - §22-2106
   Art. III.   Offenses Against Property, §22-3100 - §22-3107
   Art. IV.   Weapons, §22-4100 - §22-4103
   Art. V.   Gambling, §22-5100 - §22-5102
   Art. VI.   Littering, §22-6100 - §22-6102
   Art. VII.   Offenses Against Public Decency
      Div. 1. Prostitution, §22-7100 - §22-7104
      Div. 2. Obscenity, §22-7200 - §22-7202
   Art. VIII.   Authority to Impound Fleeing Vehicles, §22-8100 - §22-8104
ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SEC. 22-1100.   IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICER OR POLICE OFFICER.
   Whoever shall falsely represent to be an officer of the City, or shall
without authority exercise or attempt to exercise any powers, duties or
functions of any city officer, or whoever, not being a member of the police
department of the City shall wear or be in possession of any police officer's
badge with the intent thereby to pose as a police officer, shall be guilty of
an offense.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1100 repealed; new Sec. 22-1100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1101.   RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 3023-2006; Sec. 22-1101, “Fortunetelling,” repealed in its entirety;
Sec. 22-1101 reserved for future use; 05/23/06)
SEC. 22-1102.   CURFEW: IMPOSED UPON MINORS; DUTIES OF PARENTS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Curfew offenses:
   (1)   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
   (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or control
of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
   (b)   Curfew defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)
that the minor was:
   (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
   (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (5)   Involved in an emergency;
   (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
   (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
   (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
   (c)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this Section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this Section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in subsection (b) is present.
   (d)   Definitions. In this Section:
   (1)   "Curfew hours" means:
   (a.)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
   (b.)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
   (c.)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on
the following day.
   (2)   "Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile crash, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   (3)   "Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.
   (4)   "Guardian" means:
   (a.)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
   (b.)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   (5)   "Minor" means any person under 17 years of age.
   (6)   "Parent" means a person who is:
   (a.)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person;
or
   (b.)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   (7)   "Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
   (8)   "Remain" means to:
   (a.)   linger or stay; or
   (b.)   fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or
the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   (9)   "Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1102 repealed; new Sec. 22-1102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1103.   CLINGING TO RAILROAD CARS AND OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person shall seize, hang upon, get upon, hold, tie or fasten to any
railroad car, engine, or other vehicle or conveyance, or attempt to do so, or
attach to any such vehicle or conveyance any sleigh or sled, and ride thereon,
unless such person shall be acting in compliance with the law and such person's
duty.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1103 repealed; new Sec. 22-1103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1104.   ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND SIMILAR APPLIANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under such person's control, in
a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid with a snap
lock or other locking device which cannot be readily released from the inside
of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, without first removing
the door, lid, snap lock or other locking device.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1104 repealed; new Sec. 22-1104 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1105.   TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, SMOKING HERBS AND
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   (1)   Alternative nicotine product means a product or device not consisting
of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product"
excludes cigarettes, smoking tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms
are defined herein and any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation
product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
   (2)   Bidi Cigarette means a product that contains tobacco that is wrapped
in temburni or tendu leaf or that is wrapped in any other material identified
by rules of the Department or Public Health of the State of Illinois that is
similar in appearance or characteristics to the temburni or tendu leaf.
   (3)   Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems (“ENDS”) means and includes
vapes, vaporizers, vape pens, hookah pens, electronic cigarettes, e-cigs, e-
cigars, or e-pipes.
   (4)   Smoking herbs means all substances of plant origin and their
derivatives, including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy,
damiana, hops, ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura
genus, passion flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily
for use as smoking materials.
   (5)   Tobacco accessories means cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking
materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items, designed
primarily for the smoking, inhaling, or ingestion of tobacco products or of
substances made illegal under any Illinois state statute or this chapter or of
substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is made unlawful under this
Section.
   (6)   Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe, tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   (7)   Vending machine means any mechanical, electric or electronic self-
service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payment, dispenses tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS,
or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an
alternative nicotine product or ENDS.
   (8)   Retail tobacco store. Retail tobacco store means a retail
establishment principally engaged in the retail sale or display of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative nicotine products, ENDS, and
paraphernalia associated with any of the foregoing, insofar as it either (i)
devotes twenty (20) percent or more of floor area or display area to or (ii)
derives more than fifty (50) percent of its gross revenue from the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative nicotine products,
ENDS, and paraphernalia associated with any of the foregoing. the term “retail
tobacco store” shall also include smoking lounges, which are retail
establishments dedicated in whole or in part to entertaining smokers and users
of tobacco. The term “retail tobacco store” does not include cannabis business
establishments. “Retail tobacco store” also does not include (i) establishments
that incidentally sell or display such products as an accessory use,
subordinate in purpose or aggregate retail sales to the principal use served,
such as a larger commercial establishment such as a grocery or convenience
store that incidentally includes a tobacco department or display incidental to
the principal use of the premises, or (ii) any establishment with any type of
liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   (9)   Head shop. Head shop means a retail establishment specializing in the
sale or offering for sale of drug paraphernalia related to or marketed for use
with the consumption of cannabis, other recreational drugs, and/or new age
herbs, as well as counterculture art, magazines, music, clothing, and home
decor. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such products typically
include, but are not limited to, water pipes, bongs, roach clips, pipes,
rolling papers, and rolling machines. “Head shop” does not include
establishments that incidentally sell or display drug paraphernalia as an
accessory use, subordinate in purpose and display area to the principal use of
the premises as a retailer of unrelated goods.
   (b)   License required. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at
retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at
retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
smoking herbs, ENDS, or any alternative nicotine products within the City
without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefore pursuant to
this Chapter. No licensee under this Chapter shall engage in any conduct with
respect to the retail sale or display of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, alternative nicotine products, ENDS, and paraphernalia associated
with any of the foregoing as allowed by said licensee’s license.
      (1)   Tobacco Dealer License Classifications.
         i.   Class A. Principal Tobacco Dealer’s License.
            A Class A. principal tobacco dealer’s License is required for the
operation of a retail tobacco store as defined in this Chapter.
         ii.   Class B. Incidental Tobacco Dealer’s License.
            A Class B. incidental tobacco dealer’s License is required in order
to sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
alternative nicotine products, ENDS, and paraphernalia associated with any of
the foregoing by an establishment other than a retail tobacco store as defined
in this Chapter.
         iii.   Class C. Head Shop License.
            A Class C. head shop license is required in order to operate a head
shop as defined in this Chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the
rights of any person or entity operating lawfully without a license as a head
shop as defined in this chapter at the time of passage of this section to
obtain a Class C Head Shop License upon application for such within 90 days of
the effective date of this section.
      (2)   Number of Tobacco Dealer’s Licenses by category and governing
regulations.
         i   The total number of Class A tobacco dealer’s licenses to be issued
at any time is limited to 5. The total number of Class B tobacco dealer’s
licenses to be issued at any time is limited to 36. The total number of Class C
head shop licenses to be issued at any time is limited to 5. From time to time,
the Mayor and City Council may amend the number of available tobacco dealer
licenses in any of the license categories.
         ii.   As a condition precedent to receiving a Class B tobacco dealer’s
license or any renewals thereof, the prospective or existing licensee shall
execute an affidavit acknowledging the City’s definition of a retail tobacco
store and attest that neither the display of goods nor percentage of sales
revenues derived from tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
alternative nicotine products, ENDS, and paraphernalia associated with any of
the foregoing constituted or is expected to constitute the respective
thresholds established in the definition of a retail tobacco store set forth in
this Chapter. All Class A and Class B tobacco dealer licensees shall keep
accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of
entry, denoting all transactions involving tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, alternative nicotine products, ENDS, and paraphernalia associated
with any of the foregoing, including units of the regulated products, sold,
cost of the regulated products, and a description of the regulated product
sufficient to enable the reasonable administration of the City’s tobacco
licensing category distinctions. All such books and records shall, at all times
during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the City
or any agents therefore to facilitate the administration and enforcement of the
City’s tobacco dealer licensing regulations.
         iii.   If any tobacco dealer’s license is revoked, lapsed, or not
issued, the maximum number of authorized licenses in the corresponding tobacco
dealer’s license category will be automatically reduced by the total number of
revoked or non-issued licenses. All tobacco license applications in any
category must be approved by the City Council.
         iv.   No licensee under this article shall use its tobacco dealer’s
license to engage in the tobacco dealer business at any location other than the
one named in the license. The use or attempted use of a license issued pursuant
to this section at any premises other than the one for which the license was
issued shall be cause for revocation of the license.
         v.   Any license granted pursuant to this section shall be personal to
the individual or entity to whom issued and may not be transferred to any other
person or entity. Such license shall not be sold, leased, transferred,
assigned, or otherwise disposed of, either in whole or in part, whether by
forced sale, merger, consolidation, bankruptcy, reorganization under bankruptcy
laws, or otherwise, without reapplication pursuant to subsection
22-1105(c).
   (c)   License application. Application for a license hereunder shall be made
in writing to the accounts and finance officer and shall be processed in
accordance with this Code and in accordance with procedures adopted by the
accounts and finance officer.
   (d)   Licensee fee. The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) when issued, with an annual renewal
fee of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) thereafter. The license year
will begin on May 1 of each year.
   (e)   Prohibited sales, delivery – signs.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or
component of an alternative nicotine product or ENDS to any person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years.
   (2)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products,
tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS, or any alternative nicotine products,
and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, smoking herbs, electronic cigarettes or any alternative nicotine
products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, SMOKING HERBS, ENDS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW."
   Additionally, signs warning the public of the health implications of smoking
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products,
tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine products
and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine products for sale.
Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
"SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY RESULT IN FETAL
INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH AND LOW BIRTH WEIGHT."
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one (1) inch high.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to
possess, sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver a bidi cigarette to another
person.
   (f)   Minimum age to sell tobacco products. It shall be unlawful for any
person, any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any other person
under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine products in any licensed
premises or any other premises.
   (g)   Purchase by persons under the age of 21 prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase any
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative
nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine
product or ENDS, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false
or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products,
tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine product,
or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product or ENDS.
      (1)   Photo Identification: Any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, or employee of such licensee selling tobacco
products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine
product must, if the prospective buyer appears to be forty (40) years of age or
younger, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of adequate
written evidence of identity, including without limitation, a photograph, and
of the fact that the purchaser or recipient is over the age of twenty-one (21)
years (“identification card”), issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal
government or subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to, a
motor vehicle operations license or identification card issued to a member of
the Armed Services. Failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection
shall constitute a separate violation from a sale of tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine product to an
underage person as prohibited by the following subsection.
      (2)   No Sale: If any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee, believes or has reason to
believe that the ultimate recipient of tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine product to be purchased is an
underaged person or is using a forged or false identification card, they are
prohibited from making the sale.
   (h)   Possession by persons under the age of 21 prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess any
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative
nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine
product or ENDS; provided that the possession by a person under the age of
twenty-one (21) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of
such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be
prohibited.
   (i)   Proximity to certain institutions. It shall be unlawful for any person
including any licensee to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco
products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine
product, or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product or
ENDS, within one hundred (100) feet from the property line of any school, child
care facility or other premises used for educational or recreational programs
for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (j)   Certain free distributions prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing,
promoting or advertising tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs,
ENDS or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an
alternative nicotine product or ENDS, or any employee or agent of any such
licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to
distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking
herbs, ENDS or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component
of an alternative nicotine product or ENDS, free of charge to any person on any
right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the City, any school
district, any park board, or any public library.
   (k)   Vending machines - locking devices.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person or any licensee to sell or
offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling,
giving away or delivering tobacco products, tobacco accessories, smoking herbs,
ENDS or any alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an
alternative nicotine product or ENDS, by use of a vending machine, unless such
vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking
device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons
under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
      (2)    Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty-one
(21) years is prohibited by law shall be exempt from the requirements of Sec.
22-1105 (k)(1) above.
   (l)   Responsibility for agents and employees. Every act or omission of
whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of Section 22-1105 by an officer,
director, manager or other agent or employee of any person or any licensee
shall be deemed and held to be the act of such person or licensee; and such
person or licensee shall be punished in the same manner as if such act or
omission had been done or omitted by the person or licensee personally.
   (m)   Suspension; revocation of license; fines, costs.
      (1)   The mayor or designee shall be charged with the administration of
this section. The mayor or designee may suspend or revoke any license issued
under the provisions of this section, if the mayor or designee determines that
the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this section. For a
violation of subsection (b) of this section, the person shall be ineligible to
receive a license hereunder for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of
the offense. The first time a licensee violates any provision of this section,
the licensee shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). The second time a licensee violates any provision of this
section, the license shall be suspended for a period of not less than three (3)
days. The third time a licensee violates any provision of this section, the
license shall be suspended for a period of not less than fifteen (15) days. The
fourth time a licensee violates any provision of this section, the license
shall be suspended for a period of not less than thirty (30) days. The fifth or
subsequent time a licensee violates any provision of this Section, the license
shall be revoked, and no licensee shall thereafter be eligible to apply for a
new license under this section to conduct business at the premises described in
the revoked license for a period of six (6) months. In addition to suspension
or revocation of a license, the mayor or designee may levy a fine on the
licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
      (2)    However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked except
after a public hearing by the mayor or designee with a seven (7) day written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice
provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by
personal service.
      (3)    If the mayor or designee determines after such hearing that
licensee has violated any of the provisions of this section, the mayor or
designee shall within seven (7) days after the hearing state the reason for
such determination in a written order and state the amount of the fine, if any,
and the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked, and serve a
copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
      (4)    Any licensee determined by the mayor or designee to have violated
any of the provisions of this section shall pay to the City the costs of the
hearing before the mayor or designee on such violation. The mayor or designee
shall determine the costs incurred by the City for said hearing, including, but
not limited to: court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorneys' fees in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), the
cost of preparing the mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the City or such lesser sum as the mayor or designee may
allow.
      (5)    The licensee shall pay said costs to the City within thirty (30)
days of notification of the costs by the mayor or designee. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter
and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of an
additional fine.
   (n)   Ongoing offenses. Each day during which or on which any person or
licensee violates any provision of this Section
22-1105 shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (o)   Offenses on school grounds. Any person violating Section
22-1105(h), on School Grounds, shall be first admonished by the school through
the course of school discipline policies. Any violation of this section shall
not apply for the purposes of city ordinance until school discipline has been
applied twice. Therefore, a citation for Section
22-1105(h) on School Grounds shall be prima facie evidence of a third offense.
   (p)   Temporary Moratorium on Class A Tobacco Dealer’s Licenses.
      (1)   A temporary moratorium shall be, and is hereby, established on the
processing, review and approval of applications for new Class A tobacco
dealer’s licenses as defined in this Chapter.
      (2)   The temporary moratorium established in subsection (p)(1) of this
section shall be, and is hereby, established from the effective date of this
section, and shall expire at 12:01 AM on December 1, 2025, unless prior to that
time the City terminates the temporary moratorium by ordinance duly adopted.
      (3)   Existing Approved Permits/Licenses. Nothing in this section shall
affect the rights of any person or entity with a valid, existing tobacco dealer
license to renew the same as a Class A tobacco dealer’s license if the retail
establishment is already operating consistently within the definition of a
retail tobacco store as of the effective date of this section.
      (4)   Purchaser of an Existing Business. Nothing in this section shall
prevent a purchaser of a business with a valid, existing tobacco dealer’s
license to apply for a Class A tobacco dealer’s license if the retail
establishment is already operating consistently within the definition of a
retail tobacco store as of the effective date of this section.
(Ord. No. 3020-2019; 8/6/19; Ord. No. 2002-06-16; Sec. 22-1105 repealed; new
Sec. 22-1105 enacted; 06/25/02; Ord. No. 3042-2006; Sec. 22-1105(m) and (n)
repealed; new Sec. 23-1105(m) and (n) enacted; 09/23/06; Ord. No. 3002-2015;
Sec. 22-1105 repealed; new Sec. 22-1105 enacted; 01/27/15; Ord. No. 3019-2023;
Sec. 22-1105 repealed; new Sec. 22-1105 enacted; 06/20/23; Ord. No. 3036-2023;
Sec. 22-1105(b)(1)-(4) enacted; 9/26/23; Ord. No. 3006-2025; Sec. 22-1105(a)
amended, Sec. 22-1105(p) enacted; 01/21/25; Ord. No. 3055-2025; Sec. 22- 1105
(g)(1), (g)(2) enacted; 11/4/25)
SEC. 22-1106.   POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (a)   Definitions. All the terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning as ascribed to them in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq.,) and amendments thereto; except, should the term "person" be limited
therein to natural persons who have attained the age of seventeen (17) years or
more, said limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term "person" is
made applicable to all natural persons who have attained the age of thirteen
(13) years or more.
   (b)   Offense of possession of cannabis. A person commits the offense of
possession of cannabis by knowingly possessing ten (10) grams or less of any
substance containing cannabis unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant
to the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1106 repealed; new Sec. 22-1106 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1107.   USE/SALE OF INTOXICATING COMPOUNDS PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid or
chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl
acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cello acetate, cyclohexanone, the alkaloids atropine,
hyoscyamine, or scopolamine, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing
a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or
irrational behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the
auditory, visual or mental processes. For the purposes of this section, any
such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to
any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, unless upon written order of
such person's parent or guardian, any compound liquid or chemical containing
toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl
ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl
cello acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which will induce an
intoxicated condition, as defined herein, when the seller, offeror or deliverer
knows or has reason to know that such compound is intended for use to induce
such condition.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to any person who commits any act
described herein pursuant to the direction or prescription of a practitioner
authorized to so direct or prescribe. For purposes of this Section,
practitioner shall mean any person authorized by law to practice medicine in
all its branches in this state, to practice dentistry in this state, to
practice veterinary medicine in this State, or to practice chiropody in this
state.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1107 repealed; new Sec. 22-1107 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1108.   SWIMMING IN RIVER—PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall swim or bathe in the Mississippi River or Rock River
where posted on or adjoining public property.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to violate a contract (executed between the City
and the owner of property to which said contract applies) concerning the
embarking or disembarking from shore, swimming, bathing, or otherwise entering
the Mississippi River or Rock River on private property or from private
property; provided that signs are posted and provide notice of the applicable
contract provision.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall be held to repeal, impact, or affect, in any
manner, rules and regulations of the Park and Recreation Board or
Chapter 23 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1108 repealed; new Sec. 22-1108 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1109.   UNLAWFUL USE/POSSESSION OF LASER POINTING DEVICE.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
   (1)   “Aircraft” means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented,
used, or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, but excluding
parachutes;
   (2)   “Laser” means both of the following:
   (a.)   Any device that utilizes the natural oscillations of atoms or
molecules between energy levels for generating coherent electromagnetic
radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, or infrared region of the spectrum and
when discharged exceeds one milliwatt continuous wave;
   (b.)   Any device designed or used to amplify electromagnetic radiation by
simulated emission that is visible to the human eye.
   (3)   “Laser pointer” means a hand-held device that emits light amplified by
the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye.
   (4)   “Laser sight” means a laser pointer that can be attached to a firearm
and can be used to improve the accuracy of the firearm.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to focus, point, direct or shine a laser
beam from a laser pointing device directly or indirectly:
   (1)   On another person or animal in such a manner as to harass, annoy,
alarm, disturb or injure said person or animal;
   (2)   At a person he or she knows or reasonably should know to be a peace
officer; or
   (3)   Into the cockpit of an aircraft that is in the process of taking off,
landing, or is in flight.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess a laser pointing device.
   (d)   A person under eighteen (18) years shall not be in violation of this
section if the person's possession of a laser pointing device is necessary for
the person's trade or occupation and it is necessary for the laser pointing
device to be carried on his or her person.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1109 repealed; new Sec. 22-1109 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1110.   SMOKING.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   (1)   Bar. Means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives
no more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the
premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail
lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
   (2)   Department. Means the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (3)   Employee. Means a person who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who
volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.
   (4)   Employer. Means a person, business, partnership, association, or
corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity,
that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
   (5)   Enclosed area. Means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is
enclosed or partially enclosed with (i) solid walls or windows, exclusive of
doorways, or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of
doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without
limitation, lobbies and corridors.
   (6)   Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena. Means any sports
pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the
general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in
athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports,
cultural, recreational, or other events.
   (7)   Gaming equipment or supplies. Means gaming equipment/supplies as
defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
   (8)   Gaming facility. Means an establishment utilized primarily for the
purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the
purposes of accruing business revenue.
   (9)   Healthcare facility. Means an office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited
to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
   (10)   Place of employment. Means any area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and
exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in
subsection (g) of this section, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that
open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break
rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home-based
business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care,
or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment."
   (11)   Private club. Means a not-for-profit association that (1) has been in
active and continuous existence for at least 3 years prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance, whether incorporated or not, (2) is the owner, lessee,
or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes
at all times, (3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain, and (4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For
purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is
managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by
the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or
both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the
payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501.
   (12)   Private residence. Means the part of a structure used as a dwelling,
including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of
this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other
similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living
facility shall not be considered a private residence.
   (13)   Public place. Means that portion of any building or vehicle used by
and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned
in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the City of Moline, or any
other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance, as set forth in subsection (g) of this section,
of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does
not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government
owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased,
or operated by the City of Moline, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed
shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions,
educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public
restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating
rinks, reception areas, and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public
accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
   (14)   Restaurant. Means (i) an eating establishment, including, but not
limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public
school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, and (ii) a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on
the premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
   (15)   Retail tobacco store. Means a retail establishment that derives more
than 80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs
and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   (16)   Smoke or Smoking. Means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or
exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or
any other lighted smoking equipment.
   (b)   Prohibited Acts. No person shall smoke in a public place or in any
place of employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or to a
place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or
operated by the City or any political subdivision of the City. Smoking is
prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted
by subsection (f) of this section.
   (c)   Posting of Signs; Removal of Ashtrays.
   (1)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol,
consisting of pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in
each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
Ordinance by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that
place.
   (2)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this Ordinance shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (3)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this Ordinance by the owner, operator, manager, or other person
having control of the area.
   (d)   Smoking Prohibited in Student Dormitories. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Ordinance, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living
quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas,
restroom, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or
in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized
by a public or private institution of higher education.
   (e)   Designation of Other Nonsmoking Areas. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Ordinance, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment
may designate a non-enclosed area of a public place or place of employment,
including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is prohibited provided that
such employer, owner, lessee, or occupant shall conspicuously post signs
prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection (c) of this section.
   (f)   Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance,
smoking is allowed in the following areas:
   (1)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child
care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any other home-based business
open to the public.
   (2)   Retail tobacco stores as defined in subsection (a) of this section in
operation prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. The retail tobacco
store shall annually file with the Department and the local liquor control
commissioner for the City of Moline by January 31st an affidavit stating the
percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that derived from
the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or
other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any
retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of this
Ordinance may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding
structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not
migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   (3)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (4)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be continuous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than 25%
of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms
where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not
be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
   (g)   Entrances, Exits, Windows, and Ventilation Intakes. Smoking is
prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows
that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited under this Ordinance so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not
enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means.
   (h)   Ongoing Offenses. Each day during which or on which any person
violates a provision of this Section
22-1110 shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (i)   Injunctions. The Department, a State-certified local public health
department, the City of Moline, or any individual personally affected by
repeated violations may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin
violations of this Ordinance.
   (j)   Authority of Ordinance. This Ordinance shall supersede any ordinances,
resolutions or motions, or parts of ordinances, resolutions or motions in
conflict with any part herein, any such sections or parts thereof, are hereby
repealed.
   (k)   Severability. If any section or paragraph of this Ordinance shall be
held invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect any remaining provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Secs. 22-1110 and 22-1111 repealed; new Sec. 22-1110
enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1111.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES (§22-1100-
§22-1110)
   (a)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-1100 through Section
22-1110, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-1100 through Section
22-1110, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-1100 through Section
22-1110, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (b)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (c)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; new Sec. 22-1111 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 2. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SEC. 22-1200.   DEFINITION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and
materials of any kind which are used or intended for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq. It includes
but is not limited to:
   (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
   (2)   Kits used, intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
   (3)   Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
   (4)   Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
   (5)   Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or measuring
controlled substances;
   (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use, in cutting controlled
substances;
   (7)   Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs
and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
   (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or
intended for use in compounding controlled substances;
   (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended
for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
   (10)   Containers and other objects used or intended for use in storing or
concealing controlled substances;
   (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for
use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
   (12)   Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body,
such as:
   a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
   b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   c.   Water pipes;
   d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   e.   Roach clips; meaning paper clips, alligator clips, hairpins, or other
similar objects that have been altered by the defendant or prior to or while in
the possession of the defendant so that there exists a handle attached to said
object at an angle between forty-five (45) degrees and one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees so that the alteration would facilitate a person's holding of
burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or
too short to be held by the fingers and so that the alteration prohibits the
use of said object for its normal function;
   f.   Cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
   g.   Chamber pipes;
   h.   Carburetor pipes;
   i.   Electric pipes;
   j.   Air-driven pipes;
   k.   Chillums;
   l.   Bonds;
   m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (b)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
   (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation,
by the object’s owner or person in control of the object, of 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq., and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.;
   (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances owned by the
object’s owner or person in control of the object.
   (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom said owner or
person in control knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.; the innocence of an owner,
or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 720 ILCS
550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., shall not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use, or designed for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia;
   (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (11)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (12)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1200 repealed; new Sec. 22-1200 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1201.   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq. and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   (b)   It shall not be unlawful, other than individuals under 21 years of
age, to possess cannabis paraphernalia as prescribed in 410 ILCS 705/10-5.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-1201(a), as a first offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not
less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. Any person violating
Section
22-1201(a), as a second offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not
less than five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00), plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. Any person violating
Section
22-1201(a), as a third or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1201 repealed; new Sec. 22-1201 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1202.   MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, deliver or possess with
intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq. and 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the lawful purchase, manufacture or
delivery of cannabis paraphernalia as allowed under 410 ILCS 705/10-25 so long
as the delivery of said paraphernalia is to an individual 21 years of age or
older.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-1202, as a first offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating
Section
22-1202, as a second offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-1202, as a third or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1202 repealed; new Sec. 22-1202 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1203.   DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA TO A MINOR.
   Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who violates Section
22-1202 by delivering drug paraphernalia to an individual under eighteen (18)
years of age who is at least three (3) years junior to such person is guilty of
a special offense and upon conviction therefor may be punished by imprisonment
in a place other than a penitentiary for a term not to exceed six (6) months,
or subject to a mandatory fine of not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00)
plus costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or both.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1203 repealed; new Sec. 22-1203 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1204.   ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication offered for sale within the City, any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the
sale within the City of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-1204 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1204 repealed; new Sec. 22-1204 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1205.      FORFEITURE.
   All drug paraphernalia as defined by Section 22-1200 of this Code shall be
subject to forfeiture as provided in 720 ILCS 550/12 and 720 ILCS 570/505.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Secs. 22-1205 and 22-1206 repealed; new Sec. 22-1205
enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 3. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
SEC. 22-1300.   PURPOSE.
   This ordinance is declared necessary for the preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and welfare of the people of the City of Moline, and is
intended to address situations where parents have failed to act responsibly and
reasonably in the supervision of their minor children to the detriment of the
general public.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1300 repealed; new Sec. 22-1300 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1301.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   Delinquent Acts. Those acts which violate the laws of the United
States, or the statutes of the State of Illinois or the ordinances of the City
of Moline or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come
under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division, the Department of Children and
Family Services, County Court Services or the Juvenile Court but this
definition shall not include traffic violations.
   (2)   Legal Guardian. A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a
minor by a circuit court of the State, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody, of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act or the
Juvenile Court Act of 1987.
   (3)   Minor. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19 years
of age pursuant to 740 ILCS 115/2.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1301 repealed; new Sec. 22-1301 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1302.   PARENTAL DUTIES.
   (a)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
   (b)   Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable
parental control are the following duties:
   (1)   To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal
firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor.
   (2)   To know the Curfew Ordinance (
Chapter 22, Article I, Section
22-1102) of the City of Moline, and to require the minor to observe the Curfew
Ordinance.
   (3)   To require the minor, if sixteen (16) years of age or younger, to
attend regular school sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class
without parental or school permission (Truancy -
Chapter 22, Article I, Division 4, Sections
22-1400-
1402).
   (4)   To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be
absent.
   (5)   To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from
maliciously or willfully destroying real, personal, or mixed property which
belongs to the City of Moline, or is otherwise located in the City of Moline.
   (6)   To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing
firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents, and
to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private agencies in
handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1302 repealed; new Sec. 22-1302 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1303.   PARENTAL VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (a)   No parent or guardian of any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall fail to exercise reasonable parental control over such minor. An
adjudication that said minor has committed a felony, misdemeanor or violation
of an ordinance which is deemed a civil infraction as identified in Section
22-1302 (b), may be considered as evidence that said parent or guardian failed
to exercise reasonable parental control.
   (b)   The parent/guardian of a minor shall be held civilly responsible for
the damages caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the City of
Moline pursuant to 740 ILCS 115/3, et seq.
   (c)   In addition to the civil liability or responsibility set forth within
740 ILCS 115/3 et seq., the parent or guardian, upon a violation hereof, shall
face penalties or fines as set forth within Section
22-1111(a).
   (d)   In lieu of any citation penalty or fine for a first offense, a parent/
guardian may notify the chief of police, in writing, of their intention to
complete a "Parenting" course provided by an acceptable organization recognized
locally and/or nationally to provide such a course. The cost and expense
relating to attendance at such a course shall be the responsibility of the
parent/guardian. If parent/guardian provides proof of completion to the chief
of police, the chief of police shall have the authority to waive any such
citation or fine for the first offense.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1303 repealed; new Sec. 22-1303 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1304.   NOTIFICATION OF PARENTS; RECORD OF NOTIFICATION.
   Whenever a minor is apprehended or detained for a delinquent or reckless
act, the parent or legal guardian shall receive written notice thereof, either
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the police
department of the City of Moline following said adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1304 repealed; new Sec. 22-1304 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1305.   LIABILITY OF PARENTS; RECORD OF NOTIFICATION.
   (a)   Injuring or destroying property or acts of vandalism . It shall be
unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously break, deface, injure or
destroy any property within the City of Moline, whether such property is owned
by the state, county, City or any other governmental body, or owned by any
private person. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
commit an act of vandalism.
   (b)   Liable for actual damages . The parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal guardian is liable
for actual damages for the willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause
injury to a person or property.
   (c)   Recovery . No recovery under this section may exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) actual damages for each person or legal entity for each
occurrence of such willful or malicious acts by the minor causing injury, in
addition to taxable court costs. In determining the damages to be allowed in an
action under this article for personal injury, only medical, dental and
hospital expenses may be recovered.
   (d)   Other liability . This article shall not affect the recovery of
damages in any other cause of action where the liability of the parent or legal
guardian is predicated on a common law or statutory basis.
(Ord. No. 97-1-4; new Div. 3 of Article I enacted; 01/21/97)
DIVISION 4. TRUANCY
SEC. 22-1400. DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   A “truant” is defined as a child who is subject to compulsory school
attendance and who is absent without valid cause, as defined hereunder, from
such attendance for more than 1% but less than 5% of the past 180 school days.
   (b)   “Valid Cause” for absence shall be illness, including the mental or
behavioral health of the student, attendance at a verified medical or
therapeutic appointment, appointment with a victim services provider,
observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, or family
emergency and shall include such other situations beyond the control of the
student as determined by the board of education or such other circumstances
which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the mental, emotional, or
physical health or safety of the student. For purposes of a student who is an
expectant parent, or parent, or victim of domestic violence or sexual violence,
“valid cause” for absence includes (i) the fulfillment of a parenting
responsibility, including, but not limited to, arranging and providing child
care, caring for a sick child, attending prenatal or other medical appointments
for the expectant student, and attending medical appointments for a child, and
(ii) addressing circumstances resulting from domestic or sexual violence,
recovering from physical or psychological injuries, seeking medical attention,
seeking services from a domestic or sexual violence organization, seeking
psychological or other counseling, participating in safety planning,
temporarily or permanently relocating, seeking legal assistance or remedies, or
taking any other action to increase the safety or health of the student or to
protect the student from future domestic or sexual violence.
   (c)   “Chronic or habitual truant” shall be defined as a child who is
subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause
from such attendance for 5% or more of the previous 180 regular attendance
days.
   (d)   “Truant minor” is defined as a chronic truant to whom supportive
services, including prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services,
alternative programs and other school and community resources have been
provided and have failed to result in the cessation of chronic truancy, or have
been offered and refused.
   (e)   A “dropout” is defined as any child enrolled in grades 9 through 12
whose name has been removed from the district enrollment roster for any reason
other than the student's death, extended illness, removal for medical non-
compliance, expulsion, aging out, graduation or completion of a program of
studies and who has not been transferred to another public or private school
and is not known to be home-schooled by his or her parents or guardians or
continuing school in another country.
   (f)   “Religion” for purposes of this Division, includes all aspects of
religious observance and practice, as well as belief.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Section 22-1400; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1401. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPULSORY ATTENDANCE.
   (a)   Whoever has custody or control of a child (i) between the ages of 6
and 17 years (unless the child has already graduated from high school) shall
cause such child to attend some public school in the district wherein the child
resides the entire time it is in season during the regular school term and
during a required summer school program; provided that the following children
shall not be required to attend the public schools:
   1.   Any child attending a private school or a parochial school where
children are taught the branches of education taught to children of
corresponding age and grade in the public schools, and where the instruction of
the child in the branches of education is in the English language;
   2.   Any child who is physically or mentally unable to attend school, such
disability being certified by a competent medical provider licensed in Illinois
to practice medicine; or who is excused for temporary absence for cause by the
principal or teacher of the school which the child attends, with absence for
cause by illness being required to include the mental or behavioral health of a
child for up to 5 days for which the child need not provide a medical note, in
which case the child shall be given the opportunity to make up any school work
missed during the mental or behavioral absence and, after the second mental
health day used, may be referred to the appropriate school support personnel.
   3.   Any child necessarily and lawfully employed according to the provisions
of the law regarding child labor may be excused from attendance at school by
the county superintendent of schools or the superintendent of the public school
which the child should be attending, on certification of the facts by and the
recommendation of the school board of the public school district in which the
child resides.
   4.   Any child over 12 and under 14 years of age while in attendance at
confirmation classes.
   5.   Any child absent from a public school on a particular day or days or at
a particular time of day for the reason that he is unable to attend classes or
to participate in any examination, study, or work requirements on a particular
day or days or at a particular time of day because of religious reasons,
including the observance of a religious holiday or participation in religious
instruction, or because the tenets of his religion forbid secular activity on a
particular day or days or at a particular time of day. A school board may
require the parent or guardian of a child who is to be excused from attending
school because of religious reasons to give notice of the child’s absence to
the school principal or other school personnel. It shall be the responsibility
of the teachers and of the administrative officials of each public school to
make available to each child who is absent from school because of the
observance of a religious holiday an equivalent opportunity to make up any
examination, study or work requirements which he or she has missed because of
such absence. No special fees shall be charged to the child for making
available such equivalent opportunity. No adverse or prejudicial effects shall
result to any child because of him or her availing themselves of the provisions
hereof.
   6.   Any child 16 years of age or older who (i) submits to a school district
evidence of necessary and lawful employment and (ii) is enrolled in a
graduation incentives program or an alternative learning opportunities program.
   7.   A child in any of grades 6 through 12 absent from a public school on a
particular day or days or at a particular time of day for the purpose of
sounding “Taps” at a military honors funeral held in this State for a deceased
veteran. In order to be excused under this paragraph 7, the student shall
notify the school’s administration with the date, time, and location of the
military honors funeral. A student whose absence is excused under this
paragraph 7 must be allowed a reasonable time to make up school work missed
during the absence. If the student satisfactorily completes the school work,
the day of absence shall be counted as a day of compulsory attendance and he or
she may not be penalized for that absence.
   8.   Any child absent from a public school on a particular day or days at a
particular time of day for the reason that his or her parent or legal guardian
is an active duty member of the uniformed services and has been called to duty
for, is on leave from, or has immediately returned from deployment to a combat
zone or combat-support postings. Such a student shall be granted 5 days of
excused absences in any school year and, at the discretion of the school board,
additional excused absences to visit the student’s parent or legal guardian
relative to such leave or deployment of the parent or legal guardian. In the
case of excused absences pursuant to this paragraph 8, the student and parent
or legal guardian shall be responsible for obtaining assignments from the
student’s teacher or prior to any period of excused absence and for ensuring
that such assignments are completed by the student prior to his or her return
to school from such period of excused absence.
   9.   Any child from a public middle school or high school shall be permitted
by a school board one school day-long excused absence per school year for the
child who is absent from school to engage in a civic center. The school board
may require that the student provide reasonable advance notice of the intended
absence to the appropriate school administrator and require that the student
provide documentation of participation in a civic event to the appropriate
school administrator.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Section 22-1401; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1402. PUNITIVE ACTION.
   (a)   No punitive action, including out of school suspensions, expulsions,
or court action, shall be taken against truant minors for such truancy unless
appropriate and available supportive services and other school resources have
been provided to the student. A truant minor may not be expelled for
nonattendance unless he or she has accrued 15 consecutive days of absences
without valid cause and the student cannot be located by the school district or
the school district has located the student but cannot, after exhausting all
available supportive services, compel the student to return to school.
   (b)   A school district may not refer a truant, chronic truant, or truant
minor to any other local public entity for that local public entity to issue
the child a fine or a fee as punishment for his or her truancy.
   (c)   A school district may refer any person having custody or control of a
truant, chronic truant, or truant minor to any other local public entity for
the issuance of a fine or fee for the child’s truancy only if the school
district’s truant officer, regional office of education, or intermediate
service center has been notified of the truant behavior and the school
district, regional office of education, or intermediate service center has
offered all appropriate and available supportive services and other school
resources to the child. Before a school district may refer a person having
custody or control of a child to a municipality or local public entity the
school district must provide the following appropriate and available services:
   1.   For any child who is a homeless child, a meeting between the child, the
person having custody or control of the child, relevant school personnel, and a
homeless liaison to discuss any barriers to the child’s attendance due to the
child’s transitional living situation and to construct a plan that removes
these barriers.
   2.   For any child with a documented disability, a meeting between the
child, the person having custody or control of the child, and relevant school
personnel to review the child’s current needs and address the appropriateness
of the child’s placement and services.
   3.   For any child currently being evaluated by a school district for a
disability or for whom the school has a basis of knowledge that the child is a
child with a disability, the completion of the evaluation and determination of
the child’s eligibility for special education services.
   (d)   Before a school district may refer a person having custody or control
of a child to a local public entity under this Section, the school district
must document any appropriate and available supportive services offered to the
child. In the event a meeting under this Section does not occur, a school
district must have documentation that it made reasonable efforts to convene the
meeting at a mutually convenient time and date for the school district and the
person having custody or control of the child and, but for the conduct of that
person, the meeting would have occurred.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Section 22-1402; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 5. ENDANGERING THE LIFE OR HEALTH OF A CHILD
SEC. 22-1500.   ENDANGERING THE LIFE OR HEALTH OF A CHILD PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits endangering the life or health of a child when he or
she knowingly: (1) causes or permits the life or health of a child under the
age of 18 to be endangered; or (2) causes or permits a child to be placed in
circumstances that endanger the child's life or health. It is not a violation
of this Section for a person to relinquish a child in accordance with the
Abandoned Newborn Infant Protection Act.
   (b)   A trier of fact may infer that a child 6 years of age or younger is
unattended if that child is left in a motor vehicle for more than 10 minutes.
   (c)   "Unattended" means either: (i) not accompanied by a person 14 years of
age or older; or (ii) if accompanied by a person 14 years of age or older, out
of sight of that person.
   (d)   A violation of this Division is a Class A Misdemeanor. A second or
subsequent violation of this Division is a Class 3 Felony. A violation of this
Division that is a proximate cause of the death of the child is a Class 3
Felony for which a person, if sentenced to a term of imprisonment, shall be
sentenced to a term of not less than 2 years and not more than 10 years. A
parent, who is found to be in violation of this Division with respect to his or
her child, may be sentenced to probation for this offense.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Section 22-1500; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 6. NEGLECTED AND DELINQUENT CHILDREN OFFENSES
SEC. 22-1600.   PURPOSE.
   This ordinance is declared necessary for the furtherance of and preservation
of the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the people of the City of
Moline, and is intended to address situations where parents have contributed to
the dependency or neglect of their minor children and where persons have
contributed to a child's delinquency.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1500 repealed; new Sec. 22-1600 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1601.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   Dependent or Neglected Child. Any child who, while under the age of
eighteen (18) years, for any reason is destitute, homeless or abandoned; or
dependent upon the public for support; or does not have proper parental care or
guardianship; or habitually begs or receives alms; or is found living in any
house of ill fame or with a vicious or disreputable person; or has a home which
by reason of neglect, cruelty or depravity on the part of the child's parents,
guardian or any other person in whose care the child may be, is an unfit place
for such child; and any child who, while under the age of ten (10) years, is
found begging or peddling.
   (2)   Delinquent Child. Any minor prior to his or her eighteenth (18th)
birthday has violated or attempted to violate, regardless of where the act
occurred, any federal or state law or county or municipal ordinance classified
as a misdemeanor or felony.
   (3)   Parent. A mother, father, legal guardian or any other person having
the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parent's stead who
has custody or control of the minor.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1501 repealed; new Sec. 22-1601 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1602.   VIOLATION.
   Violation. Any parent of a child under the age of eighteen (18) years, who
knowingly or willfully causes, aides or encourages such child to be or to
become a dependent or neglected child, as defined in Section
22-1601 (1), who knowingly or willfully does acts which directly tend to render
any such child so dependent and neglected, or who knowingly or willfully fails
to do that which will directly tend to prevent such state of dependency or
neglect, is guilty of an offense.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1502 repealed; new Sec. 22-1602 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1603.   CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (a)   Contributing to the Delinquency of a Child. A person commits
contributing to the delinquency of a child when he or she knowingly: (1)
causes, aids, or encourages a child to be or to become a delinquent child; or
(2) does acts which directly tend to render any child so delinquent.
   (b)   Contributing to the Criminal Delinquency of a Child. A person of the
age of twenty-one (21) years and upwards commits contributing to the criminal
delinquency of a child when he or she, with the intent to promote or facilitate
the commission of an offense, solicits, compels, or directs a child in the
commission of the offense that is classified as a misdemeanor or felony.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person found guilty of the offense set forth in
subsection (1) above shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1503 repealed; new Sec. 22-1603 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 7. LOOK-ALIKE SUBSTANCES
SEC. 22-1700.   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this division, the following words and phrases have the
meanings stated below, unless the context indicates otherwise:
   (a)   Controlled Substance means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor
set forth in the Schedules of Article II of the Illinois Controlled Substances
Act, 720 ILCS 570/101 et seq., as currently enacted or as may be amended from
time to time (hereinafter referred to in this division as "the Act"), including
the most recently republished Schedules promulgated by the Illinois Department
of Human Services. The controlled substances listed or to be listed in the
Schedules in Sections 204, 206, 208, 210 and 212 of the Act are included in
this definition by whatever official, common, usual, chemical, or trade name
designated. All substances and compounds excluded from the definition of
"controlled substance" in the Act are hereby excluded from this definition of
"controlled substance."
   (b)   Look-alike substance means a substance, other than a controlled
substance which:
   (1)   By overall dosage unit appearance, including shape, color, size,
markings or lack thereof, taste, consistency, or any other identifying physical
characteristic of the substance, would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the substance is a controlled substance, except that this clause (1) of this
subsection (b) shall not apply to a non-controlled substance in its finished
dosage form that was initially introduced into commerce prior to the initial
introduction into commerce of a controlled substance in its finished dosage
form which it may substantially resemble; or
   (2)   Is expressly or impliedly represented to be a controlled substance or
is distributed under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the substance is a controlled substance. For the purpose of
determining whether the representations made or the circumstances of the
distribution would lead a reasonable person to believe the substance to be a
controlled substance under this clause (2) of this subsection (b), the court or
other authority may consider the following factors in addition to any other
factor that may be relevant:
   (a)   statements made by the owner or person in control of the substance
concerning its nature, use or effect;
   (b)   statements made to a buyer or recipient that the substance may be
resold for profit;
   (c)   whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for the
illegal distribution of controlled substances;
   (d)   whether any distribution or attempted distribution of the substance
included an exchange of or demand for money or other property as consideration,
and whether the amount of consideration paid for the substance was
substantially greater than the reasonable retail market value of the substance.
   (c)   Nurse means a registered nurse licensed under the Nursing and Advanced
Practice Nursing Act, 225 ILCS 65/5-1 et seq., as currently enacted or as may
be amended from time to time.
   (d)   Pharmacist means any person who holds a certificate of registration as
a registered pharmacist, a local registered pharmacist or a registered
assistant pharmacist under the Pharmacy Practice Act of 1987, 225 ILCS 85/1 et
seq., as currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time.
   (e)   Practitioner means a physician licensed to practice medicine in all
its branches, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, scientific investigator,
pharmacist, physician assistant, advanced practice nurse, licensed practical
nurse, registered nurse, hospital, laboratory, or pharmacy, or other person
licensed, registered, or otherwise lawfully permitted by the United States or
this State to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to,
administer or use in teaching or chemical analysis, a controlled substance in
the course of professional practice or research.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1600 repealed; new Sec. 22-1700 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1701.   SCOPE OF DIVISION.
   Nothing in this division limits the lawful authority granted to
practitioners and others by the Medical Practice Act of 1987, 225 ILCS 60/1 et
seq., the Nursing and Advanced Practice Nursing Act, 225 ILCS 65/5-1 et seq.,
or the Pharmacy Practice Act of 1987, 225 ILCS 85/1 et seq., all as currently
enacted or as may be amended from time to time. Nothing in this division
prohibits the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, processing,
packaging, advertising or distribution of a drug or drugs by any person
registered pursuant to Section 510 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(21 U.S.C. 360) as currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1601 repealed; new Sec. 22-1701 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1702.   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess a look-alike
substance. Any person who violates this subsection (a) is guilty of an offense.
Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person convicted of a
first offense under this subsection (a) shall pay a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Any person convicted of a second offense under this
subsection (a) shall pay a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any
person convicted of a third or subsequent offense under this subsection (a)
shall pay a fine of not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (b)   Any person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) of this section
who knowingly possessed a look-alike substance within one thousand (1000) feet
of any property owned or leased by any public or private elementary, middle or
secondary school, public park, public housing authority, church or other
religious organization shall pay a fine of twice the amount stated in
subsection (a) above.
   (c)    In any prosecution brought under this section, it is not a defense to
a violation of this section that the defendant believed the look-alike
substance actually to be a controlled substance.
   (d)    Nothing in this section applies to:
   (1)   The manufacture, processing, packaging, distribution or sale of
noncontrolled substances to licensed medical practitioners for use as placebos
in professional practice or research;
   (2)   Persons acting in the course and legitimate scope of their employment
as law enforcement officers;
   (3)   The retention of production samples of noncontrolled substances
produced prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of 1982, where such
samples are required by federal law;
   (4)   Nothing in this section or in this division applies to the lawful
manufacture, processing, packaging, advertising or distribution of a drug or
drugs by any person registered pursuant to Section 510 of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 360).
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1602 repealed; new Sec. 22-1702 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 8. REGISTRATION OF CERTAIN OFFENDERS.
SEC. 22-1800.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to implement provisions of the Illinois law
requiring persons convicted of certain offenses to register their residences
and other information with their local law enforcement agency.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1700 repealed; new Sec. 22-1800 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1801.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   Sex offender means any person subject to the Illinois Sex Offender
Registration Act (730 ILCS 150/1, et seq.).
   (2)   Violent offender against youth means any person subject to the
Illinois Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth Registration Act (730 ILCS
145/1, et seq.).
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1701 repealed; new Sec. 22-1801 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1802.   REGISTRATION OF SEX OFFENDERS.
   It is the duty of sex offenders residing or temporarily domiciled in the
City of Moline to register with the chief of police as required by the Illinois
Sex Offender Registration Act.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1702 repealed; new Sec. 22-1802 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1803.   REGISTRATION OF VIOLENT OFFENDERS AGAINST YOUTH.
   It is the duty of violent offenders against youth residing or temporarily
domiciled in the City of Moline to register with the chief of police as
required by the Illinois Murderer and Violent Offender Against Youth
Registration Act.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1703 repealed; new Sec. 22-1803 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1804.   FEES IMPOSED.
   The following fees shall be collected by the chief of police for
registration as required by this division:
   (1)   Sex Offender Registration Fee. One hundred dollar ($100.00) initial
registration; one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual renewal registration.
   (2)   Violent Offenders Against Youth Registration Fee. Twenty dollar
($20.00) initial registration; ten dollar ($10.00) annual renewal registration.
   (3)   The chief of police or designee thereof may waive the registration fee
or fees set forth in this section if the chief of police or designee thereof
determines that the registrant is indigent and unable to pay the registration
fee or fees. Alternatively, the chief of police or designee thereof may approve
a payment plan for the registrant that is not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1704 repealed; new Sec. 22-1804 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-1805.   PENALTY.
   Any person violating this division, upon conviction, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-1705 repealed; new Sec. 22-1805 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 9. PRIVATE SECURITY GUARDS
SEC. 22-1900.   PRIVATE SECURITY GUARD AND PRIVATE SECURITY CONTRACTOR DEFINED.
   "Private security guard" means any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business or activity of furnishing uniformed security guards, watchmen,
agents, private policemen or any other type of private security personnel, or
any uniformed person performing a private security function, except railroad
policemen, armored vehicle guards, civilian-dress store detectives, or any
persons performing a security or protection function upon private premises
owned or controlled by themselves or their employers, provided that such
persons are not wearing any type of uniform which would identify them to the
public as a security guard.
   "Private security contractor" means a person who engages in the business of
providing a private security officer, watchman, patrol, guard dog, canine odor
detection, or a similar service by any other title or name on a contractual
basis for another person, firm, corporation, or other entity for a fee or other
consideration and performing one or more of the following functions:
   (1)   The prevention or detection of intrusion, entry, theft, vandalism,
abuse, fire, or trespass on private or governmental property.
   (2)   The prevention, observation, or detection of any unauthorized activity
on private or governmental property.
   (3)   The protection of persons authorized to be on the premises of the
person, firm, or other entity for which the security contractor contractually
provides security services.
   (4)   The prevention of the misappropriation or concealment of goods, money,
bonds, stocks, notes, documents, or papers.
   (5)   The control, regulation, or direction of the movement of the public
for the time specifically required for the protection of property owned or
controlled by the client.
   (6)   The protection of individuals from bodily harm or death.
(Ord. No. 3056-2025; Sec. 22-1900 enacted; 11/4/25)
SEC. 22-1901.   PROHIBITED UNIFORMS.
   No private security guard or employee of a private security contractor shall
in any manner imply that the person is an employee or agent of a governmental
agency or display a badge or identification card, shoulder patch, emblem,
uniform, or any other form of identification or equipment citing the words
“police”, “sheriff”, “highway patrol trooper”, or “law enforcement”, or similar
words or phrases.
(Ord. No. 3056-2025; Sec. 22-1901 enacted; 11/4/25)
SEC. 22-1902.   OPEN DISPLAY OF WEAPONS.
   No person authorized to carry weapons shall openly display a weapon in a
public place unless such person wears:
   (a)   A shirt, blouse, jacket or coat as an outer garment, affixed to which
is a patch, embroidery or other insignia designating the position held by such
person which necessitates the open display of a weapon and the individual,
business or agency employing such person, and a medallion designating the
authority to openly carry weapons.
   (b)   All military-style uniforms, if worn by employees of a licensed
private security contractor agency, must bear the name of the private security
contractor agency, which shall be plainly visible on a patch, badge, or other
insignia.
(Ord. No. 3056-2025; Sec. 22-1902 enacted; 11/4/25)
SEC. 22-1903.   APPROVAL TO CARRY FIREARMS REQUIRED.
   No private security guard, as well as civilian-dress store detectives, or
any person performing a security or protection function upon private premises
owned or controlled by themselves or their employers shall carry or possess any
firearms except as authorized by Illinois statutes.
(Ord. No. 3056-2025; Sec. 22-1903 enacted; 11/4/25)
SEC. 22-1904.   PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues. Any private security contractor whose employees perform work in the
City of Moline shall be held responsible and liable in addition to the
employees for any acts of those employees in violation of the requirements of
this Division.
(Ord. No. 3056-2025; Sec. 22-1904 enacted; 11/4/25)
ARTICLE II. DISORDERLINESS AND OFFENSES AGAINST A PERSON
SEC. 22-2100.   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   A person commits disorderly conduct when said person knowingly:
   (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   (2)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of the City, or any privately owned and operated
ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical
technician-ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the
time there is no reasonable ground for believing that such assistance is
required; or
   (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the fire
department of the City a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire
exists; or
   (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poisonous gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or
radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb, explosive or container
holding poisonous gas, deadly biological or chemical contaminant or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place; or
   (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed; or
   (6)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   (7)   Enters upon a public street, sidewalk, building, park, parking lot,
property or right-of-way in a state of inebriation; there shall be a
presumption of inebriation if said person appears intoxicated and/or has an
odor of alcohol on or about their person and fails a standard or normal
sobriety field test(s); or
   (8)   Without legal justification fights while upon a public street,
sidewalk, building, park, parking lot, property or right-of-way;
   (9)   Exposes his or her sex organs, buttocks, anus or any portion of the
breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person,
not covered by an opaque covering, while on a public street, sidewalk,
building, park, parking lot property or right-of-way or in such a manner as to
be visible from a public street, sidewalk, building, park, parking lot,
property or right-of-way; provided that it shall not be a violation of this
section if a female’s breast is displayed while breast feeding an infant; or
   (10)   Urinates or defecates while on a public street, sidewalk, building,
park, parking lot, property or right-of-way or in such a manner as to be
visible from a public street, sidewalk, building, park, parking lot, property
or right-of-way; or
   (11)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without reasonable grounds to believe that transmitting such a
report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the public; or
   (12)   Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency.
    (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2100, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2100, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2100, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under
eighteen (18) years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline
Police Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a
class, curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a
similar approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such
participation shall be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon
appropriate evidence the offender has satisfactorily completed the approved
program, the charge and any resulting court or administrative proceeding shall
be dismissed without payment of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under eighteen (18)
years of age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence
to be coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE
sentences shall be for a minimum of ten (10) hours per offense and completed at
an approved agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE
sentence has been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or
administrative proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any
fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-2100 repealed; new Sec. 22-2100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2101.   INTIMIDATION.
   (a)   A Person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause another to
perform or to omit the performance of any act, he or she communicates to
another, directly or indirectly by any means, a threat to perform without
lawful authority any of the following acts:
   (1)   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or
on property; or
   (2)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
   (3)   Commit a felony or Class A Misdemeanor; or
   (4)   Accuse any person of an offense; or
   (5)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
   (6)   Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
   (7)   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or collective action.
   (b)   Sentence. Intimidation is a Class 3 Felony for which an offender may
be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than two (2) years and not
more than ten (10) years.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; new Sec. 22-2101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2102.   HARASSMENT BY TELEPHONE.
   (a)   A person commits harassment by telephone when he or she uses telephone
communication for any of the following purposes.
   (1)   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene,
lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent with an intent to offend;
   (2)   Making a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with
intent to abuse, threaten or harass any person at the called number;
   (3)   Making or causing the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with
intent to harass any persona at the called number;
   (4)   Making repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues,
solely to harass any person at the called number;
   (5)   Making a telephone call or knowingly inducing a person to make a
telephone call for the purpose of harassing another person who is under
thirteen (13) years of age, regardless of whether the person under thirteen
(13) years of age consents to the harassment, if the defendant is at least
sixteen (16) years of age at the time of the commission of the offense; or
   (6)   Knowingly permitting any telephone under one’s control to be used for
any of the purposes mentioned herein.
   (b)   Every telephone directory published for distribution to members of the
general public shall contain a notice setting forth a summary of the provisions
of this Section. The notice shall be printed in type which is no smaller than
any other type on the same page and shall be preceded by the word “WARNING”.
All telephone companies in this State shall cooperate with law enforcement
agencies in using their facilities and personnel to detect and prevent
violations of this Section.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2102, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2102, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2102, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under
eighteen (18) years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline
Police Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a
class, curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a
similar approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such
participation shall be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon
appropriate evidence the offender has satisfactorily completed the approved
program, the charge and any resulting court or administrative proceeding shall
be dismissed without payment of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under eighteen (18)
years of age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence
to be coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE
sentences shall be for a minimum of ten (10) hours per offense and completed at
an approved agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE
sentence has been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or
administrative proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any
fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; new Sec. 22-2102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2103.   HARASSMENT BY ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS.
   (a)   A person commits harassment through electronic communications when he
or she uses electronic communication for any of the following purposes:
   (1)   Making any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene
with an intent to offend;
   (2)   Interrupting, with the intent to harass, the telephone service or the
electronic communication service of any person;
   (3)   Transmitting to any person, with the intent to harass and regardless
of whether the communication is read in its entirety or at all, any file,
document, or other communication which prevents that person from using his or
her telephone service or electronic communications device;
   (4)   Transmitting an electronic communication or knowingly inducing a
person to transmit an electronic communication for the purpose of harassing
another person who is under 13 years of age, regardless of whether the person
under 13 years of age consents to the harassment, if the defendant is at least
16 years of age at the time of the commission of the offense;
   (5)   Threatening injury to the person or to the property of the person to
whom an electronic communication is directed or to any of his or her family or
household members; or
   (6)   Knowingly permitting any electronic communications device to be used
for any of the purposes mentioned in this subsection (a).
   (b)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service providers, and
providers of information services, including, but not limited to, Internet
service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable under this
Section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of the
transmission, storage, or caching of electronic communications or messages of
others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services, or information services used by others in violation
of this Section.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2103, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2103, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2103, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; new Sec. 22-2103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2104   MINORS INVOLVED IN ELECTRONIC DISSEMINATION OF INDECENT VISUAL
DEPICTIONS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Section:   
   (1)   "Computer" has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 17-0.5 of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012.
   (2)   "Electronic communication device" means an electronic device,
including but not limited to a wireless telephone, personal digital assistant,
or a portable or mobile computer, that is capable of transmitting images or
pictures.
   (3)   "Indecent visual depiction" means a depiction or portrayal in any
pose, posture, or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed or
transparently clothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is
female, a fully or partially developed breast of the person.
   (4)   "Minor" means a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   (b)   A minor shall not distribute or disseminate an indecent visual
depiction of another minor through the use of a computer or electronic
communication device.   
   (c)   Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit a prosecution
for public indecency, child pornography, a violation of Article 26.5 Harassing
and Obscene Communication of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, bringing an
action pursuant to 705 ILCS 405/3-40, or any other applicable provision of
law.   
   (d)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2104, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2104, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2104, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; new Sec. 22-2104 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2105.   ASSAULT.
   (a)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, said
person engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving battery.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2105, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2105, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2105, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-2101 repealed; new Sec. 22-2105 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-2106.   BATTERY.
   (a)   A person commits battery if said person intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an
individual; or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with
an individual.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-2106, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-2106, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-2106, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-2102 repealed; new Sec. 22-2106 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
SEC. 22-3100.   CRIMINAL DAMAGE AND VANDALISM TO PROPERTY.
   (a)   Offense. A person commits the offense of criminal damage to property
when said person knowingly:
   (1)   Damages any property of another without said other's consent; or
   (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damages property of
another; or
   (3)   Starts a fire on the land of another without said other's consent; or
   (4)   Injures a domestic animal of another without said other's consent; or
   (5)   Deposits on the land or in the building of another, without said
other's consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound or any
disruptive material, property or item and thereby intends to interfere with the
use by another of the land or building; or
   (6)   Damages any property with intent to defraud an insurer.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-3100, as a first offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3100, as a second offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3100 as a third or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
   (c)   Restitution. In addition to or in lieu of the above-referenced
penalties, restitution or reparation may be required to be made to the victim
or owner of the damaged property.
   (d)   Liability of Parent or Legal Guardian of Minor Offender.
   (1)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who
resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or
condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for
violation of this article, provided that said minor has not paid said fine or
made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, further
provided that said parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or
notice to appear in the original cause as provided by law.
   (2)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor defendant who
resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be a necessary party to any
proceeding under this article.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3100 repealed; new Sec. 22-3100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3101.   CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES.
   (a)   Offense. A person commits criminal trespass to vehicles when he or she
knowingly and without authority enters any part of or operates any vehicle,
aircraft, watercraft or snowmobile.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-3101, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3101, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-3101, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3101 repealed; new Sec. 22-3101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3102.   CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (a)   Offense: A person commits criminal trespass to land when he or she:
   (1)   knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within or on
a building;
   (2)   enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to the entry,
notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
      (3)   remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart;
   (4)   presents false documents or falsely represents his or her identity
orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to obtain
permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building or on
the land;
   (5)   intentionally removes a notice posted on residential real estate as
required by subsection (l) of Section 15-1505.8 of Article XV of the Code of
Civil Procedure before the date and time set forth in the notice;
   (6)   enters a field used or capable of being used for growing crops, an
enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered vehicle) after receiving,
prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is
forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the owner
or occupant to depart.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating this section, as a first offense, shall
be subject to a citation, which citation shall be paid at the City of Moline,
department of finance, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), or if paid
within seven (7) calendar days, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any person
violating this section as a second or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a
citation, which citation shall be paid at the City of Moline, department of
finance, in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or if paid within
seven (7) calendar days, fifty dollars ($50.00). Any person who fails to make
payment as outlined above within thirty (30) days, shall thereafter be subject
to an action in Circuit Court which may be commenced in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., and any
person found to have violated Section
22-3102 shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
plus court costs, plus reimbursement to the City for the costs the City
incurred in serving the person with process. Each day during which or on which
any person violates Section
22-3102 shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (c)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection (a) if such person has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry
has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or
the forbidden part thereof.
   (d)   This Section shall also apply, in its entirety, to the unlawful
trespass on or in lands and buildings supported in whole or in part with City
funds, or funds administered or granted through City agencies.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3102 repealed; new Sec. 22-3102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3103.   UNLAWFUL DAMAGE TO CITY SUPPORTED PROPERTY.
   (a)   A person commits the offense of unlawful damage to City supported
property when said person knowingly:
   (1)   Damages, by any and all means, any property supported in whole or in
part with City funds administered or granted through a City agency without the
consent of the City; or
   (2)   Deposits on land or in a building supported in whole or in part with
City funds, or funds administered or granted through City agencies without the
consent of the City, any stink bomb, any offensive smelling compound or any
disruptive material property or item and thereby intends to interfere with the
use by another of the land or building.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-3103, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3103, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-3103, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3103 repealed; new Sec. 22-3103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3104.   THEFT.
   (a)   Offense of theft. A person commits the offense of theft when said
person knowingly:
   (1)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   (2)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   (3)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   (4)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce said
person to believe that the property was stolen; or
   (5)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property; or
   (6)   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
   (7)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
   (b)   Penalty.
   (1)   Any person violating Section
22-3104(a), as a first offense, shall be punished as follows: If the value of
the owner's property equals less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the person shall
be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), plus
court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court
costs. If the value of the owner's property equals fifty dollars ($50.00) or
more, the person shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than double
the value of said property, plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.
   (2)   Any person violating Section 22-3104(a), as a second or subsequent
offense, shall be punished as follows: If the value of the owner's property
equals less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the person shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus court
costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. If
the value of the owners' property equals fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the
person shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than three times the
value of said property, plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3105 repealed; new Sec. 22-3104 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3105.   THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINES.
   (a)   Offense of theft from coin-operated machines. A person commits the
offense of theft from coin-operated machines when said person knowingly and
without authority and with intent to commit a theft from such machine, opens,
breaks into, tampers with, or damages a coin-operated machine. This offense
includes the use of slugs and counterfeit coins or currency to gain possession
of property from a coin-operated machine.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-3105, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3105, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-3105, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3106 repealed; new Sec. 22-3105 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3106.   RETAIL THEFT.
   (a)   Offense of retail theft. A person commits the offense of retail theft
when said person knowingly:
   (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise; or
   (2)   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale,
in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
   (4)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
   (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
   (6)   Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange
for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
   (7)   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
   (b)   Theft by emergency exit. A person commits the offense of theft by
emergency exit when he or she commits a retail theft, and to facilitate the
theft he or she leaves the retail mercantile establishment by use of a
designated emergency exit.
   (c)    Presumption. If any person conceals upon said person's body or among
said person's belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored, or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and removes that
merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that
merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment; such person shall be
presumed to have possessed, carried away, or transferred such merchandise with
the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use, or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
   (d)    Detention. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
   (1)    To request identification;
   (2)    To verify such identification;
   (3)    To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in such
person's possession unpurchased merchandise and to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;
   (4)    To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;
   (5)    When such person is a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents,
guardian, or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person. A
merchant may make a detention as permitted hereinabove off the premises of a
retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
   (e)    Affirmative defense. A detention performed pursuant to and in
accordance with this section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful
restraint, and this section may be pleaded in any way of an affirmative defense
to false arrest, false imprisonment, or any other cause of action for damages
or liability where the essence of said cause is the detention made pursuant
hereto.
   (f)    Penalty.
   (1)   Any person violating Section 22-3106(a) or (b), as a first offense,
shall be punished as follows: If the value of the owner's merchandise equals
less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the person shall be subject to a mandatory
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. If the value of the
owner's merchandise equals fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the person shall be
subject to mandatory fine of not less than double the value of said
merchandise, plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), plus court costs.
   (2)   Any person violating Section 22-3106(a) or (b), as a second or
subsequent offense, shall be punished as follows: If the value of the owner's
merchandise equals less than fifty dollars ($50.00), the person shall be
subject to a mandatory fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), plus court costs. If the value of the owner's merchandise equals
fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the person shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than three times the value of said property, plus court costs, nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3107 repealed; new Sec. 22-3106 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-3107.   THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY.
   (a)   Offense. A person commits the offense of theft of lost or mislaid
property when said person:
   (1)   Knows or learns the identity of the owner, or knows, or is aware of,
or learns of, a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and
   (2)   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the
owner; and
   (3)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the property; or knowingly
uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a manner as to deprive the
owner permanently of such use or benefit; or uses, conceals, or abandons the
property knowing such use, concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive
the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-3107, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-3107, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-3107, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-3108 repealed; new Sec. 22-3107 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE IV. WEAPONS
SEC. 22-4100.   UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (a)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when said
person knowingly possesses or carries any of the following items on public
property or public right of way, including, but not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parks, and parkways:
   (1)   an air gun, spring-loaded gun, bludgeon, blackjack, slungshot,
slingshot, sand-club, sandbag, or throwing star;
   (2)   metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon regardless of its
composition;   
   (3)   a switchblade knife, also known as an automatic knife, which has a
blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or
other device in the handle of the knife, unless said person possesses a
currently valid Firearm Owner's Identification Card previously issued in said
person's name by the Department of State Police or to a person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or manufacturing switchblade knives;    
   (4)   a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade as
a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas;    
   (5)   a dagger, dirk, billy, spring gun, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
   (6)   a stun gun or taser, meaning 1) any device which is powered by
electrical charging units, such as, batteries, and which fires one (1) or
several barbs attached to a length of wire and which, upon hitting a human, can
send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a
manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning, or 2) any device which
is powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which, upon
contact with a human or clothing worn by a human, can send out current capable
of disrupting the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him
incapable of normal functioning;   
   (7)   a tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious
liquid gas or substance, other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious
liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal defense carried by a
person eighteen (18) years of age or older;    
   (8)   any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or bullets may be
discharged by a single function of the firing device;    
   (9)   a machine gun, which shall be defined for the purposes of this
subsection as any weapon, which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily
restored to shoot, automatically more than one (1) shot without manually
reloading by a single function of the trigger, including the frame or receiver
of any such weapon;    
   (10)   any rifle having one (1) or more barrels less than sixteen (16)
inches in length or a shotgun having one (1) or more barrels less than eighteen
(18) inches in length or any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun, whether by
alteration, modification, or otherwise, if such weapon as modified has an
overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches;
   (11)   any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle or other container containing
an explosive substance of over one-quarter (1/4) ounce for like purposes, such
as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov cocktails or artillery
projectiles.
   (b)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when said
person knowingly sells an air gun to a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   (c)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when said
person knowingly carries or possesses any type of knife, razor blade or box
cutter, other than those that are possessed or carried for use in furtherance
of a school-sanctioned activity, in or on any school building or property,
including buildings or property used for extracurricular activities,
administration, or education.
   (d)   Exceptions.
   (1)   The possession and transportation of paintball markers, also known as
paintball guns, is allowed on public property and public right of way, as long
as the following requirements are met:
   (a)   The paintball marker/gun is not loaded, and the hopper, which holds
the paintballs, is removed from the paintball marker/gun;
   (b)   The barrel plug is in place;
   (c)   The propellant (i.e., CO2, compressed air or other propellant) is
removed from the paintball marker/gun;
   (d)   The paintball marker/gun, and any and all accessories, is enclosed in
a carrying case or other storage device at all times except when being used at
a City-approved facility specifically designed for paintball marker/gun use.
   (e)   If transporting the paintball marker/gun, the marker/gun and any and
all accessories must be stored outside the passenger compartment (i.e., in the
trunk) of any vehicle.
If any one of these requirements is not met, a person commits the offense of
unlawful use of weapons, unless the paintball marker/gun is being used at a
City-approved paintball facility for the purpose for which it is intended.
   (2)   This section does not apply to police or public safety officers
otherwise authorized to possess or carry weapons.
   (e)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-4100, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-4100, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-4100, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-4100 repealed; new Sec. 22-4100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-4101.   UNLAWFUL SALE OF FIREARMS.
   (a)   A person commits the offense of unlawful sale of firearms when said
person knowingly:
   (1)   Sells or gives any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the
person to any person under eighteen (18) years of age; or
   (2)   Sells or gives any firearm to a person under twenty-one (21) years of
age who has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or
adjudged delinquent; or
   (3)   Sells or gives any firearm to any narcotic addict; or
   (4)   Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been convicted of a
felony under the laws of this state or any other jurisdiction; or
   (5)   Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been a patient in a
mental hospital within the past five (5) years; or
   (6)   Sells or gives any firearm to any person who is mentally disabled; or
   (7)   Delivers any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person,
incidental to a sale, without withholding delivery of such firearm for at least
seventy-two (72) hours after application for its purchase has been made, or
delivers any rifle, shotgun or other long gun, incidental to a sale, without
withholding delivery of such rifle, shotgun or other long gun for at least
twenty-four (24) hours after application for its purchase has been made.
However, this subsection shall not apply to:
   a.   The sale of a firearm to a law enforcement officer or a person who
desires to purchase a firearm for use in promoting the public interest incident
to such person's employment as a bank guard, armed truck guard, or other
similar employment; or
   b.   A mail order sale of a firearm to a nonresident of the state under
which the firearm is mailed to a point outside the boundaries of the state; or
   c.   The sale of a firearm to a nonresident of the state while at a showing
or display recognized by the state department of public safety; or
   d.   The sale of a firearm when another firearm is traded-in for the firearm
purchased, in whole or in part; or
   e.   The sale of a firearm to a dealer licensed under the Federal Firearms
Act of the United States.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-4101, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-4101, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-4101, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-4101 repealed; new Sec. 22-4101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-4102.   CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   (a)   Upon conviction of a violation of this article, any weapon seized
shall be confiscated by the City or the trial court.
   (b)   Any weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for evidentiary
purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession if known. All
other confiscated weapons when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, shall
be preserved as property of the City or destroyed by the City at its sole and
exclusive discretion.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-4102 repealed; new Sec. 22-4102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-4103.   DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the
City.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a bow and arrow,
spring-loaded gun, sling, slingshot, air gun or any other weapon on public
property or public right of way in the City.
   (c)   The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to the
following:
   (1)   To a peace officer in the performance of an official duty;
   (2)   To law enforcement personnel and other individuals receiving training,
practicing or in competition on a firearms range, either public or private,
approved by the City Council;
   (3)   To a person using a paintball marker, also known as a paintball gun,
at a public field or facility specifically designed for holding paintball
events and approved by the City.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any bow and arrow,
spring-loaded gun, sling, slingshot, air gun or any other weapons on any
private parcel of land or residence in such a manner that the pellet,
paintball, dart, slingshot, BB shot, rock, missile, or other projectile may
reasonably be expected to traverse any ground or space beyond the lot lines of
such private parcel of land or in such a manner that persons or property may be
endangered.
   (e)   The provisions of subsection (d) shall not apply to archery hunting on
private property within the City as long as it is performed in compliance with
all municipal code requirements.
   (f)    Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-4103, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-4103, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-4103, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-4103 repealed; new Sec. 22-4103 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE V. GAMBLING
(Ord. No. 3019-2012; Art. V. repealed; new Art. V. enacted, 07/17/12; Ord. No.
3019-2023; Art. V. repealed; new Art. V. enacted, 06/20/23; see separate
subsections for prior amendment references)
SEC. 22-5100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Gambling device is any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance
or skill or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked,
hazarded, bet, won or lost or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or
other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A “gambling
device” includes, but is not limited to, any simulated video gaming device such
as a video poker machine, video or mechanical slot machine, video or mechanical
bingo machine, or other device which involves any game of chance or amusement
based upon poker, blackjack, dog racing, or horse racing, craps, any card or
dice game, or any similar device operated by means of the insertion of a coin,
token, slug currency, or similar object. A "gambling device" does not include:
      a.   Authorized video gaming terminals as defined in the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.;
      b.   Any of the following, as more specifically defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-
2(a)(1) through (a)(5):
         i.   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the
operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns
to the player thereof no money, property or other thing of value or the right
to receive money or property or other thing of value;
         ii.   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard;
         iii.   Crane games;
         iv.   Redemption machines; or
         v.   Internet computer service or system.
   (2)   Lottery is any scheme or procedure whereby one (1) or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for
a chance to win the prizes, whether the scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
   (3)   Policy game is any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device
that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event
of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder
to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
(Ord. No. 3016-2004; Sec. 22-5100 repealed; new Sec. 22-5100 enacted; 03/19/04)
SEC. 22-5101.   GAMBLING DECLARED AN OFFENSE; ACTS CONSTITUTING GAMBLING
ENUMERATED.
   (a)   A person commits the offense of gambling when said person does any of
the following acts:
   (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value,
unless permitted per subsection (b) below.
   (2)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device, unless permitted per subsection (b) below.
   (3)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election.
   (4)   Contracts to have or give said person or another the option to buy or
sell or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other
commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it is at
the time of making such contract intended by both parties thereto that the
contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised or the contract
resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of the
property, but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; however,
the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or guarantee, by or through
a person registered with the secretary of state pursuant to the Illinois
Securities Law of 1953, or by or through a person exempt from such registration
under that law of a put, call, or other option to buy or sell securities which
have been registered with the secretary of state or which are exempt from such
registration under the Illinois Securities Law of 1953 is not gambling within
the meaning of this subsection.
   (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means
of which bets or wagers have been or are, recorded or registered or knowingly
possesses any money which said person has received in the course of a bet or
wager.
   (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance,
political nomination, appointment or election.
   (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers
any ticket or share for any lottery, unless permitted per subsection (b) below.
   (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device.
   (9)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints or
publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or similar device or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game,
unless permitted per subsection (b) below.
   (10)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
chances in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information, except that nothing in this subsection prohibits
transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests.
   (b)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
   (1)   Agreements to compensate for the loss caused by the happening of
chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life
or health or accident insurance.
   (2)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in
any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest.
   (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state.
   (4)   Video gaming as authorized by the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq.
   (5)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof pursuant to the Illinois
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., and/or for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law.
   (6)   The game commonly known as "bingo" when conducted in accordance with
"An Act making lawful the conducting of bingo by certain not-for-profit
organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing regulations therefor," as
authorized by the law of this state, and when conducted pursuant to license
issued hereunder.
   (7)   Any lottery conducted and authorized by the law of this state.
   (8)   Any lottery commonly known as a raffle which is licensed pursuant to
Article IX of
Chapter 17 of this Code.
   (9)   Any charitable game including but not limited to roulette, blackjack,
poker, pull tabs, craps, bang, beat the dealer, big six, gin rummy, five card
stud poker, chuck-a-luck, keno, hold-em poker and merchandise wheel conducted
pursuant to and in strict compliance with the Charitable Games Act, 230 ILCS
30/1 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
(Ord. No. 3022-2006; Sec. 22-5101(b)(7) repealed; new Sec. 22-5101(b)(7)
enacted; 05/23/06)
   (c)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
22-5101, including all subparts thereof, shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100), plus court costs, nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500), plus court costs. Any person violating Section
22-5101, including all subparts thereof, as a second offense, shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200), plus court
costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), plus court costs. Any
person violating Section
22-5101, including all subparts thereof, as a third or subsequent offense,
shall be subjected to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250), plus court costs, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750), plus court costs.
   (1)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, a first time offender under 18
years of age may notify legal counsel for the City or a Moline Police
Department representative of their intention to enroll and complete a class,
curriculum or program coordinated by the Youth Service Bureau, or a similar
approved agency, to address the offender’s violation. Such participation shall
be at the Offender’s sole cost and expense. Upon appropriate evidence the
offender has satisfactorily completed the approved program, the charge and any
resulting court or administrative proceeding shall be dismissed without payment
of any fine being due.
   (2)   In lieu of the above-referenced fines, an offender under 18 years of
age may elect to complete a Public Service Employment (“PSE”) sentence to be
coordinated by counsel for the City or a local probation office. PSE sentences
shall be for a minimum of 10 hours per offense and completed at an approved
agency or organization. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof the PSE sentence has
been timely completed, the charge and any resulting court or administrative
proceeding shall be closed and satisfied without payment of any fine being due.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-11; new Sec. 22-5101 (c) enacted; 09/10/02)
SEC. 22-5102.   SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (a)   Every gambling device which is incapable of lawful use is contraband
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board as authorized by the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. As used in this section, a “gambling device
which is incapable of lawful use" includes any slot machine, and includes any
machine or device constructed for the reception of money or other thing of
value and so constructed as to return on chance to the player thereof money,
property or a right to receive money or property.
(Ord. No. 3019-2012; Art. V. repealed; new Art. V. enacted, 07/17/12; see
separate subsections for prior amendment references)
ARTICLE VI. LITTERING
SEC. 22-6100.   PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person, or the agent or employee of any person, shall throw, drop, place,
deposit, discard or let fall, or cause such to be done, on any public street,
highway, roadway, thoroughfare, sidewalk, pathway, lawn, park, parkway,
waterway, stream, brook, parking lot, cemetery or other public place or public
building within the City any paper, glass, plastic, wood, metal, solid or
liquid vegetable or animal compound, rubbish, garbage, waste, effluent, junk,
debris, litter, any solid, or any combination thereof, other than in a trash
receptacle or official landfill site of the City.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-6100 repealed; new Sec. 22-6100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-6101.   WHEN PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person, or the agent or employee of any person, shall throw, drop, place,
deposit, discard or let fall or cause any littering prohibited by this article
on public property, or any private property within the City where the litter is
likely to blow, flow, move, drain, scatter or be blown, moved, drained, or
scattered onto public property or public water under normal or predictable
weather or environmental conditions in the City; however, this section does not
apply to home garbage disposals, or to commercial garbage disposals where
permits have been issued by the City.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-6101 repealed; new Sec. 22-6101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-6102.   VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.
   (a)   Any act prohibited by this section is also declared to be a nuisance,
and may be a nuisance.
   (b)   Any person violating this article, as a first offense, shall be
subject to a citation, which citation shall be paid at the City of Moline
department of finance in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), or if paid
within seven (7) calendar days, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any person
violating this article as a second or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a
citation, which citation shall be paid at the City of Moline department of
finance in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or if paid within seven
(7) calendar days, fifty dollars ($50.00). Any person who fails to make payment
as outlined above within thirty (30) days, shall thereafter be subject to an
action in Circuit Court which may be commenced in accordance with the
requirements of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., and any
person found to have violated this article shall be subject to a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs, plus reimbursement to the
City for the costs the City incurred in serving the person with process. Each
day during which or on which any person violates this article shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-6102 repealed; new Sec. 22-6102 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
DIVISION 1. PROSTITUTION
SEC. 22-7100.   PROSTITUTION.
   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any of the following
acts for money, commits the offense of prostitution:
   (1)   Any act of sexual intercourse.
   (2)   Any act of deviate sexual conduct.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7100 repealed; new Sec. 22-7100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7101.   PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE.
   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not said
person's spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
   (1)   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with
a prostitute.
   (2)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in
an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7101 repealed; new Sec. 22-7101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7102.   SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE.
   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits the offense of
soliciting for a prostitute:
   (1)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;
   (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of
prostitution;
   (3)   Directs another to a place knowing the direction is for the purpose of
prostitution.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7102 repealed; new Sec. 22-7102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7103.   PIMPING.
   Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not for a
lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from the
practice of prostitution, commits the offense of pimping.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7103 repealed; new Sec. 22-7103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7104.   PANDERING.
   Any person who performs any of the following acts for money commits the
offense of pandering:
   (1)   Compels a person to become a prostitute; or
   (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a person may
practice prostitution.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7104 repealed; new Sec. 22-7104 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 2. OBSCENITY
SEC. 22-7200.   "OBSCENE" DEFINED.
   As used in this division, material is "obscene" when:
   (1)   It depicts or describes any of the following types of sexual conduct:
      a.   Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated;
      b.   Masturbation;
      c.   Excretory functions; or
      d.   Lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
   (2)   To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the
dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient
interest in sex;
   (3)   The material, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7200 repealed; new Sec. 22-7200 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7201.   ACTS CONSTITUTING OBSCENITY ENUMERATED.
   A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature of contents
thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
disclose the nature of contents thereof:
   (1)   Such person sells within the City, any obscene book, magazine,
pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film, phonograph record,
film strip or slide;
   (2)   Such person offers or attempts to sell within the City, any obscene
book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film,
phonograph record, film strip or slide;
   (3)   Such person distributes or gives away within the City, any obscene
book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film,
photograph record, film strip or slide;
   (4)   Such person offers to or attempts to give away within the City, any
obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture
film, phonograph record, film strip or slide;
   (5)   Such person prints or publishes within the City, any obscene book,
magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, drawing, motion picture film, film strip
or slide;
   (6)   Such person exhibits or shows within the City, any obscene photograph,
drawing, motion picture, film strip or slide;
   (7)   Such person produces, directs, or plays a part within the City, in any
obscene play;
   (8)   Such person advertises for sale within the City, any obscene book,
magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, motion picture film, phonograph record,
film strip or slide;
   (9)   Such person advertises for viewing within the City, any obscene motion
picture, play, film strip or slide;
   (10)   Such person publicly performs an obscene act or otherwise publicly
presents an obscene exhibition of such person's body within the City;
   (11)   Such person buys or procures in the City, for resale in the City, any
obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, photograph, motion picture film, film
strip, slide or phonograph record;
   (12)   Such person buys, leases or produces in the City, for showing in the
City for gain, any obscene motion picture, film strip or slide;
   (13)   Such person sells, purchases, rents, leases, or displays within the
City, any obscene video, video tape, motion picture film, laser disc, compact
disc, cassette tape, digital audio tape, slide(s) transferred to tape, or any
similar product;
   (14)   Such person sells, purchases, rents, leases, or displays within the
City, any obscene product of technological advances beyond those enumerated in
subsection (13) above;
   (15)   For the purpose of enforcing subsections (13) and (14) above, any law
enforcement officer has the right to enter upon any business property within
the City limits, during the hours such business is open to the public or its
customers, for purposes of inspection to determine whether there are any
violations of said subsections;
   (16)   With respect to displaying of material pursuant to subsection (13),
if the material displayed does not involve minor children, it shall not be
deemed a violation of this section for a person to display material which would
otherwise be classified as obscene when such display is entirely within the
confines of the person's private residence; provided that the material is
displayed only to residents or guests therein, and provided further that there
is no transfer of money, goods, services or other consideration of any type or
kind whatsoever between resident(s) and guest(s), if any, in exchange for said
display.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7201 repealed; new Sec. 22-7201 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-7202.   PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an
offense which shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-7202 repealed; new Sec. 22-7202 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE VIII. AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND FLEEING VEHICLES
SEC. 22-8100.   FLEEING VEHICLE AND IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Declared A Nuisance: A vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee
and elude a peace officer that is not immediately stopped by the police and the
driver placed under arrest is declared to be a public nuisance and said vehicle
is subject to being immediately towed and impounded by the police.
   (b)   Vehicle Subject To Seizure And Impoundment: Whenever a police officer
has observed a vehicle engaged in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude and
believes that there exists probable cause to tow and impound said vehicle, and
locates said vehicle on a public thoroughfare or within a parking lot under
City ordinance control or a parking lot open to the general public within the
City before the end of his or her watch, then said vehicle may be seized and
impounded. Notice shall be given to the person in control of the vehicle and
the owner of the vehicle as described herein.
   (c)   Incident Report: Whenever a police officer has observed a vehicle
engaged in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude and said vehicle is not
located by the police before the end of his or her watch, said officer shall at
the end of his or her watch prepare a written incident report which provides a
record, if possible, of the make, model, year, color, state of registration,
license plate number, identification of the driver, location of the incident
and the date and time of the incident. Said report shall include information
sufficient to support the determination of probable cause to tow and impound,
including information of the officer's attempts to stop the vehicle at the time
of the occurrence, and that the driver failed or refused to stop after the
officer activated the squad car's emergency signal equipment and that pursuit
of the vehicle was abandoned for public safety reasons.
   (d)   Interim Seizure: Upon completion of the report, the officer shall give
the report to the shift commander or his or her designee for interim seizure
and impoundment authorization of said vehicle. Once authorized, said vehicle
may be seized and impounded by police based upon the reporting officer's
probable cause for a period of ninety six (96) hours prior to the filing of a
Notice of Intent to Impound as described herein. If said vehicle is towed
within the ninety six (96) hour period and before a Notice of Intent to Impound
is filed, notice shall be given to the person in control of the vehicle and the
owner of the vehicle as described herein.
   (e)   Notice of Intent to Impound: If said vehicle is not located within
ninety six (96) hours, the police department may file a Notice of Intent to
Impound with the administrative clerk of MUNICES. Once filed, said vehicle may
be seized and impounded by police if located on a public thoroughfare or within
a parking lot under city ordinance control, or a parking lot open to the
general public within the City, pending a MUNICES hearing as described herein.
The Notice of Intent to Impound shall include the following information:
   (1)   A statement that the operator on the date, time, and approximate
location of the incident in question failed or refused to stop operation of the
vehicle when ordered to do so by the police officer;
   (2)   A description of the vehicle as contained in the police officer's
report;
   (3)   Notice that a hearing on the merits to contest the eligibility for
impoundment of the motor vehicle shall be scheduled on a specified date before
the MUNICES hearing officer;
   (4)   Notice that if said vehicle, as described in the Notice of Intent to
Impound, is located on a public thoroughfare or within a parking lot under city
ordinance control or a parking lot open to the general public within the City,
at any time prior to the scheduled MUNICES hearing, that said vehicle is
subject to immediate impoundment and seizure; and
   (5)   That the owner is entitled to post a cash bond to retrieve the vehicle
prior to the scheduled MUNICES hearing.
   (f)   Delivery of Notice: Upon filing the Notice of Intent to Impound with
the administrative clerk of MUNICES, notice shall be sent by regular mail to
the vehicle's owner of record. The notice is presumed delivered upon it being
deposited with the United States postal service with proper postage being
affixed thereto.
   (g)   This Article VIII., including all sections thereof, also applies when
the vehicle at issue is located on a public thoroughfare or within a parking
lot under City ordinance control of another City with whom the City has an
intergovernmental agreement to provide assistance relating to multi-
jurisdictional problems or issues. The vehicle described in the notice shall be
eligible for impoundment if found on the public way or within a parking lot
under city ordinance control or parking lot open to the general public or in a
parking lot or on the public way of another city with whom the city has an
intergovernmental agreement to provide assistance in conjunction with an
incident involving multi-jurisdictional problems within twelve (12) months.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-8100 repealed; new Sec. 22-8100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-8101.   BONDING PROCEDURE AND AMOUNT OF BOND.
   Whenever the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant hereto wishes to retrieve
their vehicle prior to the MUNICES hearing, they may do so by posting a cash
bond at the City’s department of finance or through the City’s online payment
options. On the first instance a vehicle is impounded, the cash bond amount
shall be $500.00. On the second instance a vehicle is impounded, the cash bond
amount shall be $750.00. For each subsequent instance a vehicle is impounded,
the cash bond amount shall not be less than $1,000.00.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-8101 repealed; new Sec. 22-8101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-8102.   HEARING.
   (a)   Within ten (10) business days after a vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant hereto or a Notice of Intent to Impound is issued, the administrative
clerk of MUNICES shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the
owner of record, any lienholders or other legally entitled persons of the date,
time and location of a MUNICES hearing. When the City does not know the
identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person,
the City will cause the vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois
to be searched for purposes of obtaining the required ownership information.
   (b)   A hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of
the MUNICES hearing officer, on the City’s next scheduled MUNICES hearing date
following the day the vehicle was seized or a Notice of Intent to Impound was
issued, whichever is later, if not within ten (10) days. If said MUNICES
hearing would fall within ten (10) days of either the impoundment of the
vehicle or issuance of a Notice of Intent to Impound, the MUNICES hearing shall
be set for the City’s next scheduled MUNICES hearing date. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The
MUNICES hearing rules and procedures shall apply to any such hearing.
   (c)   If, after the hearing, the MUNICES hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle had been stolen prior to the
alleged violation, he shall enter an order dismissing the matter. If, however,
he determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was not
stolen prior to the violation, he shall enter an order requiring the vehicle to
be impounded for the applicable length of time provided for herein and until
the owner pays the applicable fines and MUNICES costs if the vehicle is still
in the custody of the City. If the vehicle is not in the City's custody,
because a cash bond has been posted, then subsection (d) shall apply.
   (d)   If a cash bond has been posted and the owner has possession of the
vehicle, the MUNICES hearing officer shall enter an order deducting the fine
and any MUNICES costs imposed as if the vehicle was actually held for the time
period specified from the cash bond that was posted.
   (e)   In the event the defendant wishes to appeal the decision of the
MUNICES hearing officer under the provisions of the administrative review act,
said defendant shall pay the cost of the preparation and transcription of the
record of the hearing and shall appeal to the Circuit Court of Rock Island
County.
   (f)   If the MUNICES hearing officer determines that there is no such
probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other costs.
   (g)   The fine and costs shall be a debt due and owed to the City. However,
if a cash bond has been posted the bond shall be applied to the fine and costs.
If the MUNICES hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used with
the permission, express or implied, of the owner, he shall order the return of
the vehicle or cash bond. In the event it shall become necessary for the City
to collect the debt by filing an action in the Circuit Court of Rock Island
County, the City shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the amount due,
court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
   (h)   Notwithstanding any other provisions hereof, any lienholder of record
may obtain possession of any seized and impounded vehicle they have a legal
lien interest in by: 1) submitting to the City verified proof that they have
commenced foreclosure proceedings against the registered owner of said vehicle;
2) payment of the towing and storage fees for the period of time said vehicle
was held; and 3) providing a written agreement to refund to the City the net
proceeds of any foreclosure sale, over and above the amount necessary to
satisfy any liens, to be applied by the City to satisfy any fines and costs
imposed.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-8102 repealed; new Sec. 22-8102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-8103.   LENGTH OF IMPOUNDMENT AND FINES.
   (a)   Any vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee and elude a peace
officer in violation hereof shall be impounded for not less than seven (7) days
and a fine shall be imposed against the registered vehicle owner in the amount
of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (b)   The length of impoundment and fine imposed shall double upon a second
violation hereof involving the same vehicle, resulting in an impoundment of not
less than fourteen (14) days and a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (c)   A third violation hereof involving the same vehicle shall result in an
impoundment of not less than twenty one (21) days and a fine of not less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (d)   In addition to the foregoing fines, the vehicle owner shall be
responsible for all MUNICES costs incurred.
   (e)   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle hereunder shall be the
responsibility of the vehicle’s owner of record and shall be payable in the
same amount as those charged per the contract for towing and storage services
with the City in effect at the time of the violation.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-8103 repealed; new Sec. 22-8103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 22-8104.   UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed may be disposed of according to
state statute and the age of the vehicle after the expiration of the period of
impoundment, the conclusion of a MUNICES hearing or the judicial review of the
actions taken hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3019-2023; Sec. 22-8104 repealed; new Sec. 22-8104 enacted; 06/20/23)
.
CHAPTER 23
PARKS AND RECREATION
Note: See end of Chapter for list of Chapter amendments
   Art. I.   Park and Recreation Board, §23-1100 - §23-1107
   Art. II.   Operation of Park and Recreational Facilities, §23-2100 - §23-
2103
   Art. III.   Watercraft, Docks and Waterways
      Div. 1. In General, §23-3100 - §23-3102
      Div. 2. Operation of Watercraft, §23-3200 - §23-3210
   Art. IV.   Cemetery Operation, §23-4100 - §23-4107
   Appendix 1. Restricted Areas of Parking/Boat Ramps
ARTICLE I. PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
SEC. 23-1100.   CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created and established a park and recreation board for the
City which shall be composed of seven (7) residents who shall be appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members must remain
residents of the City during their tenure on the board. Not more than one (1)
member of the board shall be a member of the City Council.
SEC. 23-1101.   TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The park and recreation board is a continuation of the playground and
recreation board and the staggered terms of office of the members of said
playground and recreation board shall be continued for their full term.
Subsequent appointments shall be made for five-year terms, and members shall
serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. In the case of
vacancy, the mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
appoint a successor for the unexpired term.
SEC. 23-1102.   COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the park and recreation board shall serve without
compensation.
SEC. 23-1103.   QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the park and recreation board shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business.
SEC. 23-1104.   ORGANIZATION.
   The park and recreation board shall elect necessary officers and adopt such
rules, bylaws and regulations as it may deem proper for the conduct of its
work; however, said rules, bylaws and regulations shall be in writing and shall
be on file with the city clerk for at least ten (10) days before same or any
amendment thereto becomes effective.
SEC. 23-1105.   POWERS.
   The park and recreation board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (1)   To take charge of and operate all parks, playgrounds, cemeteries, park
and recreational facilities, and any other property entrusted to it by
resolution or ordinance and to have the care, custody, and supervision thereof.
   (2)   To acquire, in the name of the City and in accordance with the general
ordinances of the City relating to purchasing, either within or beyond the
corporate limits of the City, real or personal property, which is necessary,
advisable, or useful for the purposes of said board by purchase, gift,
exchange, or condemnation when authorized by law; provided said acquisition of
real property is first approved by the City Council.
   (3)   To sell or dispose of real and personal property no longer needed or
useful; provided, such sale or disposition shall be either with the express
approval of the City Council or in accordance with the terms of any general
ordinance enacted by the City Council relating to the sale or disposal of
property.
   (4)   To adopt rules and regulations for the control and government of the
facilities, properties and institutions entrusted to said board; penal rules
and regulations, when approved by the City Council, shall have the force and
effect of ordinances and may be enforced as ordinances when published.
   (5)   To appoint and employ, subject to the personnel Code of the City, such
employees as may be necessary to direct and operate such facilities,
properties, and institutions entrusted to and fix the compensation thereof in
accordance with general compensation plans adopted by the City Council; and as
may be permitted under the budget as submitted to City Council and approved
each year. The director of the department of park and recreation shall be
appointed by the board. The director shall be assisted by the municipal
services general manager, who will coordinate park maintenance activities with
the board and other municipal services.
   (6)   To procure such material, supplies, and equipment as is needed for the
operation of the facilities, properties, and institutions entrusted to it;
provided, said procurement is in accordance with the general ordinances of the
City relating to purchasing.
   (7)   To provide for the maintenance and improvement of the facilities,
properties, and institutions.
   (8)   To establish additional facilities and properties or branches of
existing facilities, institutions, or properties; provided, said establishment
is first submitted to the Moline Plan Commission for review as to locational
conformance to master plans and the official map.
   (9)   To enter into operating, exchange of property, or sharing of property
and facilities agreements with other public or private organizations for the
purpose of furthering public recreational, open space and burial needs.
   (10)   To plat, lay out, survey, and ornament City cemetery grounds.
   (11)   To establish fees and charges for use of properties, facilities, and
institutions entrusted to it and to assess the value of interment rights which
are offered for sale and to sell and dispose of, in the name of the City, said
interment rights on such terms and with such conditions for the permanent care
and preservation of the cemeteries and all their parts as it may deem proper.
   (12)   To have such other powers as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and powers hereinabove set forth or that may be granted by law or
ordinance.
SEC. 23-1106.   PARK AND RECREATION FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby created a park and recreation fund, which shall
consist of the “Park Fund,” “Park and Cemetery Gift Fund,” and “Perpetual Care
Fund.” All taxes now levied or to be hereafter levied for park, recreational,
and cemetery purposes, and all moneys hereafter received from the collection of
such taxes or from other sources shall be deposited in said park and recreation
fund.
   (b)   The park and recreation board shall maintain at least four (4)
accounts within said fund so that park and recreational moneys, cemetery
moneys, cemetery perpetual care moneys, and trust moneys may be accounted for
separately to the extent practicable, in keeping with good management
practices, and as required by terms of gift, bequest, or trust.
   (c)   Money received for park, recreational, and cemetery purposes shall be
deposited with the officer charged with control of the City's finances to the
account of the park and recreation board, and the money may be withdrawn and
paid out by said officer upon receipt of warrants drawn on the City treasury by
said board.
   (d)   The board may direct the officer charged with control of the City's
finances to invest money in its account in any security or instrument permitted
by statute; said officer shall then determine the appropriate term and
investment.
SEC. 23-1107.   ANNUAL AND MONTHLY REPORTS.
   By June 30, following the end of each calendar year, the City’s Audited
Financial Statements will be presented separately to the Park Board & City
Council. The Audit will include the following schedules for each of the Park
Funds:
   (a)   Balance Sheet –Assets & Liabilities;
   (b)   Schedule of Revenues, Expenditures & Changes in Fund Balance - Budget
& Actual; and
   (c)   Fixed Asset Schedule – additions & deletions.
   Following the release of the City’s previous year audit and in preparation
for the upcoming fiscal year budget, the Park Director will prepare a budget
request of the financial requirements for all Park Divisions for inclusion in
the annual appropriation of the corporate authority, and of the amount of money
which, in the judgment of the Park Board, is necessary to levy for park
purposes in the next annual tax levy ordinance. The final levy distribution
will be adopted by Council resolution.
(Ord. No. 3017-2022; 7/26/22)
ARTICLE II. OPERATION OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
SEC. 23-2100.   PARK AND RECREATION SYSTEM CREATED; ORGANIZATION.
   (a)   There is hereby established a park, supervised playground, and
recreation system in the City. Said system shall be maintained and operated for
the use and benefit of the citizens of the City and shall be designed to meet
the open space and passive recreational needs as well as the active
recreational needs of said citizens.
   (b)   Said system and expenditures for said system constitute a legitimate
public purpose in that the public health, safety, and welfare are serviced by
developing within an urban setting activities that promote healthy minds and
bodies. Physical exercise, quiet retreats, development of skill in the cultural
arts, and promotion of the aesthetic quality of the City are such activities
and are compatible in nature to rightfully be continued in one unified system.
   (c)   The management and supervision of the department, and of any and all
property pertaining thereto, shall be under the direction of the park and
recreation board and the parks recreation director, herein designated as the
director, and it shall be the director's duty to protect the same from
unnecessary damage or loss and keep the department in proper running order and
repair.
   (d)   The director shall be assisted in the administration of the department
by the municipal services general manager, herein designated as the general
manager, and it shall be the general manager's duty to coordinate park
maintenance activities with the director and the park and recreation board; the
general manager shall further coordinate the use of park employees with other
municipal functions and services so as to make best use of all municipal
employees and equipment.
SEC. 23-2101.   PARK AND RECREATIONAL AREAS DEFINED.
   (a)   The park and recreation system shall consist of such property,
facilities and institutions either within or beyond the corporate limits as the
park and recreation board, with the approval of the City Council, may from time
to time determine. The City Council has approved by a special ordinance certain
properties, facilities and institutions for inclusion in said system. The
properties, facilities and institutions are described in the following special
ordinances: Special Ordinance No. 161, Special Ordinance No. 179, Special
Ordinance No. 227, Special Ordinance No. 294, and Special Ordinance No. 306.
   (b)   The city clerk is hereby authorized to include in subsection (a)
above, special ordinances adopted hereafter which turn over real property for
jurisdiction by the park and recreation board or to cause said listing to be
done without further amendment of this section.
SEC. 23-2102.   RULES OF CONDUCT APPLICABLE TO ALL PARKS.
   (a)   The rules contained in subsections (b) and (c) below have been adopted
by the park and recreation board and have been approved by the City Council.
Said rules are applicable to conduct of any person within any park, playground,
recreational facility, or other premises under the jurisdiction of said board
and are considered supplementary to, and not in exclusion of, any other rules,
provisions of this Code, or other ordinances of the City applicable to such
matters.
      (1)   Exception: The use of trails located within the City and under the
jurisdiction of the park and recreation board shall be pursuant to the rules
adopted by the park and recreation board and approved by the City Council as
set forth in Sec.
23-2103 below.
   (b)   Large parks or those containing evening program activities (BBMP,
Riverside, Green Valley, Prospect, Stephens) shall be open for public use from
6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily. Neighborhood and small parks or those offering
no evening activity schedule (Peterson, McCandless, Velie, Karstens, Kiwanis,
Butterworth Playground, East End, Optimist, Millennium, Sylvan Island,
Browning, Jefferson, Meersman and Stephen's Square) shall be open for public
use from 6:00 a.m. until sunset.
   (c)   No person in any park, playground, recreational facility or other
premises under the jurisdiction of the park and recreation board shall:
      (1)   Permit unleashed or unaccompanied animals on the premises, nor
allow animals to enter fenced-in areas, except for special functions, as
authorized by the director.
      (2)   Carry or discharge firearms, fireworks, spring-loaded guns, or bows
and arrows, or other weapons not designated in Section
23-2102(c)(3), unless duly authorized by City officials.
      (3)   Carry or discharge slings, slingshots, air guns, or other weapons
not designated in Section
23-2102(c)(2), unless duly authorized by City officials.
      (4)   Cut, mark, break, climb upon, or in any way injure or deface trees,
shrubs, plants, buildings, fences, bridges, or other structures or property on
the premises.
      (5)   Remove from the premises sod, trees or plants or other movable
property, or to pick flowers of any kind on any such premises.
      (6)   Race with horses, bicycles, automobiles, minibikes, motorcycles or
other vehicles, boats, or animals; or drive or ride on drives on any such
premises at more than fifteen (15) miles per hour, unless otherwise designated.
      (7)   Sell, be in possession, or be under the influence of any
intoxicating beverages, hallucinogenic drugs, or marijuana, except that the
sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted at Green
Valley as long as such sale, possession and consumption is performed in
compliance with Chapter 4 of this Code and all other applicable statutes, rules
and regulations. On any property under the jurisdiction of the Park Board other
than at Green Valley or Riverside Riverslide, sale, possession and consumption
of alcoholic beverages will be allowed if, and only if, performed in compliance
with Section
4-3309 of this Code, governing Special Event Not For Profit Licenses.
      (8)   Lie or sleep on tables or benches on the premises.
      (9)   Distribute circulars or advertisements, or post notices, bills or
other paper upon any structures or trees on any such premises, or to advertise
by any other means.
      (10)   Take any bird eggs or bird nests; fish in the lagoons, unless
permitted at such times as designated by the director or other authorities; or
kill or disturb any waterfowl, birds or wildlife. Fishing is permitted at any
time at designated park locations; see Sec.
23-2102(e) below.
      (11)   Light any fires on the property, other than in established
fireplaces.
      (12)   Drive or park automobiles on the grassy areas.
      (13)   Swim in any but designated places for swimming, and only during
the designated hours. Swimming is not permitted from or off of boat docks,
launching areas, shorelines or any structure or item attached to park
shoreline.
      (14)   Be on the premises, unless otherwise designated or authorized and
under proper supervision, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or
additional hours, as set forth under Sec.
23-2102(b). The enclosed playground areas shall be opened and closed at the
discretion of the park and recreation staff, and any person being found within
such closed areas shall be in violation of this chapter.
      (15)   Be permitted to call or hold meetings or gatherings on park or
recreational property without written consent by permit from the director or
the City Council or refuse to vacate a property to allow use by a permit
bearing group or interrupt a permitted activity in progress.
      (16)   Be permitted to bring into or upon park and recreational
properties refuse of any kind, including undesirable plant life or discarded
appliances.
      (17)   Enter any area or portion of any area designated as restricted by
signs or notices without the consent of the director.
      (18)   Be allowed to display language or conduct deemed disorderly.
      (19)   Sell or offer to sell to any person food or refreshments, or be a
vendor of any saleable products without the approval by written permit or
contractual agreement with the park and recreation board or its authorized
agents.
      (20)   Drive, operate or use any snowmobile, hover craft, minibike,
motorcycle, go-cart or any other vehicle in any park of the City, except in
areas specifically designated, if any, by the park and recreation board for
such use.
      (21)   Be permitted to solicit for membership into, affiliation with, or
support of, any subject, activity or organization other than park and
recreation board services and activities.
      (22)   Provide and distribute food to any species of waterfowl within any
City park.
   (d)   Penalty .
      (1)   Any person violating Section 23-2102(c)(1) shall be subject to a
mandatory fine as follows: not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus
court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court
costs, and any other applicable penalty provisions of Chapter 7, “Animals and
Fowl.”
      (2)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c)(2) shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
      (3)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c), subsections (3), (4), (5), (6), (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), (15),
(16), (17), (19), (20), or (21) shall be subject to a mandatory fine as
follows: not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
      (4)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c)(7) shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less than four
hundred dollars ($400.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
      (5)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c)(8) or (c)(9) shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not
less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus court costs nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
      (6)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c)(18) shall be subject to the mandatory fine and penalty provisions
set forth in Section
22-2100, “Disorderly Conduct,” subsection (e), “Penalty.”
      (7)   Any person violating Section
23-2102(c)(22) shall be subject to a fine as follows: not less than twenty-five
($25.00) plus court costs nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus
court costs.
   (e)   Fishing Permitted.
      (1)   A person may obtain a permit from the office of the park and
recreation board, 3635 4th Avenue, Moline, to fish at any time at the following
parks: Ben Butterworth Parkway, Sylvan Island, Green Valley Park, Sylvan
Gateway Park, and Harold’s Landing. Such permit is valid for the holder of the
permit only.
         a.   The permit is good for the calendar year in which it is issued
and must be carried at all times while fishing. Failure to carry a permit while
in a designated park after hours shall be a violation of this Code as set forth
in subsection (c)(14) and shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
         b.   If a person fishing after park hours parks his motor vehicle in
the parking lot of one of the above named parks, such vehicle must have a
parking sticker issued by the office of the park and recreation board affixed
to the left side of the rear window of the vehicle. An administrative fee will
be imposed for the sticker.
         c.   A person fishing after park hours with a permit is required to
abide by all other rules of conduct contained in this section.
   (f)   Smoking Prohibited. No person shall be permitted to smoke in any park
and recreation area under the jurisdiction of the park and recreation board.
      (1)   Posting of Signs. A sign indicating “NO SMOKING” shall be
conspicuously posted at every entrance of every park and recreation area where
smoking is prohibited, and at all other locations within said park and
recreation area as deemed necessary by the park and recreation board.
      (2)   Exemption. Smoking shall be permitted in all cemeteries and parking
lots adjacent to all park and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the
park and recreation board.
      (3)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
23-2102(f) shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 3044-2025; Sec. 23-2102(c)(7) repealed; Sec. 23-2102(c)(7) enacted;
10/14/25)
SEC. 23-2103.   TRAILS; RULES OF CONDUCT APPLICABLE TO TRAILS.
   (a)   Defined. For purposes of this chapter, a trail is a multi-use trail,
side path, or shared use path as defined by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), specifically, a bikeway
physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or
barrier and either within the highway right-of-way or on other public property
or within an easement dedicated for public use.
   (b)   Trails may be established for the purposes of recreation,
transportation, fitness and other similar purposes. They are intended primarily
for non-gas powered/human-powered activities, including but not limited to,
walking, running, bicycling, in-line skating, roller skating, skateboarding,
skiing, and other similar activities; and for use of Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant, motorized or non-motorized devices intended
for personal transport of individuals with disabilities. “Bicycle” definition:
1) Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having
two, three or four wheels. 2) Low-speed electric bicycles equipped with fully
operational pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts.
   (c)   City Trails. Trails within the City under the jurisdiction of the park
and recreation board include, but are not limited to, Ralph B. Birks
Recreational Trail, Prospect Park Trails, Kiwanis Trail, Sylvan Island Trails,
and Green Valley Sports Complex Trail.
   (d)   The rules contained in this subsection (d) have been adopted by the
park and recreation board and have been approved by the City Council. Said
rules are applicable to conduct of any person using any trail under the
jurisdiction of said board and are considered supplementary to, and not in
exclusion of, any other rules, provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the
City applicable to such matters, or existing State of Illinois vehicle codes or
other applicable federal, state, or local rules and regulations pertaining to
trail use.
      (1)   No user of a trail shall:
         a.   Travel at a rate of speed greater than reasonable and prudent.
         b.   Use the trail in a negligent manner that is likely to endanger
persons or property. Trail users shall use common courtesy and respect the
rights and safety of others. The applicable state regulations regarding the
equipment required to allow the safe operation of bicycles or other wheeled
vehicles during the times of day when natural light is diminished shall be
applied to the trails subject to this chapter.
         c.   Sell, be in possession, or be under the influence of any
intoxicating beverages, hallucinogenic drugs, or marijuana.
         d.   Permit unleashed or unaccompanied animals on a trail; any animal
present on a trail must be on a leash no longer than six (6) feet and with the
owner in complete physical control at all times.
         e.   Litter, leave animal waste, or discard any other items along or
near the trail.
         f.   Operate any vehicle other than a compliant vehicle, as defined as
a non-gas powered/human-powered device no wider than four (4) feet, with the
exception of Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant, motorized or non-
motorized devices intended for personal transport of individuals with
disabilities, or equipment approved by the park and recreation board for use to
maintain the trail, to provide for public safety, or specifically permitted for
use by the park and recreation board.
   (e)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person violating Section
23-2103(1)c. shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less than four
hundred dollars ($400.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
   (2)   Any person violating Section
23-2103(1)d. shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) plus court costs, and any other applicable penalty provisions
of Chapter 7, “Animals and Fowl.”
   (3)   Any person violating Section
23-2103(1), subsections a., b., e., or f., shall be subject to a mandatory fine
as follows: not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 3027-2025; 7/22/25)
ARTICLE III. WATERCRAFT, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 23-3100.   PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   The intent and purpose of this article is to protect the life and safety of
persons and property using navigable waters within the City, using watercraft
harbors, launching ramps, piers and marinas owned or operated by the City.
SEC. 23-3101.   CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN WATERCRAFT LAUNCHING OR PIER AREAS.
   No person on or about any watercraft harbor, launching ramp or pier owned,
operated or controlled by the City or any of its agents or agencies shall:
   (1)   Deviate from the traffic pattern and priority system in attempting to
launch or load watercraft.
   (2)   Remain in the vehicle pulling trailer, other than a driver, during
launching operations.
   (3)   Fail to remove trailers and other vehicles from the launching zones
and ramps as soon as watercraft is launched or removed from the water.
   (4)   Park automobiles, trailers, or other vehicles within eighty (80) feet
of launching ramps.
   (5)   Park automobiles, trailers or other vehicles in areas other than those
areas designated for parking.
   (6)   Park heavy or large trucks.
   (7)   Wash vehicles in parking or launching areas.
   (8)   Swim in watercraft ramp or pier areas.
   (9)   Light or permit fires in watercraft launching or pier areas.
   (10)   Park or leave unattended any watercraft in the water within any
launching zone and within twenty-five (25) feet of any launching zone.
SEC. 23-3101.1   RESTRICTED AREAS OF PARKING/BOAT RAMPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any type of vehicle not actually
being utilized to pull a trailer or boat in those areas specifically designated
for the parking of vehicles pulling trailers and boats on the City's boat
ramps, as described in
Appendix 1, which is incorporated in this section as if set out fully herein.
For purposes of this section, "actually being utilized" shall include the
parking of said vehicle while the boat is being used, loaded or unloaded.
DIVISION 2. OPERATION OF WATERCRAFT
SEC. 23-3200.   CARELESS AND RECKLESS OPERATION.
   (a)   No person shall operate any watercraft in a careless or heedless
manner so as to be grossly indifferent to the persons or property of other
persons, or at a rate of speed greater than will permit said person in the
exercise of reasonable care to bring the watercraft to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.
   (b)   No person shall operate any watercraft or manipulate any water skis,
aquaplane or similar device in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb,
or damage the property of any person.
SEC. 23-3201.   INTERFERENCE WITH NAVIGATION.
   No person shall operate any watercraft in a manner which unreasonably or
unnecessarily interferes with other watercraft or with the free and proper
navigation of the waterways of the state. Anchoring under bridges or in heavily
traveled channels constitutes such interference, if unreasonable under the
prevailing circumstances.
SEC. 23-3202.   OVERLOADING.
   No watercraft shall be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe
carrying capacity, taking into consideration weather and other existing
operating conditions.
SEC. 23-3203.   INCAPACITY OF OPERATOR; INTOXICATION.
   (a)   The owner of any watercraft or any person having same in said person's
charge or in said person's control, shall not authorize or knowingly permit the
watercraft to be operated by any person who by reason of physical or mental
disability is incapable of operating such watercraft under the prevailing
circumstances.
   (b)   No person shall operate any watercraft or vessel, or manipulate any
water skis, aquaplane, or similar device while intoxicated or under the
influence of any narcotic drug, barbiturate or marijuana.
   (c)   The owner of any watercraft or any person in charge or in control of
such shall not authorize or knowingly permit the watercraft to be operated by
any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic or habit
forming drug.
SEC. 23-3204.   OVERPOWERING.
   No watercraft shall be equipped with any motor or other propulsion machinery
beyond its safe power capacity, taking into consideration weather and other
existing operating conditions.
SEC. 23-3205.   OBSERVANCE OF RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No person shall operate a watercraft within a water area which has been
clearly marked by buoys or other distinguishing devices as a bathing, fishing,
swimming or otherwise restricted area by the state, the City, or by an owner or
lessee of property in accordance with said owner or lessee's rights to the use
of the property; however, this section shall not apply in the case of an
emergency, or to patrol or rescue craft.
SEC. 23-3206.   RULES OF THE ROAD.
   Watercraft shall comply with the following rules:
   (1)   Passing: when two (2) watercraft are approaching each other head on,
or nearly so, so as to involve the risk of collision, each watercraft shall
bear to the right and pass the other watercraft on its left side.
   (2)   Crossing: when watercraft approach each other obliquely or at right
angles, the watercraft approaching on the right side has the right-of-way.
   (3)   Overtaking: one watercraft may overtake another on either side, but
must grant right-of-way to the overtaken watercraft.
   (4)   Unpowered vessels: when a watercraft is approaching a watercraft
propelled solely by sails or oars, the watercraft shall yield the right-of-way
to the sail boat or rowboat.
SEC. 23-3207.   WATER SKIING AND SIMILAR OPERATIONS.
   Watercraft used for water skiing or similar operations shall comply with the
following requirements:
   (1)   No watercraft which has in tow or is otherwise assisting a person on
water skis, aquaplane or similar contrivance, shall be operated or propelled in
or upon any waterway, unless the watercraft is occupied by at least two (2)
competent adults.
   (2)   No watercraft shall have in tow or shall otherwise be assisting a
person on water skis, aquaplane or similar contrivance from the period one hour
after sunset to one hour prior to sunrise. This subsection shall not apply to
watercraft used in duly authorized water ski tournaments, competitions,
exhibitions or trials therefor where adequate lighting is provided.
   (3)   All watercraft having in tow or otherwise assisting a person on water
skis, aquaplane or similar contrivance, shall be operated in a careful and
prudent manner and at a reasonable distance from persons and property so as not
to endanger the life or property of any person.
   (4)   No person shall operate or manipulate any vessel, tow-rope or other
device by which the direction or location of water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device may be affected or controlled in such a way as to cause the water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device, or any person thereon to collide with or strike
against any person or object, except ski jumps, buoys and like objects normally
used in competitive or recreational skiing.
SEC. 23-3208.   BOAT HARBOR AREA DEFINED; CONDUCT WITHIN.
   (a)   The following described area is specifically designated as a boat
harbor area: That part of the Mississippi River which is immediately adjacent
to and extends from the shoreline out into the river three hundred (300) feet
from the following described territory: Commencing at a point on the north edge
of the north curb of River Drive, five hundred thirty (530) feet westerly along
said north edge of said north curb from the intersection of an extension of the
west right-of-way line of Thirty-Fourth Street and the north edge of said north
curb; thence north, parallel to said extended right-of-way line of Thirty-
Fourth Street to the Mississippi River shoreline; thence westerly along said
shoreline a distance of approximately one thousand six hundred sixty (1,660)
feet, more or less, to the intersection of said shoreline and the line of a
fence running north and south between the shoreline and River Drive; thence
southerly along said fence line to the intersection of said fence line and the
north edge of the north curb of River Drive; thence easterly long the north
curb of River Drive, a distance of approximately one thousand six hundred sixty
(1,660) feet, more or less, to the point of beginning; all of which is situated
in Township 18, Range 1 West of the Fourth Principal Meridian in the City.
   (b)   Within the harbor area described in subsection (a), all persons shall
operate watercraft at a no-wake speed, and no swimming or water skiing shall be
allowed in the harbor area.
SEC. 23-3209.   NO-WAKE ZONE ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   A no-wake zone is hereby established for that part of Sylvan Slough
between 14 Street and 17 Street extended.
   (b)   That a wake is defined as movement of water created by a boat underway
great enough to disturb a boat at rest, and under no circumstances shall a
watercraft underway exceed 5 (five) miles per hour while in a posted "No-Wake"
area.
SEC. 23-3210.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
   (a)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of Section
23-3203 is guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by imprisonment in
a place other than a penitentiary for a term not to exceed three hundred sixty-
four (364) days or be fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or both.
   (b)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, other
than as provided in subsection (a), is guilty of a petty offense and, upon
conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided for in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
   (c)   Any person convicted of a violation of Division 2 of this article, in
addition to other penalties authorized herein, may, in the discretion of the
court, be refused the privilege of operating any watercraft on any waterways
located within the City for a period of not more than one (1) year. Any person
who operates any watercraft during the period which said person is denied the
privilege to so operate, by virtue of the provisions of this article, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by imprisonment in a place
other than a penitentiary for a period not to exceed six (6) months or be fined
an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or both.
ARTICLE IV. CEMETERY OPERATION.
SEC. 23-4100.   MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES ESTABLISHED.
   There are hereby established the City cemeteries known as Riverside Cemetery
and Moline Memorial Park. All ordinances of the City describing the boundaries
of Riverside Cemetery and Moline Memorial Park are hereby expressly saved from
repeal.
SEC. 23-4101.   GOVERNING BOARD.
   The park and recreation board shall have control over said cemeteries. Said
board is the successor to the Moline City cemetery board of managers, and the
rules and regulations adopted by said board of managers shall continue in full
force and effect until repealed, amended, or modified by said successor board.
In addition, the powers listed in Article I of this chapter are intended to be
broad enough in scope to include and encompass the powers formerly held by the
said board of managers.
SEC. 23-4102.   BURIAL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the park and recreation board, or its designee, to
require the presentation of a permit as provided for in 410 ILCS 535/21, before
permitting interment of a dead body in said cemeteries.
SEC. 23-4103.   PERPETUAL CARE.
   The park and recreation board may, in its discretion, establish a charge for
perpetual care and add such charge to the price of each lot or assess and
collect from grantees of interment rights in the City cemeteries, at intervals
it deems appropriate, a reasonable sum for each right so owned for the purpose
of keeping and maintaining the lots in good order; however, no owner of an
interment right who has paid a charge for perpetual care may be later assessed
for said care.
SEC. 23-4104.   REQUIRED RECORDS.
   The park and recreation board shall cause to be kept in books provided for
that purpose a full and complete record of all of its meetings, proceedings,
orders, rules and regulations; of all plats and surveys; of all purchases and
sales of interment rights, with the names of grantees thereto, and a record of
the title papers in full; and a complete register of all the burials in said
cemeteries, with the date of burial, and names and ages of the dead, which
records shall, at all proper times, be open to public inspection.
SEC. 23-4105.   PLATTING.
   In laying out City cemetery grounds, the park and recreation board shall
cause the corners of the principal subdivisions to be indicated by substantial
monuments to be fixed permanently in the ground as starting points for future
measurements and surveys, and such monuments shall be plainly indicated on the
plats aforesaid. The plats, when completed, shall be certified by the surveyor
who made the plat; authenticated by the seal of the City; subscribed by the
mayor and the city clerk; acknowledged before any officer authorized by law to
take acknowledgments of deeds; and filed for record in the recorder's office of
the county. The filing of such plats shall operate as a legal vacation of any
former plats or subdivisions of ground and of any streets, roads, or avenues
passing through said grounds. No change shall be made in the platting of lots
sold, or in any laying out of the avenues or alleys adjacent thereto, without
the consent of the owners thereof.
SEC. 23-4106.   MANNER OF SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS; ASSIGNABILITY.
   (a)   The right of interment which may be sold, shall be vested in the
grantee and grantee's heirs by a certificate of purchase, executed by and in
the name of the City, subscribed and acknowledged by the mayor and city clerk,
and countersigned by the secretary and treasurer of the board, and shall be
recorded by the secretary or designee in a book kept for that purpose.
   (b)   Every transfer of interment rights in the City cemeteries shall be
made by surrendering the certificate issued pursuant to subsection (a) to the
secretary of the board, who shall cancel the certificate, note the cancellation
on the records and issue a new certificate in lieu thereof.
   (c)   Interment rights in burial lots shall not be held and used for the
purpose of speculation, and no grantee of interment rights shall permit
interment in or upon any lot held by said grantee for compensation.
SEC. 23-4107.   FINANCIAL DUTIES.
   Other than the duties and powers listed in Article I of this chapter, the
park and recreation board shall have the duty to maintain and report on its
financial accounts as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-52.1-1 et seq. and 65 ILCS 5/11
52.2-1 so long as there is no conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
APPENDIX 1. RESTRICTED AREAS OF PARKING/BOAT RAMPS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any type of vehicle not actually
being utilized to pull a trailer or boat in those areas specifically designated
for the parking of vehicles pulling trailers and boats on the following City
boat ramp locations:
   75 spots on 55th Street and River Drive.
Note: Chap. 23 repealed in its entirety; new Chap. 23 enacted; 7/26/22 – Ord.
No. 3017-2022.
Said amendment, along with amendments effective prior to and following, are
listed below sequentially by article, division or section number .
Code Section No. and Action Ordinance No. Adoption Date
Code Section No. and Action                         Ordinance No. Adoption Date
Chap. 23 repealed; new Chap. 23 enacted             3017-2022     7/26/22
Chap. 23 repealed; new Chap. 23 enacted             3025-2014     10/21/14
Sec. 23-1100 repealed; new Sec. 23-1100 enacted     3012-2009     05/26/09
Sec. 23-1100 repealed; new Sec. 23-1100 enacted     3020-2016     06/21/16
Sec. 23-1105(5) repealed; new subsection(5) enacted 2000-01-04    01/18/00
Sec. 23-2100 repealed; new Sec. 23-2100 enacted     2000-01-04    01/18/00
Sec. 23-2102(b) repealed; new subsection(b) enacted 2000-05-12    05/23/00
Sec. 23-2102(c) repealed; new Sec. 23-2102(c)       2002-08-11    09/10/02
enacted
Sec. 23-2102(c)(7) repealed; new Sec. 23-2102(c)(7) 3043-2009     12/15/09
enacted
Sec. 23-2102(c)(13) repealed; new subsection (c)    2000-05-12    05/23/00
(13) enacted
Sec. 23-2102(c)(22) enacted new                     3054-2017     12/19/17
Sec. 23-2102(d)(7) enacted new                      3054-2017     12/19/17
Sec. 23-2102(e) enacted                             2003-08-03    08/19/03
Sec. 23-2103 repealed; new Sec. 23-2103 enacted     3037-2007     11/06/07
Sec. 23-3101.1 enacted                              96-1-1        01/02/96
Sec. 23-3102(c) repealed; new Sec. 23-3102(c)       98-10-1       10/06/98
enacted
Sec. 23-3209 enacted                                97-8-5        08/12/97
 
CHAPTER 24
PERSONNEL
Note: See end of Chapter for list of Chapter amendments
   Art. I.   In General, §24-1100
   Art. II.   Personnel Code
       Div. 1. In General, §24-2100 - §24-2113
       Div. 2. Employment Practices, §24-2200 - §24-2203
       Div. 3. Termination of Employment, §24-2300 - §24-2307
       Div. 4. Vacation, Holidays and Similar Benefits, §24-2400 - §24-2407
   Art. III.   Positions and Compensation
       Div. 1. In General, §24-3100 - §24-3101
       Div. 2. Classification, §24-3200 - §24-3208
       Div. 3. Compensation, §24-3300 - §24-3304
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 24-1100.   MEDICAL TREATMENT FOR POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS INJURED
IN THE LINE OF DUTY.
   (a)   Medical treatment for City employees including, without limitation,
police officers and firefighters shall be as provided in the collective
bargaining agreements between the F.O.P. and the City or the I.A.F.F. and the
City, or as provided in state statute, as the case may be.
   (b)   In any case in which the accident contemplated by subsection (a) shall
be due to the negligence of some person liable in damages therefore, if the
City incurs any expense contemplated by subsection (a), it may recoup the
expense from the party liable therefor and shall have an action over for the
recovery of the expense against the person liable for the injury.
ARTICLE II. PERSONNEL CODE
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 24-2100.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be called "Personnel Code."
SEC. 24-2101.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Appointed personnel shall mean any person appointed for specific
duties by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
   (2)   Department Director shall mean any appointed personnel having direct
supervision and responsibility for personnel, records, funds maintenance and
service to be performed by a City department.
   (3)   Official shall mean any elected or appointed person commissioned by
warrant under the corporate seal of the City.
   (4)   Regular, full-time employee shall mean any person who works a normal
workweek as defined in Section
24-2105 but not including seasonal, part-time or temporary employees.
   (5)   Part-time employee shall mean any person who works less than the
normal workweek as defined in Section
24-2105 but more than one thousand (1,000) hours per year.
   (6)   Seasonal employee shall mean any person who works less than 20 hours
per workweek as defined in Section
24-2105 or one thousand (1,000) or less hours per year.
   (7)   Temporary, full-time employee shall mean any person hired to work a
normal workweek for a period not to exceed three hundred sixty-five (365)
consecutive days.
SEC. 24-2102.   SCOPE OF ARTICLE; EXCLUDED PERSONNEL.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all City employees except the
following: members of the police and fire departments; employees of the Moline
public library; employees of the City park and recreation department, provided,
however that the board of library trustees or the parks and recreation board
may elect, by resolution, negotiated collective bargaining agreement, or
otherwise, to apply the provisions of this chapter to their respective
employees.
SEC. 24-2103.   APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS, DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS AND
SUPERINTENDENTS.
   The city administrator, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
shall appoint all department directors, as provided elsewhere in this Code,
with departmental, supervisory or official capacity, except elected officials
and those employees directly responsible to elected officials other than the
mayor.
SEC. 24-2104.   REPORT OF ACCIDENTS INVOLVING PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   City personnel involved in, or having any knowledge of, any accident whereby
any person employed by the City or any property or equipment owned or operated
by the City is involved, shall immediately report the accident and pertinent
information to the department supervisor who shall forward the information to
the human resources office. This section shall be in addition to the
requirement of reporting accidents as provided for in the state Motor Vehicle
Act.
SEC. 24-2105.   WORKDAY AND WORKWEEK; REPORTS; HOLIDAY COMPENSATION.
   Unless otherwise agreed upon or provided for, and except in the case of an
emergency as determined by the mayor or city administrator, the following shall
apply:
   (1)   The City workweek shall be forty (40) hours per week.
   (2)   There shall be provided at least eight (8) hours rest in each twenty-
four (24) hour period.
   (3)   Department supervisors shall establish a normal workday specifically
designating the starting time, the quitting time, rest breaks, and the lunch
period, which time shall be strictly adhered to by the City employees.
Employees shall be at their places of work according to departmental
regulations.
   (4)   All departments shall maintain a daily attendance record of employees,
and provide reports concerning same upon request of the human resources manager
or city administrator.
   (5)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to department directors
or officials.
SEC. 24-2106.   OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   Outside employment is generally incompatible to full-time public service. No
City employee shall engage in any outside employment which will impair the
performance of said employee's duties or be detrimental to the City service.
SEC. 24-2107.   SENIORITY.
   Seniority shall be determined and administered in accordance with collective
bargaining agreements and past practice.
SEC. 24-2108.   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   Employees with any grievance for which provisions for appeal are not covered
by a state statute or collective bargaining agreement, arising out of their
employment with the City, except requests for or concerns about any wage
increase or disciplinary action, shall follow this procedure:
   (1)   Step 1. Employees with such complaint or grievance arising out of
their employment shall have the right to discuss the conditions and
circumstances of said complaint with the department director if requested
within ten (l0) working days after the condition or circumstances giving rise
to said complaint occurs.
   (2)   Step 2. If this discussion does not resolve the issue, the complaint
or grievance shall be reduced to writing and signed by the aggrieved employee
and presented to the city administrator's designee by the aggrieved employee
individually or by the employee's selected representative. Any grievance which
is submitted to the city administrator's designee shall be submitted within
five (5) working days after discussing the matter with the department director
and shall be answered in writing not later than fifteen (15) working days after
the meeting in which the discussion of the grievance is concluded, and if the
grievance is denied or remains unsettled, the city administrator's designee in
either's answer shall state that any provision of this Code or other ordinance
cited by the employee was not violated or that no provision of this Code or
other ordinance cited by the employee was violated or that no provision of this
Code or other ordinance is involved in the grievance or any combination of
these positions. Any grievance processed through Step 2 and which is not
referred, in writing, to Step 3, shall be deemed settled on the basis of said
answer. The time periods provided in this paragraph (2) may be extended by
agreement between the employee filing the grievance and the city
administrator's designee.
   (3)   Step 3. In the event the decision of the city administrator's designee
in Step 2 is not satisfactory to the aggrieved employee, the aggrieved employee
shall have the right to appeal in writing such decision to the city
administrator within five (5) working days from the date of the Step 2 answer
and shall be answered in writing not later than fifteen (15) working days after
receipt in the city administrator’s office and if the grievance is denied, the
city administrator shall state that any provisions of this Code or other
ordinance cited by the employee was not violated or that no provision of this
Code or other ordinance cited by the employee was violated or that no provision
of this Code or other ordinance is involved in the grievance or any combination
of these positions. The decision at Step 3 is final. The time periods provided
in this paragraph (3) may be extended by agreement between the employee filing
the grievance and the city administrator.
SEC. 24-2109.   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (a)   Employees of the City may fully and freely associate themselves in
organizations of their own choosing for their mutual benefit as provided and
allowed under state and federal law. No employee shall be required to join any
such organization as a condition of employment or continuation thereof and the
right of an employee with or without such an organization to petition the city
administrator or the City Council, as provided and allowed under state and
federal law, is hereby recognized. Employees of the City shall have the right
to organize and designate representatives of their own choosing from among
themselves for the purpose of collective bargaining, and the right of such
representative to meet with the city administrator and the City Council is
hereby recognized.
   (b)   Except as otherwise governed by state or federal law or collective
bargaining agreements, employees of the City shall have the right to contact
the city administrator without representation if they see fit to do so.
   (c)   Collective bargaining or negotiation shall be conducted at a
designated time and place as is agreed upon by the employees of the City and
their representatives, and the city administrator and the City's other
representative(s), if any.
SEC. 24-2110.   DEDUCTION OF EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION DUES FROM PAYCHECKS.
   Any deduction of employee organization dues shall be governed by the City's
collective bargaining agreement with such employee organization.
SEC. 24-2111.   RIGHT TO STRIKE.
   Because the public health, safety and welfare may be adversely affected
thereby, no employee shall have the right to engage in or encourage any form of
sit down, slowdown, or in fact cause any form of work stoppage or strike for
any reason, against the City, except as otherwise dictated by state or federal
law. A refusal by an employee to perform an assignment injurious to employee's
health or physical safety shall not be considered a violation of this section.
SEC. 24-2112.   TRAVEL EXPENSES.
   (a)   Requests for budgeted travel expense funds for official City business,
special education, or training, shall be submitted to the city administrator
for approval on an authorized form obtainable from the finance office in
accordance with a written travel policy to be adopted and approved by the city
administrator from time to time.
   (b)   Due to an immediate need, the city administrator and not less than two
(2) members of the Committee-of-the-Whole of the City Council, may approve
unbudgeted travel expense funds in lieu of City Council action. Upon such
approval, the finance director shall make the prescribed payment.
   (c)   All expenses incurred for approved official City business, special
education or training shall be reported on the "travel expense statement" forms
with payment in accordance with the written travel policy. In the event that
the travel expense reported is greater than the amount advanced or authorized
by the officials set forth in Sec.
24-2112 (b) above, a claim may be filed and submitted to the City Council, and,
upon approval of the claim, authorized payment will be made.
SEC. 24-2113.   RELATIONS WITH THE PUBLIC.
   No City official or employee shall grant special consideration, treatment,
or advantage to any citizen or group beyond that which is available to every
other citizen or group. City officials shall at all times comply with the Code
of Ethics and Gift Ban Act in
Chapter 2 of the Code. City officials or employees shall at all times
conscientiously and faithfully perform their duties; they shall be tactful,
patient and courteous in answering all inquiries.
DIVISION 2. EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
SEC. 24-2200.   IN GENERAL.
   The department director or designee, in conjunction with the human resources
manager, subject to approval by the city administrator, shall have the
authority to employ the necessary personnel, as authorized by this article or
City Council action, to perform the necessary duties of their respective
departments. It shall be the department director or designee and human
resources manager’s duty, in accordance with the written recruitment and
selection policy promulgated by the city administrator, to determine by the
applicant's history and interview process whether the applicant has the
necessary qualifications for performing the duties required, before
recommending the employment of the job applicant.
SEC. 24-2201.   APPLICATION; PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.
   (a)   No person shall be considered to have become an employee of the City
until the date such person has begun work in a position following application
for an advertised vacancy, has received and accepted a tentative, conditional
offer of employment from the human resources office, has passed any medically
necessary examinations, and attended orientation and agreed in writing to abide
by the City's present residency requirements as a continuing condition of
employment.
   (b)   Applicants seeking appointment or employment in a City position shall
complete a standard application form as provided by the City’s human resources
office.
   (c)   Any offer of employment shall be considered tentative and conditional
until and unless the applicant passes a background history check, completes any
medically necessary examinations to be given by a physician of the City's
choosing to determine whether the applicant has the physical and mental ability
to perform the essential functions of the required work.
   (d)   A newly hired employee shall be given an orientation to City
employment and the applicant's required work.
   (e)   This section shall not apply to those employees hired in an emergency
and for a period of less than ten (10) working days.
SEC. 24-2202.   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   The first one hundred eighty (180) days of service of an employee, unless a
different term is provided for in a collective bargaining agreement, is a
probationary period during which there shall be no responsibility on the part
of the City for the continued employment of the new employee. Termination of
employment during this probationary period is not subject to challenge by the
employee. There is no probationary period for employees hired on or after
September 1, 2017, unless a probationary period is provided for in a collective
bargaining agreement.
SEC. 24-2203.   RESIDENCY.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to require administrators to
live within the corporate limits of the City so that the City may be assured
that said employees are knowledgeable about and attuned to the interests of the
City and the workings of the social, civic, political, educational and
commercial infrastructures existing therein. Additionally, it is the intent of
this section to require employees whose employment is covered by a collective
bargaining agreement to reside within the area of residence that has been
established on the basis of response time and administrative convenience in the
enforcement of said policy as set forth in each respective collective
bargaining agreement. There shall be no residency requirement for employees who
are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement.
   (b)   Residency required.
      (1)    The city administrator and assistant city administrator shall
reside within the corporate limits of the City within one (1) year of the date
of hire. The city administrator and assistant city administrator may negotiate
additional terms and conditions related to residency in an employment agreement
approved by the City..
      (2)    All other City employees not specifically identified herein,
including library, police and fire personnel, shall reside within the area
described in such employees' respective collective bargaining agreement.
      (3)   Said residency requirements are a continuing condition of
employment with the City; failure to comply with same and failure to notify the
human resources office of any change in residence within ten (10) days after a
change in residency shall be grounds for and shall constitute a mandatory
discharge.
   (c)   Other provisions.
      (1)    Regardless of an employee's place of residence, failure to report
to work at the designated starting time shall constitute an unpaid, unexcused
absence unless a properly authorized official has previously declared that the
class of employees to which an employee failing to report to work belongs is
excused from said duty.
      (2)   No employee shall be permitted to take a City vehicle outside the
corporate limits of the City for the purpose of commuting to and from the place
of employment and the residence of said employee; provided, said restriction
shall not prevent an employee from using a City vehicle for such commuting when
the residence is located within the corporate limits of the City and the most
direct route to and from the place of employment to said residence requires
traveling through areas not within the corporate limits of the City.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing, the police chief and fire chief may be
authorized to take home their assigned public safety vehicle regardless of
whether their resience is located within the corporate limits of the City,
subject to the approval of the city administrator or their designee.
      (3)   An applicant for regular, full-time City employment shall agree in
writing as part of the application procedure to comply with the above residency
requirements; said application shall contain sufficient notice of these
requirements.
(Ord. No. 3023-2025; amending 24-2203(a), (b), (c); repealing 24-2203(d), (e);
5/20/25)
DIVISION 3. TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
SEC. 24-2300.   DISMISSAL.
   (a)   Non-Bargaining Unit Employees. The department director or the city
administrator may dismiss an employee at any time for just cause. The just
cause provision applies only to non-bargaining unit employees hired prior to
September 1, 2017. Non-bargaining unit employees hired on or after September 1,
2017, are considered at-will employees and may be dismissed at any time without
cause unless precluded by law.
   (b)   Bargaining Unit Employees. A department director or the city
administrator may dismiss a bargaining unit employee in accordance with the
collective bargaining agreement covering such employee.
   (c)   An employee who is dismissed shall be given written notice of the
reasons for the action, copies of which notice shall be forwarded to the city
administrator and human resources manager. Those employees directly responsible
to elected officials other than the mayor may be dismissed by the elected
official at any time for just cause, and notice as provided for in this section
shall be given.
   (d)   Officials Appointed by Mayor. The mayor shall have power to remove any
appointed official, appointed by the mayor and who does not report to the city
administrator, on any formal charge, whenever the mayor shall be of the opinion
that the interests of the City demand the removal, unless state law preempts
the City's home rule power concerning such mayoral appointed official. The
mayor shall report the reasons for such removal to the City Council at a
meeting thereof to be held not less than five (5) days, or more than fifteen
(15) days, after the removal. If the mayor shall fail or refuse to file with
the City Clerk a statement of the reasons for the removal, or if the City
Council by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law,
disapproves the removal, the official shall thereupon become restored to the
office from which said official was removed. No official shall be removed a
second time for the same incident.
   (e)   The city administrator shall have power to remove any person appointed
by such administrator as set forth elsewhere in this City Code.
SEC. 24-2301.   RETIREMENT PLAN GENERALLY.
   The pension, if any, of City officials and employees shall be according to
the laws of the state and the United States. A summary of the municipal
retirement pension plan shall be made available to employees upon request.
SEC. 24-2302.   DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.
   (a)   Any regular full-time employee or regular part-time employee or
eligible official of the City of Moline may defer compensation from the City by
electing to do so in writing.
   (b)   Any regular full-time employee or regular part-time employee or
eligible official of the City of Moline electing to defer compensation shall do
so by entering into a written contract on appropriate forms furnished by the
human resources office.
   (c)   No deferred compensation plan shall be permitted which does not
possess a ruling from the internal revenue service that the deferred
compensation is not subject to income tax in the year earned, but is subject to
income tax only upon distribution.
   (d)   Any recognized plan meeting all the qualifications set forth in 40
ILCS 5/24-101, and any amendments thereto, may be chosen by an employee, unless
the City, by special ordinance, shall limit its participation to a particular
plan.
SEC. 24-2303.   CONTRIBUTIONS AND PAYMENTS.
   The City of Moline shall not contribute or make any additional payments to
or on behalf of its employees because of any deferred compensation plan, but
shall make all contributions and payments on behalf of its employees as
required by statute or regulation promulgated thereto.
SEC. 24-2304.   RESIGNATIONS.
   To resign in good standing, appointed personnel shall submit resignations in
writing one (1) calendar month in advance of the effective date of their
resignation; all other employees shall submit resignations in writing two (2)
weeks in advance of the effective date of their resignation.
SEC. 24-2305.   LAYOFFS AND RECALLS.
   (a)   Department directors, other than the Fire Chief and Police Chief,
shall lay off employees when necessary due to changes in duties or lack of work
or funds. As a prerequisite to any such layoffs, the City Council must confirm
the need to layoff due to changes in duties or lack of work or funds and must
confirm the number of employees to be laid off. Seniority and qualifications,
as set forth in the various collective bargaining agreements, shall govern all
layoffs and recalls.
   (b)   The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the duty to lay
off members of the fire department and police department and shall follow the
procedures contained herein rather than those contained in 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-18
and amendments thereto.
   (1)   A layoff shall be necessary when the force of the fire department and
police department is reduced, when positions are displaced because of a member
of the force being returned to active duty from disability, or when a position
is abolished either as a reorganization of the department or other reason.
   (2)   Seniority in rank shall prevail for all layoffs and the officers and
members reduced in rank or removed from the service of the fire or police
department shall be considered furloughed without pay.
   (3)   When any position which was vacated because of the reasons stated in
(1) above is reinstated, the board of fire and police commissioners shall
notify those members furloughed without pay by registered mail of such
reinstatement of positions and said notified members shall have prior right to
such positions if otherwise qualified, and in all cases seniority shall
prevail.
   (4)   Written application for such reinstated position must be made by the
furloughed person within thirty (30) days after notification has been provided
as above and such person may be required to submit to examination by physicians
of both the board of fire and police commissioners and the applicable pension
board to determine physical fitness of said person.
   (5)   In case of displacement of position because a member of the fire or
police department is returned to active duty from disability, the board of fire
and police commissioners is hereby authorized to withhold layoff and, if
necessary, exceed the authorized strength of the department or any position
within the department for a period not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days. If
a vacancy for the position displaced fails to occur within said ninety (90) day
period, the board of fire and police commissioners shall follow the procedures
set forth in (1) and (2) above.
   (c)   Layoff and recall procedures established herein shall not take
precedence over such procedures established by collective bargaining agreements
or memoranda of understanding between the City and employee organizations and
shall not apply to the City and employee organizations and shall not apply to
"worksharing" arrangements established in such agreements, memoranda, or, for
persons not a part of any bargaining unit, by order of the city administrator.
   (d)   "Worksharing" for purposes of this section shall mean a reduction of
paid hours of work for part or all of the workforce; provided, such reduction
of hours is not sufficient to qualify an employee as an unemployed individual
under 820 ILCS 405/239.
(Ord. No. 3038-2020 § 24-2305(a) amended, 12/01/20)
SEC. 24-2306.   EMPLOYMENT TERMINATION PAY.
   Employees who leave the service of the City for any reason shall receive all
pay which may be due them with the following qualifications:
   (1)   Employees shall be paid for all unused accrued vacation leave in
accordance with collective bargaining agreements of the City and with state or
federal law.
   (2)   In case of the death of an employee, such employee's estate shall be
paid for unused accrued vacation leave and regular pay then accrued.
SEC. 24-2307.   CONTINUATION OF HEALTH BENEFITS.
   Any employee or any dependent of said employee who is receiving health
benefits at the time of such employee’s termination of employment shall be
entitled to continue such benefits at the employee's or dependent’s sole and
exclusive cost and expense, with no expense to the City, but only in accordance
with, and for the time required by, federal law; provided, however, that for
certain classes of employees, the cost and expense shall be determined by
collective bargaining agreements or non-bargaining unit wage and benefit
resolution. Upon separation of employment, employee health benefit premiums, if
any, shall be deducted from employee’s final paycheck.
DIVISION 4. VACATION, HOLIDAYS AND SIMILAR BENEFITS.
SEC. 24-2400.   VACATIONS.
   (a)   Regular full-time employees or regular part-time employees shall be
entitled to vacation leave as provided in the City's respective collective
bargaining agreements, but if no collective bargaining agreement applies, then
pursuant to written City policy, promulgated from time to time by the City
Council or City Council’s designee.
   (b)   Temporary or seasonal employees, paid on an hourly basis, are excluded
from the provisions of this section.
SEC. 24-2401.   PAID HOLIDAYS.
   (a)   Holidays to be observed with pay, and the policies covering same,
shall be as provided in the City's respective collective bargaining agreements,
but if no collective bargaining agreement applies, then pursuant to written
City policy, promulgated from time to time by the City Council or City
Council’s designee.
   (b)   Temporary or seasonal employees, paid on an hourly basis, are excluded
from the provisions of this section.
SEC. 24-2402.   SICK LEAVE, DISABILITY LEAVE, RECORDS, ETC.
   (a)   Coverage. The provisions of this section shall apply to all City
employees and appointed personnel, including police officers and firefighters.
Sick leave and disability leave, and the policies concerning same, shall be as
provided in the City's respective collective bargaining agreements, but if no
collective bargaining agreement applies, then pursuant to written City policy,
promulgated from time to time by the City Council or City Council’s designee.
   (b)   Records. Department directors shall be responsible for maintaining
sick leave records and attendance records of their subordinates. The human
resources office shall be responsible for maintaining disability records and
other medical records for all City employees.
   (c)   Multiple Compensation Prohibited. So as to preclude multiple
compensation for the same sickness or injury, worker's compensation, duty
disability or pension shall not be claimed or payable for periods during which
sick leave or disability leave with pay is claimed or payable, or vice versa.
   Sick leave, disability leave with pay, worker's compensation, duty
disability or pension may not be claimed for the same period.
   (d)   Disability Leave with Pay. The disability pay provided for herein
shall be paid in lieu of any worker's compensation otherwise payable, and
acceptance and application and approval of said disability pay shall constitute
a waiver of the right to worker's compensation for the period which it covers,
as set forth in the various collective bargaining agreements.
   (e)   Temporary and Seasonal Employees. Temporary and seasonal employees
will not be entitled to accrual of sick leave time.
SEC. 24-2403.   BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   (a)   Bereavement leave shall be as provided in the City's respective
collective bargaining agreements, but if no collective bargaining agreement
applies, then pursuant to written City policy, promulgated from time to time by
the City Council or City Council’s designee.
   (b)   Temporary or seasonal employees, paid on an hourly basis, are excluded
from the provisions of this section.
SEC. 24-2404.   MILITARY LEAVE.
   (a)   Military leave shall be as provided in the City's respective
collective bargaining agreements, but if no collective bargaining agreement
applies, then pursuant to written City policy, promulgated from time to time by
the City Council or City Council’s designee; provided, however, that any such
policies or agreements shall at all times be, and remain consistent, with
federal law.
   (b)   Temporary, part-time, or seasonal employees, paid on an hourly basis,
are excluded from the provisions of this section as permitted by federal law.
SEC. 24-2405.   LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   (a)   Leave of absence or unspecified leave without pay shall be as provided
in the City's respective collective bargaining agreements, but if no collective
bargaining agreement applies, then pursuant to written City policy, promulgated
from time to time by the City Council or City Council’s designee.
   (b)   Temporary, part-time or seasonal employees, paid on an hourly basis,
are excluded from the provisions of this section.
SEC. 24-2406.   SPECIAL LEAVE.
   Employees or officials of the City on special leave for official City
business, special education, or training, as authorized in the budget process
and approved by the appropriate supervisory official, if any, shall receive
regular pay during the period of the leave; also, all necessary expenses may be
paid by the City, if authorized by the appropriate supervisory official. In
administering or interpreting this section, the appropriate supervisory
official shall follow all requirements of the City's applicable collective
bargaining agreements, or written City policy for non-bargaining unit
employees. For purposes of this section, "appropriate supervisory official"
shall mean the respective department directors, or for department directors,
the city administrator.
SEC. 24-2407.   ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE.
   An employee absent for three (3) consecutive workdays without notice and
without sufficient and satisfactory reason, or an employee failing to report to
work after the end of a formal leave of absence, or after notification of
cancellation of a leave of absence, shall be considered to have resigned.
ARTICLE III. POSITIONS AND COMPENSATION
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 24-3100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   Classification shall mean a group of positions, or one position, that:
   (1)   Has similar duties and responsibilities;
   (2)   Requires like qualifications; and
   (3)   Can be equitably compensated by the same salary range.
   Position shall mean a group of currently assigned duties and
responsibilities requiring the full or part-time employment of one (1) person.
A position may be occupied or vacant.
SEC. 24-3101.   BI-WEEKLY PAYROLL; APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   The salaries and pay of all officers and employees of the City shall be due
and payable bi-weekly to each person entitled thereto, as set forth in the
respective collective bargaining agreements, or, for non-bargaining unit
employees, on a schedule established from time to time by the City Council.
DIVISION 2. CLASSIFICATION
SEC. 24-3200.   ADMINISTRATION OF CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   (a)   The city administrator shall be responsible for administering the
classification plan of the City. The city administrator may assign other
officials or employees to assist in this activity.
   (b)   The city administrator or designee shall review requests for changes
in the classification plan to review or adjust compensation. The human
resources manager, along with selected human resources staff shall factor
evaluate job descriptions submitted for reclassification according to past
practice.
   (c)   The findings and recommendations of the city administrator or designee
shall be submitted in writing to the requesting employee within a reasonable
time frame.
SEC. 24-3201.   ALLOCATION OF NEW POSITIONS.
   The department director shall complete a job description covering the duties
and responsibilities of each proposed position which shall be forwarded to the
human resources office for review and editing. The human resources office shall
recommend allocation of the position to one (1) of the classifications in the
classification plan; if a suitable classification does not exist, it shall
recommend the establishment of a new classification, and if the classification
is adopted by the City Council as provided by this division, the human
resources manager shall add said classification to the City's pay and
classification plan as set forth in Appendix 1.
SEC. 24-3202.   REVIEW OF IMPROPERLY CLASSIFIED POSITIONS.
   If an employee has facts which indicate that said employee's position is
improperly classified because of changes in duties occurring after assumption
of the position, then said employee shall proceed according to the City's
respective collective bargaining agreements and past practice; provided,
however, if said employee is a non-bargaining unit employee, said employee may
request the human resources manager to review the classification of said
position in accordance with past practice; such request shall be submitted in
writing within 30 calendar days after a change in duties is made and shall
contain a statement of justification. Salary adjustments, if any, shall be
applied only after approval of the city administrator.
SEC. 24-3203.   MAINTENANCE OF CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   (a)   The city administrator may require departments or employees to submit
job descriptions on a periodic basis, or any time the city administrator has
reason to believe that there has been a change in the duties and
responsibilities of one (1) or more positions.
   (b)   Each time a new classification is established, a classification
delineation shall be written and incorporated in the pay and classification
plan. The classification shall be added to the schematic list of
classifications; also, an abolished classification shall be deleted from the
pay and classification plan by removing the class specification and eliminating
the classifications from the schematic list of classifications.
SEC. 24-3204.   INTERPRETATION OF CLASSIFICATION DELINEATIONS.
   The classification delineations are descriptive and not restrictive; they
are intended to indicate the kinds of positions which shall be allocated to the
classifications established.
SEC. 24-3205.   OFFICIAL COPY OF THE PAY AND CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   The human resources office shall be responsible for maintaining an official
copy of the pay and classification plan. The official copy shall include
regulations for administration, a schematic list of classifications, position
titles and job descriptions, and classification delineations, plus all
amendments thereto. A copy of the official plan shall be available for
inspection by the public under reasonable conditions, during business hours.
SEC. 24-3206.   MANNER OF AMENDING THE PAY AND CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
   Each time a new classification of positions is proposed to be established or
a current classification of positions is proposed to be abolished, the human
resources office shall submit its findings and recommendations to the city
administrator. The city administrator shall determine whether the establishment
or the abolition of a classification is in order; such changes shall take the
form of amendments to the pay and classification plan.
SEC. 24-3207.   ALLOCATION OF POSITIONS.
   (a)   The positions covered by the pay and classification plan are hereby
allocated to appropriate classes as set forth in Appendix 1 and entitled "City
of Moline Pay and Classification Plan" and job descriptions attached thereto,
which are incorporated herein as though set forth verbatim and made a part
hereof by reference.
   (b)   The City Council hereby authorizes the city administrator to maintain,
operate, modify, delete, and amend said Appendix 1 without further Council
action or authority provided the following conditions are met:
   (1)   That any such maintenance, operation, modification, deletion, or
amendment be within the amount budgeted and appropriated for costs of personnel
budget expenditure accounts; and
   (2)   That any new position shall be added only by proper City Council
action; and
   (3)   Appendix 1 may be reviewed by the City Council at least once every
three (3) years upon the request of any two (2) aldermen or the mayor.
   (c)   Pay and classification plans for seasonal employees shall be by a
separate schedule or plan, adopted from time to time by the City Council.
SEC. 24-3208.   CLASSIFICATION PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The classifications and grades as set forth in Appendix 1 to this chapter,
entitled "City of Moline Pay and Classification Plan," and job descriptions
attached thereto, which are incorporated herein as though set forth verbatim
and made a part hereof by reference, are hereby adopted. [Copies of Appendix 1
are on file and available for public inspection in the City's human resources
office.]
DIVISION 3. COMPENSATION
SEC. 24-3300.   MINIMUM PAY FOR NEW EMPLOYEES; EXCEPTIONS.
   The minimum rate of pay for each job description is based upon the
assumption that a new employee meets the minimum qualifications based on the
job and stated in the job description. A new employee shall be paid the minimum
rate of pay for such employee's job description; however, exceptions may be
granted upon the approval of the city administrator as set forth as follows:
   (1)   If a new employee more than meets the minimum qualifications, and will
not accept appointment at the minimum rate for the job description, such
employee may be appointed at a higher rate of pay within the pay grade.
   (2)   Each case shall be thoroughly analyzed and measured against standards
of the respective job description.
   (3)   Every effort shall first be made to recruit a qualified employee who
will accept appointment at the minimum pay rate of the job description.
SEC. 24-3301.   PROMOTIONS.
   (a)   When an employee is promoted to a position in a higher grade, such
employee’s salary shall be increased as set forth in the respective collective
bargaining agreement, or for non-bargaining unit employees, in an amount within
the pay grade of the new position reflecting the employee’s experience and
qualifications as determined by the city administrator. In no case shall the
employee be paid more than the maximum of the pay grade for the employee’s new
position, unless approval is granted by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   If allowed, pursuant to respective collective bargaining agreements,
or if no such agreement applies, promotional increases may be delayed for a
period not to exceed the one-hundred eighty (180) days probationary period, the
employee shall be entitled to any promotional increase retroactive to the
effective date of the promotion.
SEC. 24-3302.   TRANSFERS.
   (a)   When an employee is transferred to a position of the same grade, such
employee’s salary shall be as set forth in the respective collective bargaining
agreement; or for non-bargaining unit employees, such employee’s salary shall
be increased in an amount within the pay grade of the new position reflecting
the employee’s experience and qualifications as determined by the city
administrator. In no case shall the employee be paid more than the maximum of
the pay grade, unless approval is granted by the City Council.
   (b)   If an employee is transferred to a position having a higher pay grade
minimum than the position from which the employee was transferred, the change
shall be deemed a promotion and the provisions of this division governing
promotions shall apply.
   (c)   Any employee temporarily assigned to perform all the major job duties
of another position shall continue to be paid at the rate of the employee’s
regular position, unless the city administrator determines otherwise. In no
case shall the employee be paid more than the maximum of the pay grade for the
employee’s temporarily assigned position.
SEC. 24-3303.   DEMOTIONS.
   When a City employee is demoted or transfers into a lower pay range job
description or employee’s position is downgraded to a lower classification,
such employee shall be paid at a rate which is within the approved range for
the lower pay range job description, not to exceed the maximum of the lower pay
range, even if a reduction in the employee's pay occurs as the result, unless
the city administrator determines otherwise.
SEC. 24-3304.   PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT.
   Part-time employment shall be paid for at an hourly rate commensurate with
hours worked and the amount of work performed.
Amendments:
Ord. No. 3013-2009; Chap. 24 repealed in its entirety; new Chap. 24 enacted;
06/02/09
Ord. No. 3013-2013; Sec. 24-2203(b) repealed; new Sec. 24-2203(b) enacted; 05/
28/13
Ord. No. 3015-2017; Sec. 24-2202 repealed; new Sec. 24-2202 enacted; 08/22/17
Ord. No. 3015-2017; Sec. 24-2203(b)(1)(3)(6) repealed; new Sec. 24-2203(b)(1)
(3)(6) enacted; 08/22/17
Ord. No. 3015-2017; Sec. 24-2300 repealed; new Sec. 24-2300 enacted; 08/22/17
CHAPTER 25
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
   Art. I.   In General, §25-1100 -§25-1104
   Art. II.   Official Comprehensive Plan, §25-2100
   Art. III.   Plan Commission, §25-3100 -§25-3116
   Art. IV.   Historic Preservation, §25-4100 -§25-4112
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 25-1100.   DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT CREATED; PURPOSE.
   The department of planning and development is hereby created. The primary
purpose of this department is to assist the Moline Plan Commission and City
Council in the development, maintenance and administration of the comprehensive
program of long-range community planning; to provide continuous, comprehensive
review and analysis of activities implementing or impacting upon long-range
planning and community development; to assist in the development of a capital
improvements program and budget; to administer and maintain the Moline Zoning
Ordinance (
Chapter 35) and Subdivision Ordinance (
Chapter 29).
SEC. 25-1101.   POSITION OF DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT CREATED;
APPOINTMENT; RESPONSIBILITY; QUALIFICATIONS.
    There is hereby created the position of director of planning and
development. The director of planning and development shall be appointed by the
city administrator with the advice and consent of the City Council and may be
dismissed by the city administrator at any time in accordance with the
provisions of this Code for the removal of officers set forth in Sec.
2-3202(c)(3). Said director shall be responsible for the administration,
direction, and supervision of the department of planning and development and
its personnel and carry out such other functions as may be assigned from time
to time by the city administrator. The individual appointed to the position of
director of planning and development shall be a person skilled in the field of
municipal planning and development regulation by education, training, and
experience.
(Ord. No. 92-6-1; §25-1102 repealed; new section enacted; 06/02/92)
SEC. 25-1102.   PERSONNEL IN DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.
   In addition to the director of planning and development, the office of
planning and development shall include economic development coordinator;
community development coordinator; land development coordinator;and such other
personnel as authorized by the City Council from time to time.
SEC. 25-1103.   DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND COORDINATION.
   In addition to providing the mayor, city administrator, and City Council
with assistance and advice on all community planning and development matters,
the department of planning and development shall provide technical,
secretarial, and clerical assistance to the Moline Plan Commission, and any
other boards, commissions and advisory groups duly appointed by the mayor and/
or the City Council, depending upon their particular needs. The department
shall work closely with other City departments, the Moline Housing Authority,
the Moline School District, and provide liaison with the Bi-State Regional
Commission and adjoining community planning departments and agencies.
SEC. 25-1104.   DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT SUPERSEDES DEPARTMENT OF
PLANNING AND ZONING.
   The department of planning and development shall replace and supersede all
reference in the Moline Code of Ordinances to the department of planning and
zoning.
ARTICLE II. OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
SEC. 25-2100.   OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; ADOPTED; TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.
   (a)   The comprehensive plan prepared for the Moline Plan Commission by the
Bucher, Willis & Ratliff Corporation and published in September 2001, in one
(1) volume, “Comprehensive Plan 2001,” is, and the same is hereby adopted as
the official comprehensive plan for the City, and is attached hereto and
incorporated herein as Exhibit A. Exhibit “A” is not set forth herein, but is
on file with the City.**
   (1)   The “Comprehensive Plan 2001” as prepared by the Bucher, Willis &
Ratliff Corporation and published in September 2001 is supplemented by and
includes the following Comprehensive Plan elements as part of the same and are
hereby adopted as elements of the official comprehensive plan for the City:
      a.   The Moline Centre on the Mississippi Master Plan Update
      b.   The Floreciente Neighborhood Plan Update, dated November 2001
      c.   The Avenue of the Cities vision and Implementation Plan
      d.   The Edgewater Neighborhood Plan, dated April 1993
      Said elements of the official comprehensive plan for the City are
attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibits “B,” “C,” “D,” and “E”
respectively. Exhibits “A,” “B,” “C,” “D,” and “E” are not set forth herein,
but are on file with the City.”
   (2)   The comprehensive plan as contained in the Future Land Use map
incorporated herein as Exhibit A and the Future Land Use South Rock Planning
District map incorporated herein as Exhibit B are hereby amended by repealing
the future land use classification of “Industrial with Business Park Overlay”
for a tract property contained with said Exhibits A and B and further described
as follows:
      That certain tract of land situated in the East Half of the Northeast
Quarter of Section Number Thirty (30), Township Number Seventeen (17) North,
Range Number One (1) West of the Fourth Principal Meridian, described as
follows, to-wit:
      Beginning at the Southeast Corner of said East Half of the Northeast
Quarter; Thence North 89 degrees 03 minutes 19 seconds West along the South
line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section Number Thirty (30) a distance of
797.02 feet; Thence North and parallel to the East Line of said Section Number
Thirty (30) a distance of 172.67 feet to a point; Thence North 90 degrees 00
minutes 00 seconds East a distance of 797.02 +/- feet to a point on the East
line of said Section Number Thirty (30); Thence South along the East line of
said Section Number Thirty (30) 172.67 feet, more or less, to the point of
beginning; situated in Rock Island County, Illinois.
      Subject to an easement for the Indian Hills Subdivision filed in Plat
Book 45, Page 327, filed 27 November 1978 in the Rock Island County Recorder’s
Office.
      And in lieu thereof there is hereby adopted a new Future Land
Classification of “Agricultural” for said tract of land described above and
contained within Exhibits A and B.
(Ord. No. 2001-11-01; Sec. 25-2100 (a) repealed; new Sec. 25-2100 (a) enacted;
11/13/01; Sp. Ord. No. 2060; Sec. 25-2100 (a) repealed; new Sec. 25-2100 (a)
enacted; 06/11/02)
   (b)   The “Comprehensive Plan 2001” as prepared by the Bucher, Willis &
Ratliff Corporation and published in September 2001 is supplemented by and
includes the following Comprehensive Plan elements as part of the same and said
elements are hereby adopted as elements of the official comprehensive plan for
the City:
   (1)   North Rock River Corridor Plan 2004
   (2)   The Moline Centre on the Mississippi Master Plan Update
   (3)   The Floreciente Neighborhood Plan Update, dated November 2001
   (4)   The Avenue of the Cities Vision and Implementation Plan
   (5)   The Edgewater Neighborhood Plan, dated April 1993
   Said elements of the official comprehensive plan for the City are
incorporated herein as Exhibits “B,” “C,” “D,” “E,” and “F,” respectively.
Exhibits “A,” “B,” “C,” “D,” “E,” and “F” are not set forth herein, but are on
file with the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 3068-2004; Sec. 25-2100 (b) repealed; new Sec. 25-2100 (b) enacted;
09/07/04)
   (c)   The comprehensive plan adopted in subsection (a) shall be applicable
to all land situated within the corporate limits of the City, and shall also be
applicable to contiguous territory within one and one-half (1½) miles from the
corporate limits of the City and not included within the corporate limits of
any other municipality.
   (d)   The official comprehensive plan adopted in subsection (a) shall be
available to the public upon request.
**(Ord. No. 3038-2008; Sec. 25-2100 amended by repealing Chapter 1 of the
Comprehensive Plan, “Socioeconomic Analysis, Inventory and Evaluation of
Existing Conditions,” and enacting new Chapter 1 re: same subject matter; 10/
09/08)
   (f)   Adopting and adding new Appendix R, Moline River Front + Centre Plan,
to the Official Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. No. 3035-2025; 8/26/25)
ARTICLE III. PLAN COMMISSION
SEC. 25-3100.   CREATED; PURPOSE.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive City plan for the guidance, direction and control of the growth
and development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous territory not more
than one and one-half (1½) miles beyond the corporate limits of the city, and
not included in any municipality, a plan commission is hereby created.
SEC. 25-3101.   COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; MAYOR
TO BE EX OFFICIO MEMBER.
   The plan commission shall consist of nine (9) members, citizens of the City,
appointed by the mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty
on the plan commission, and subject to the approval of the City Council. In the
event a vacancy occurs on the Plan Commission for any reason, the number of
members on that Commission shall be automatically reduced until the number of
members is at the maximum allowed herein, without further action by the Mayor
and City Council.
(Ord. No. 3058-2023; Sec. 25-3101 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 25-3102.   TERMS AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The term of office of members of the plan commission shall be six (6) years.
All members of the plan commission shall serve without compensation except
that, if the City Council deems it advisable, they may receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the City Council and provided
for in the appropriation ordinance.
SEC. 25-3103.   ORGANIZATION.
   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the plan commission
shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt
and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with state law, the provisions of this Code and other City
ordinances.
SEC. 25-3104.   RECORDS.
   The plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which
shall be open at all times to public inspection.
SEC. 25-3105.   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (1)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous
unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (1½) miles beyond the
corporate limits of the City and not included in any other municipality. The
plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts,
each of which, when adopted shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part
thereof, of the City. Such plan shall be advisory, except as to such part
thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly adopted by the City Council.
All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the
county recorder of deeds, and filing of the comprehensive plan and ordinances
with the city clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law.
   (2)   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the City and its contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as defined in this division, and shall establish
reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of
public streets and highways, all ways for public service facilities, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of
lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply
and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment. The
requirements specified in this subsection shall become regulatory only when
adopted by ordinance.
   (3)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the City and the
recommended zoning classification for the land upon annexation.
   (4)   To recommend to the City Council, from time to time, such changes in
the official comprehensive plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary.
   (5)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time, plans
or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
comprehensive plan.
   (6)   To give aid to the officials of the City, charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official comprehensive plan or
parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
   (7)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (8)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
groups or agencies to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (9)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois entitle
"Illinois Municipal Code" approved May 29, 1961, and effective July 1, 1961,
and as amended, as may be conferred by the City Council.
SEC. 25-3106.   ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL MAP.
   An Official Map may be designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the
whole area included within the official comprehensive plan or of one (1) or
more separate geographical or functional parts, and may include all or any part
of the contiguous unincorporated area within one and one-half (1½) miles from
the corporate limits of the City. All requirements for public hearing, filing
of notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of the plan
and ordinances including the Official Map with the city clerk, shall be
complied with as provided for by law.
SEC. 25-3107.   SUBDIVISIONS.
   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record,
affecting land within the City, or within contiguous territory which is not
more than one and one-half (1½) miles beyond the corporate limits of the City,
shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown
thereon provides for standards or design, and standards governing streets,
alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities, street lights, public
grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm and flood
water run-off channels and basins, water supply and distribution, sanitary
sewers, and sewage collection and treatment, in conformity with the applicable
requirements of this Code and other City ordinances, including the Official
Map.
SEC. 25-3108.   DATA RELATIVE TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The city clerk shall furnish the plan commission for its consideration, a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the City Council.
SEC. 25-3109.   EXPENDITURES; EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL.
   The mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may employ a planning
staff whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be provided for
by adequate appropriation made by the City Council from the public funds. If
the plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or
services, it may be done upon authority from the City Council and
appropriations by the City Council therefor.
SEC. 25-3110.   HEARINGS IN GENERAL.
   At all hearings before the plan commission, all testimony shall be given
under oath, and a record of the proceedings shall be made.
SEC. 25-3111.   PLAN COMMISSION REVIEW OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   The plan commission, in conducting its review under Sec.
25-3108, shall follow standard specifications on file in the office of the city
clerk and director of public works.
SEC. 25-3112.   ADOPTION OF STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   The following supplemental specifications and construction standard details
are hereby adopted as the specifications of the City of Moline and shall govern
all work on public improvements pursuant to the board of local improvements’
powers, pursuant to the subdivision regulations, and other public improvement
projects authorized by the City Council. The supplemental specifications
supplement a specific Section or Article of the edition in effect on the date
of invitation of bids of the following: the Illinois DOT “Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction”; the “Illinois DOT
Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions”; the “Illinois
Recommended Standards for Sewage Works and the Design Criteria for Pressure
Sewer Systems”; the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways; the “Manual of Test Procedures of Materials”; and the “Standard
Specifications for Water & Sewer Main Construction in Illinois”, hereinafter
referred to as the Sewer and Water Specifications.
   In case of conflict with any part, or parts, of the above, the City of
Moline Supplemental Specifications, the City of Moline Special Provisions
(specific to the project being bid), and City of Moline Standard Details shall
take precedence and will govern. In the case of conflict between the Moline
Supplemental Specifications and the Moline Special Provisions, the Moline
Special Provisions shall take precedence and will govern and shall be
maintained on file in the office of the city clerk/legal records’ office and
director of public works for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 3007-2007; Sec. 35-3112 repealed; new Sec. 35-3112 enacted; 02/13/07)
SEC. 25-3113.   PROVISIONS FOR AMENDMENT OF STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   No amendment to any standard specifications shall be enacted unless
initiated by the director of public works and reviewed by the plan commission
and enactment shall follow the procedure used for original enactment.
SEC. 25-3114.   SPECIAL PROVISION TO THE STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   Sec.
25-3111, Sec.
25-3112, and Sec.
25-3113 shall not prohibit development of individual special provisions and/or
standards by either the director of public works or a registered professional
engineer for individual projects, if approved by the director of public works,
and such director or such registered professional engineer is hereby authorized
to promulgate and adopt such provisions or standards and to keep such
provisions or standards available for public review and inspection; provided,
such special provisions and/or standards shall be listed on the face of any
plans or permits and attached verbatim thereto as an exhibit.
SEC. 25-3115.   COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   Contractors under contract with the City and all other persons doing work
which is or will be a public improvement upon completion thereof or which work
is governed by said standard specifications (such work includes, but is not
limited to, sidewalk, driveway, pavement patch permit work and other work
regulated by
Chapter 28) shall be required to follow said standard specifications unless
special provision is made otherwise and failure to follow said standard
specifications shall be considered a breach of contract or violation of permit
and an offense of this Code.
SEC. 25-3116.   VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of Sec.
25-3115 shall be punishable as provided in Sec.
1-1107 of this Code.
ARTICLE IV. HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SEC. 25-4100.   AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE PRESERVATION OF STRUCTURES OR
AREAS OF HISTORIC OR ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE FOR THE CITY OF MOLINE,
ILLINOIS.
   (a)   Authority.  The authority for this ordinance is found in the Illinois
Constitution of 1970, Article VII, concerning home rule powers and the Illinois
Historic Areas Preservation Act, Chapter 65, Section 5/11-13.1 and 5/11-48.2
et. seq. of the Illinois Compiled Statutes that grants powers to the Mayor and
City Council of Moline to provide for official landmark designation by
ordinance of areas, places, buildings, structures, and other objects having a
special, historical, community or aesthetic interest or value, and in
connection with such areas so designated by ordinance to impose regulations
governing the construction, alteration, demolition and use, and to adopt other
additional measures appropriate for their preservation, protection,
enhancement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, perpetuation or use.
   (b)   Purpose and Scope. This Historic Preservation Ordinance is established
for the purpose of:
   (1)   Promoting the educational, cultural, and economic welfare of the City
by preserving and protecting historic structures, sites, and neighborhoods
which serve as visible reminders of the history and cultural heritage of the
City, state, or nation.
   (2)   Fostering awareness and appreciation among Moline citizens for the
unique history of the City embodied in its architecture and historic sites.
   (3)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive
historic architectural areas and structures that are significant to the City’s
history.   
   (4)   Strengthening the economy of the City by stabilizing and improving
property values in historic areas, and to encourage new developments that will
be harmonious with the existing historic structures and districts.
   (5)   Fostering civic pride and enhancing and promoting the aesthetics of
the community to residents, potential residents and visitors.
   (6)   Encouraging preservation, restoration of structures, areas, and
neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight.
SEC. 25-4101.   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise indicated, the following words, terms or phrases shall have
these prescribed meanings:
   (1)   ADDITION . Any act or process which changes one or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure designated for preservation by
adding to, joining with, or increasing the size or capacity of the structure.
   (2)   ALTERATION . Any act or process that changes one (1) or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure including, but not limited to
the erection, construction, reconstruction or moving of any structure.   
   (3)   ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE . Embodying the distinctive characteristics
of a type, period style or method of construction or use of indigenous
construction, or representing the work of an important builder, designer,
architect, or craftsman who has contributed to the development of the
community, City, county, state or nation.
   (4)   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS . A certificate reviewed by the
Historic Preservation Commission and issued by the City Council verifying that
an application to allow the alteration or demolition of any improvement upon a
Landmark Site or Historic District was found to be appropriate to the general
character of the Landmark Site or Historic District; and that the City has
found that the proposed alteration is in accordance with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Design Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings; and that the requested action may be taken
subject to applicable building and zoning codes.
   (5)   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP . A certificate reviewed by the
Historic Preservation Commission and issued by the City Council authorizing
alterations, construction, relocation, removal or demolition of a landmark
building, or structure when such property cannot be put to a reasonably
beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return thereon
without the proposed alteration, construction, relocation, removal or
demolition.
   (6)   CITY COUNCIL . The elected City Council of the City of Moline,
Illinois.
   (7)   COMMISSION . The City’s appointed Moline Historic Preservation
Commission.
   (8)   CONTRIBUTING (building, structure or site) . A building, structure or
site that may not necessarily have architectural or historic significance as a
single property, but which adds to the overall character and significance of a
historic district due to its architectural or historical merit and its
compatibility with other buildings, structures and sites within an
architectural or historic setting such as a neighborhood or commercial
district.
   (9)   DEMOLITION . The complete or substantial removal or destruction of any
site, structure or improvement.
   (10)   DEPARTMENT .  Shall refer to the Department of Planning and
Development of the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (11)   DESIGN GUIDELINES . A set of criteria, policies or procedures
intended to preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or
areas.
   (12)   EXTERIOR . The front facade of any structure or any exterior feature
visible from the public way.
   (13)   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE . The architectural and general
composition    of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to
the kind and texture of the building material and the type, design and
character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant
elements.
   (14)   LOCALLY DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT . An area designated a Historic
District by ordinance of the City Council and which may contain within
definable geographic boundaries one (1) or more historic properties and which
may have within its boundaries other properties or Landmark structures that,
while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated
as Landmark, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of
the Landmark or Landmarks located within the Historic District.
   (15)   NATIONALLY DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT . An area that has been
designated by the US Secretary of Interior and is listed on the National
Register of Historic Sites and Places.
   (16)   IMPROVEMENT . An exterior change in the property that upgrades the
structure and enhances the value of said property.
   (17)   LANDMARK . A historic property or structure or site designated as a
Landmark by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed
herein, that is of architectural, landscape architectural, historical,
archaeological, or cultural importance or value of significance to the City, or
has been designated as a landmark by the U.S. Secretary of Interior on the
National Register of Historic Sites and Places prior to the adoption of this
ordinance.
   (18)   LANDSCAPE . The area surrounding a landmark or structure within a
historic district. This shall include, but not be limited to, fences, statues,
signs, plantings, paving and outbuildings, as well as landforms.
   (19)   REHABILITATION . The process of returning a property to a state of
utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property
which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
   (20)   RELOCATION . Any repositioning of a structure on its site or the
moving of it to another site.
   (21)   REPAIR . Any change that does not require a building permit, is not
new construction, removal, or alteration. Furthermore, nothing in this
definition shall be construed to prohibit or limit normal repairs or
maintenance, which do not involve alterations or changes in the exterior
features of a structure. For the purposes of this ordinance, changes made in
the color of the exterior surfaces of a structure are considered to be ordinary
maintenance and repair.
   (22)   SITE . Any parcel of real property.
   (23)   STRUCTURE . Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but not
limiting the generality of the following: any building, structure, wall, fence,
gazebo, advertising sign, billboard, backstops for tennis courts, radio and
television antennae, including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite
dishes, solar panels and wind generation.
   (24)   STRUCTURAL CHANGE . Any change or repair to the exterior of a
structure that would change the structure in height or bulk or any change in
the supporting members of a structure.
   (25)   UNLAWFUL DEMOLITION . The removal in whole or in part of a historic
landmark without proper City Council approval.
SEC. 25-4102.    HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (1)   COMPOSITION . The Moline Historic Preservation Commission shall
consist of seven (7) voting members, residents and/or property owners of the
City,    appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
   (2)   QUALIFICATIONS . The members of the Commission shall be appointed on
the basis of, expertise, experience or interest in the area of architectural
history, building construction or    engineering, finance, historical and
architectural preservation, neighborhood organizing or real estate.
   (3)   TERMS . The members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of
three (3) years. Of those members first taking office, two (2) shall be
appointed for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years, and two (2) for three
(3) years. The successors to the initial members shall serve for a term of
three (3) years. Alternate members shall be appointed in the same manner as
regular members    to serve in the extended absence or disqualification of the
regular members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members
shall serve without compensation.
   (4)   OFFICERS . Members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and Secretary. Officers shall serve for a term of one (1) year and
may be re-elected, but no person    may serve as chairperson for more than two
(2) consecutive years.
   (5)   MEETINGS . Following their appointment, members of the Commission
shall meet at least monthly, or more often as determined by the Chairman. A
quorum shall consist of five (5) of the    members. A concurring vote of a
majority of those members present and constituting a quorum is    necessary to
render a decision on any matter on which the Commission is authorized to act.
No member of the Commission shall vote on any issue that might be construed in
any way as a    conflict of interest under the City Code of Ethics as contained
in
Chapter 2 of the City Code. The Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings and all meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open
Meeting Act of the State of Illinois
   (6)   ATTENDANCE . A commission member having three (3) consecutive
unexcused absences may be recommended for removal from the commission by the
Mayor, with the consent of the City Council.
   (7)   POWERS AND DUTIES . At all times consistent with and subject to the
laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of the City of Moline, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall have and may exercise the following
responsibilities:
      a.   Adopt its own procedural regulations.
      b.   Undertake an ongoing survey and research effort in the City to
identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that have
historical, community, architectural or aesthetic importance, interest or
value.
      c.   As part of the survey, the Commission shall review and evaluate any
prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private organization and
compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs.
      d.   Identify such structures, places or areas within the City which are
historically significant in that they exemplify and/or reflect the cultural,
social, economic, political or architectural history of the nation, the state
or the City.
      e.   Investigate and hold public hearings, and recommend to the City
Council the adoption of ordinances designating such structures, places or areas
as either Landmark or Historic Districts.
      f.   Review and process applications for Certificate of Appropriateness
and Certificate of Economic Hardship and provide Commission recommendations to
the City Council.
      g.   Investigate and recommend areas as having special historic,
community or architectural value as potential Historic Districts or Landmarks.
      h.   Subject to Council approval perform such other functions as may be
useful or necessary to safeguard and enhance the City’s historic, aesthetic,
architectural, cultural and community heritage as embodied in its structures,
places and areas.
      i.   The commission may review plans and designs for new infill
construction in designated Historic Districts and forward its findings and
recommendations to City Council.
      j.   To accept and administer on behalf of the City of Moline upon
designation by the City Council such gifts, grants and money as may be
appropriate for the purpose of this ordinance.
SEC. 25-4103.   LANDMARK DESIGNATION GUIDELINES.
   (a)   Applications for landmark designation shall be reviewed by the
Historic Preservation Commission, which shall consider whether a building or
structure nominated for Landmark designation meets the required designation
guidelines.
   Any person, group of persons or association, including but not limited to
the Moline Historic Preservation Commission, may nominate a building or
structure that may have historic or architectural significance as defined by
the ordinance, for designation as a Landmark.
   Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to completing an application may
contact the Department of Planning and Development or the Historic Preservation
Commission. Completed applications shall be filed at the Department of Planning
and Development.
   To be considered for landmark designation, a structure or structures should
be determined to be at least fifty (50) years old. Special consideration may be
given to a structure less than fifty years old that exhibits exceptional
qualities such as being designed by a noted architect, is architecturally
significant, has prominence of location, and has local, state or national
historical significance.
   Additionally, proponents must provide information to the Commission to
satisfy one (1) or more of the following criteria.
   (1)   Properties and/or structures are significant in national, state or
local history, architecture, archaeology, and/or culture.
   (2)   Properties and/or structures possess integrity of location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, or association.
   (3)   Properties and/or structures are associated with events that have made
a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history.
   (4)   Properties and/or structures are associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past.
   (5)   Properties and/or structures embody the distinctive characteristics of
a type, period, method of construction, represent the work of a master, possess
high artistic values, and represent a significant and distinguishable entity.
   (6)   Properties and/or structures have yielded, or may likely yield,
information important in prehistory or history.
   (b)   For consideration, an application for nomination of a Landmark should
minimally include the following:
   (1)   The name and address of the property owner(s) of the proposed
Landmark.
   (2)   The legal description and common street address of the property and/or
a map delineating the boundaries of the area.
   (3)   A written history describing the property and setting forth reasons in
support of the proposed designation.
   (4)   Documentation that the property owners have been notified or consent
to the application for designation.
   (5)   Documentation of the building or structure construction date, if
possible.
   (6)   A list of significant exterior architectural features that should be
protected.
   (7)   Photographs and an overall site plan of the Landmark
   (8)   Fees may be established by action of the City Council. Such fees shall
be paid to the Finance Director who shall give a receipt therefore and account
for the same to the City Council.
SEC. 25-4104.   HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION GUIDELINES.
   (a)   Applications for Historic District status shall be reviewed by the
Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission shall evaluate the proposed
district for eligibility based on its overall historic and/or architectural
significance, and the extent to which it meets the following criteria:
   (1)   The area contains one or more buildings, structures or sites meeting
the criteria for landmark designation, and may also include other buildings,
structures or sites which, although they may not qualify for individual
landmark designation, contribute to the overall visual character of the area
and to its architectural or historic significance.
   (2)   The area is historically, economically or culturally significant to
the development of the City of Moline.
   (3)   The area has sufficient integrity to convey the sense of a particular
period in the history of the community.
   (b)   Any person, group of persons or association, including but not limited
to the Moline Historic Preservation Commission, may nominate an area or
district within the boundaries of the City of Moline that may have historic or
architectural significance as defined by the ordinance for the designation of a
Historic District. Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to completing an
application may contact the Department of Planning and Development or the
Historic Preservation Commission. Completed applications shall be filed at the
Department of Planning and Development.
   (c)   For consideration, an application for nomination of a Historic
District should minimally include:
   (1)   A petition supporting the nomination signed by no less that fifty-one
percent (51%) of the property owners of record within the proposed district.
   (2)   The legal description, names and addresses of all property owners
within the proposed district and a map delineating the boundaries of the area.
   (3)   A written statement describing the history of the proposed district
and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed designation.
   (4)   Documentation of the structure or district’s age.
   (5)   A list of significant exterior architectural features that should be
protected.
   (6)   Photographs and an overall site plan of the proposed Historic
District.
   (7)   Fees may be established by action of the City Council. Such fees shall
be paid to the Finance Director who shall give a receipt therefore and account
for the same to the City Council.
SEC. 25-4105.   LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Applications for Landmark designation may be obtained from the City’s
Department of Planning and Development.
   (1)   Any person, group of persons, or association, including but not
limited to the Moline Historic Preservation Commission, may request a Landmark
or Historic District    designation for any area, structure or site within the
boundaries of the City of Moline which may have historic or architectural
significance as defined by this ordinance.
   (2)   The Department of Planning and Development shall submit completed
applications to the Historic Preservation Commission. Upon receipt of the
application, the Commission will schedule a review to be held at its next
regular meeting and shall notify the applicant and the owner of the property in
writing of the date, time and place of such landmark applications review.
   (3)   The Commission shall evaluate the property’s eligibility for landmark
designation based on its historic and/or architectural significance, the
integrity of its design, workmanship, materials, location, setting and the
extent to which it meets landmark guidelines.
   (4)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications. At
least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the Commission
shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation in the City of Moline, a
notice of time and place of the hearing as provided by statutes of the State of
Illinois. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall also be sent by mail to the owner(s) of record of the nominated property
as well as to the adjoining property owners not less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the date of the hearing.
   (5)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review and evaluate
the application according to the criteria established in this Article IV.
   (6)   If the Commission finds the application merits further consideration,
the Commission will recommend designation as a Landmark or Historic District to
the City Council’s    Committee of the Whole. If the Commission does not
recommend further consideration, they will recommend rejection to the City
Council’s Committee of the Whole.
   (7)   If the Committee of the Whole and owners of record agree that the
Landmark or Historic District should be designated, a simple majority vote of
the City Council is necessary for approval of a Landmark or Historic District.
   (8)   If legal objectors representing at least twenty percent (20%) of the
total lineal footage of the boundaries of the site for which a Landmark or
Historic District is proposed, file a written, duly notarized objection with
the Department of Planning and Development or with the City clerk; or if the
owner of the subject site is in opposition; or if the Commission recommends
denial of a Landmark or Historic District; the City Council shall not adopt an
ordinance for such Landmark or Historic District except by a vote of at least
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council.
   (9)   Where provisions of state statute and this ordinance conflict, this
ordinance shall prevail per Article VII, Sec. 6 of the Illinois Constitution of
1970.
SEC. 25-4106.   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (a)   Certificate of Appropriateness must be obtained before any
construction, alteration, demolition, repair or relocation affecting the
exterior architectural appearance of any designated Landmark or structure
within a locally designated Historic District can occur. A copy of the
Certificate of Appropriateness may be obtained from the Department of Planning
and Development.   
   (b)   The Historic Preservation Commission will approve or deny all requests
for a Certificate of appropriateness before a building permit, moving permit or
demolition permit can be issued for any designated landmark or landmarked
structure in a locally designated historic district. If the Historic
Preservation Commission denies the request for a certificate of appropriateness
the commission will submit its recommendation to the Committee Of the Whole and
the City Council which must approve the certificate of appropriateness before a
building permit, moving permit or demolition permit can be issued for any
landmark or landmarked structure in a locally designated historic district. A
Certificate of Appropriateness is also required if the structure or site will
be altered, extended or repaired in such a manner as to cause a major change in
the exterior appearance of the aforementioned. Such major changes include, but
are not limited to:
   (1)   Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, renovation or repair.
   (2)   Any new construction or demolition, or removal in whole or in part
requiring a building permit from the City of Moline.
   (3)   Moving a structure.
   (4)   Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the Landmark or Historic District.
   (c)   In the case of a pending application for nomination of a Landmark or a
locally designated Historic District, a Certificate of Appropriateness in
accordance with the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation shall
be required for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed
Landmark or locally designated Historic District effective from the date the
nomination form is presented to the Department of Planning and Development and
shall be required until the final disposition of the request, or sixty (60)
days, whichever is shorter.
   (d)   Any construction, alteration or repairs to an exterior feature must be
made in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation and follow this ordinance’s Design Guidelines.
   (1)   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION
      a.   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
      b.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
      c.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features of architectural elements from other
buildings shall not be undertaken.
      d.   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      e.   Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be
preserved.
      f.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or
pictorial evidence.
      g.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
      h.   Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
      i.   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment.
      j.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   (2)   DESIGN GUIDELINES
   Guidelines for applying the criteria for review of Certificates of
Appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the following architectural
criteria:
      a.   Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction should
be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with surrounding
structures in a historic district.
      b.   Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark.
      c.   Relationship of Building Masses and Spaces. The relationship of a
structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining
structures should be similarly compatible.
      d.   Roof Shape. The design of the roof, fascia, and cornice should be
compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark.
      e.   Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the architectural
character and appearance of the landmark.
      f.   Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or
partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding    structures in a historic district.
      g.   Directional Expression. Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures; the directional expression of a landmark
after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with
its original architectural style and character.
      h.   Architectural Details. Architectural details including types of
materials, colors, and textures should be treated so as to make the landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character of a landmark or
historic district.
      i.   New Structures. New structures in a Historic District shall be
compatible with the architectural styles and design in said districts.
SEC. 25-4107.   APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR A LANDMARK
OR HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   (a)   Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness may be obtained from
the Department of Planning and Development at the Moline City Hall. The
Historic Preservation Commission, prior to approval or denial of a request for
a Certificate of Appropriateness, shall review each application including plans
and specifications for proposed exterior renovations or changes to the
designated Landmark structure which require a building permit or demolition
permit. A Certificate of Appropriateness is also required if the structure or
site will be altered, extended, or repaired in such a manner as to cause a
major change to its exterior appearance. The Commission’s findings and
recommendations for the denial of said request are then forwarded to the City
Council’s Committee of the Whole for its approval or denial of the
applications. Approval of the request by the Commission requires no action by
the City Council as detailed below in subsection (c).
   (b)   Each application must include, but not be limited to:
   (1)   Owner’s name, developer’s name (if different than the owner) and
architect’s name;
   (2)   Street address of the property involved;
   (3)   Legal description of the property involved;
   (4)   Photographs of the property involved;
   (5)   Brief description of the existing improvements situated on the
property;
   (6)   A detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition, or
use proposed, together with any architectural drawings or sketches if those
have been utilized by the applicant, and if not, a sufficient description of
the construction, alteration, demolition or use to enable any reasonable person
to determine what the final appearance and use of the real estate will be; and
   (7)   A filing fee, as set by the City Council, from time to time, is
required.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a request for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission will meet to review an application for
alterations, repairs or for a request for demolition of a Historic Landmark. If
the Commission finds the application for alterations or repairs to be in
accordance with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, and
there are no objectors of record to the proposed alterations or repairs, the
Commission shall approve the request for a Certificate of Appropriateness and
no action by the City Council will be required.
   If the application for alterations or repairs is not in accordance with the
Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, the Commission may deny
the request for a Certificate of Appropriateness. The Commission will then make
a recommendation to the City Council Committee of the Whole as to whether the
request is appropriate for said Landmark or Historic District with the City
Council making the final decision to deny or approve the request for a
Certificate of Appropriateness. A simple majority vote of the City Council is
necessary for approval or denial.
(Ord. No. 3032-2007; Sec. 25-4107 repealed; new Sec. 25-4107 enacted; 10/09/07)
SEC. 25-4108.   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (a)   An exception to the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made if
the applicant shows the City that a failure to grant the permit will cause an
imminent threat to life, health or property. After a recommendation for denial
of the Certificate of Appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission,
the City Council may consider an exemption for economic hardship which has not
been self-imposed or self-created by the applicant. In order to obtain such
exemption, the applicant must show that the structure or structures cannot be
used for the original intended purpose and/or no alternative reasonable use can
be identified and the applicant can show evidence that economic hardship will
be created if the structure or structures cannot be removed.
   (b)   The Historic Preservation Commission will review all evidence and
information required of the applicant and make a recommendation to the City
Council whether the denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness has deprived, or
will deprive, the owner of the property of reasonable use of, or economic
return on, the property. After reviewing the evidence, the City Council may
deny and/or accept the application of economic hardship or may postpone
consideration of the application for sixty (60) days to permit an opportunity
for other alternatives to be evaluated. If no decision is made within said
sixty (60) days, the application shall be deemed denied for the reasons set
forth by the Historic Preservation Commission.
SEC. 25-4109.   APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by or adversely affected by a decision of the City may,
within thirty (30) days of the decision, appeal the action to the City Council.
When the City Council has determined an exception, no additional appeals may be
made. The City Council shall determine whether the City exercised its power in
accordance with the applicable laws and ordinances. Appeal from the actions of
the City Council shall be pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law
found generally at 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.
SEC. 25-4110.   PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of
a petty offense and shall be subject to a fine of no less than fifty dollars
($50.00) for the first offense and no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for the second and subsequent offenses upon conviction thereof. The maximum
fine shall be consistent with Section
1-1107 of the Code. Each day any willful violation of any provision of this
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
SEC. 25-4111.   MAINTENANCE OF LANDMARK STRUCTURES.
   The owner or other person of record having custody and control of a Landmark
structure shall not allow such structure and the land upon which it is situated
to fall into a state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any
exterior appurtenance or architectural feature or other element upon which its
landmark designation is based so as to produce or tend to produce a detrimental
effect upon the appearance, life or character of the structure, or upon the
landmark designation or upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
   Such structures shall be maintained in good condition and repair so as to
avoid a deteriorating or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorating
roofs or roof supports, chimneys and exterior walls, subject to buckling,
listing or sagging; deteriorating or ineffective waterproofing of exterior
walls, roofs and foundation, and broken windows or doors or any other fault or
defect which renders a structure unsafe or not protected from weathering.
   In addition said premises or vacant property shall be kept clear of all
weeds, fallen trees or limbs, debris, abandoned vehicles and all other refuse
as specified under City code. A violation of this section may subject the
structure in question to a loss of Landmark status and the property owner
subject to penalties as set forth under the City’s penalties for code
violations.
SEC. 25-4112.   CIVIL RELIEF.
   Unlawful Demolition. It is the intent of this ordinance that it be construed
as a regulation of land usage and of buildings and, therefore, the civil
remedies available under the Illinois Compiled Statutes 65 ILCS 5/11-13-15
(proceedings to prevent violation) and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 Par. 11-31-1, et.
seq., (demolition or repair) shall be available to civilly enforce the
provisions hereof.
   In addition, such remedies shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any
remedies provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-1 (preservation of historical and other
special areas) et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 98-8-10; Chapter 25, Article IV repealed, new Article IV enacted; 08/
18/98)
   Specifically, any Code violations may be referred to a Code Enforcement
Hearing Officer (RICCES) per Section
2-6100, et. seq.
(Ord. No. 98-8-10; Chapter 25, Article IV repealed, new Article IV enacted; 08/
18/98; Ord. No. 3040-2006; Art. IV repealed; new Art. IV enacted; 10/03/06)
CHAPTER 26
POLICE
   Art. I.   In General, §26-1100 - §26-1103
   Art. II.   Police Department
      Div. 1. In General, §26-2100 - §26-2113
      Div. 2. The Chief of Police, §26-2200 - §26-2213
      Div. 3. Personnel, §26-2300 - §26-2323
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 26-1100.   POLICE DEPARTMENT BUILDING AND CITY JAIL ESTABLISHED;
FACILITIES FOR JUVENILES.
   There is hereby created a police department building and City jail, which
shall have such location as may be prescribed from time to time by the City
Council. The City jail shall contain separate facilities for juveniles, or
separate facilities for juveniles may be provided at another location.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-1100 repealed; new Sec. 26-1100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-1101.   RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING THE MAYOR OR PEACE OFFICER.
   (a)   A person commits the offense of resisting or obstructing the mayor or
peace officer when said person knowingly restricts or obstructs the performance
by one known to the person to be the mayor or a peace officer of any authorized
act within an official capacity.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating Section
26-1101 shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-1101 repealed; new Sec. 26-1101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-1102.   OBSTRUCTING SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   Whoever knowingly resists or obstructs the authorized service or execution
of any civil or criminal process or order of any court shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus court
costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-1102 repealed; new Sec. 26-1102 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-1103.   REFUSING TO AID A PEACE OFFICER.
   Whoever upon command refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person
known by him to be a peace officer in:
   (1)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (2)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense shall be punished
as provided in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-1103 repealed; new Sec. 26-1103 enacted; 06/20/23)
ARTICLE II. POLICE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 26-2100.   ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created and established within the City the police
department.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2100 repealed; new Sec. 26-2100 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2101.   COMPOSITION.
   (a)   The police department shall consist of a chief of police, and such
number of deputy chiefs, lieutenants, sergeants, and police officers as are
authorized from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (b)   Appointment of Deputy Chief of Police: The chief of the police
department shall appoint a deputy chief or deputy chiefs of police as
authorized by the City Council.
   Applicants for the position of deputy police chief shall have a thorough
knowledge of all aspects of law enforcement service and shall have attained a
rank of captain, lieutenant or sergeant in the Moline Police Department, or
shall have attained an equivalent in knowledge, rank and position in a police
department outside of the City of Moline.
   The deputy chief of police shall be subject to the direction and control of
the chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall serve in such a position
until such time as the chief of police determines otherwise.
   (c)   Removal of the Deputy Chief of Police: If the chief of police
determines that it is necessary and desirable to appoint another person to the
position of deputy chief of police, then the previously appointed person shall,
to the extent he or she was a sworn officer of the police department prior to
being appointed deputy chief of police, automatically return to his or her
prior rank, together with all authority, responsibility and compensation
commensurate with such prior rank.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2101 repealed; new Sec. 26-2101 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2102.   ORDER OF RANKING.
   The order of ranking of the members of the police department shall be as
follows:
   (1)   The chief of police.
   (2)   Deputy Chiefs.
   (3)   Lieutenants.
   (4)   Sergeants.
   (5)   Police officers.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2102 repealed; new Sec. 26-2102 enacted; 06/20/23)
   
SEC. 26-2103.   CHIEF OF POLICE TO BE EXECUTIVE HEAD OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT;
OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The chief of police shall be the executive head of the police department and
in control thereof, and every police officer and other members of the police
department, or any person receiving compensation from the City for police duty,
shall be under the jurisdiction of the chief of police and subject to the
orders and directions of said chief of police at all times.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2103 repealed; new Sec. 26-2103 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2104.   DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IN GENERAL.
   It shall be the duty of the police department, and each member thereof, to
preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness of the City and to enforce
all provisions of this Code and other City ordinances, acting under the general
supervision of the city administrator; to execute and enforce all orders and
directions of the city administrator or the City Council; to protect every
citizen in the right, property, safety and lawful enjoyment of life; to enforce
and secure public order and welfare; to prevent obstruction to public travel
and intercourse and preserve and secure to every person such person's personal
liberty and free and lawful intercourse with others.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2104 repealed; new Sec. 26-2104 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2105.   POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IN
GENERAL.
   Each member of the police department shall have the powers conferred upon
police officers and conservators of the peace by law, and such other powers and
duties as may from time to time be lawfully provided by the United States or
state law, or by the provisions of this Code or other City ordinance. Each
police officer shall be a conservator of the peace and aid in the preservation
of the public peace and the observance and enforcement of the provisions of
this Code or other ordinances of the City and the laws of the state, including
specifically but not limited to Articles 107 and 108, Chapter 725 of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. Each police officer shall have power and authority,
within the City, to serve and execute warrants and other legal processes for
the apprehension and commitment of any person charged with, held for
examination or for trial, or taken in the act of committing a crime or
misdemeanor, or violating any law or provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the City.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2105 repealed; new Sec. 26-2105 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2106.   GENERAL DUTIES OF DEPUTY CHIEFS AND LIEUTENANTS OF POLICE.
   The several deputy chiefs and lieutenants of the police department shall
function effectively within the framework of written policy, in the specific
positions as assigned by their commanding officers, and within the chain of
command.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2106 repealed; new Sec. 26-2106 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2107.   TRANSMITTAL ORDERS.
   All orders to the chief of police shall be issued to the chief by the city
administrator, and all orders to the police force shall be issued by the chief
of police and communicated to the force through the chain of command or in such
manner as the circumstances may require.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2107 repealed; new Sec. 26-2107 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2108.   JUVENILE UNIT.
   (a)   There is hereby established a juvenile unit within the police
department which shall function within the framework of written policy as
promulgated by the chief of police and within the chain of command established
therein.
   (b)   Said juvenile unit shall be under the immediate supervision of a
Division Commander or Assistant Division Commander.
   (c)   All crimes, violations, and offenses committed by a person who is
seventeen (17) years or younger shall be coordinated with the juvenile unit.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2108 repealed; new Sec. 26-2108 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2109.   DUTY OF POLICE OFFICER; JUVENILE PROBLEMS.
   All police officers shall familiarize themselves with the laws, the
provisions of the Moline Code of Ordinances, and all other City ordinances
pertaining to juveniles. Each officer shall take notice of all juvenile
offenders and offenses and any contributory action by adults in all instances
coming to the attention of the officer in the performance of the officer's
official duties and shall report same to the juvenile unit.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2109 repealed; new Sec. 26-2109 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2110.   CUSTODY OF PROPERTY; DEPARTMENT PROPERTY; LOST, STOLEN AND
CONFISCATED PROPERTY.
   (a)   The chief of police is responsible for the proper care, custody and
control of the firearms, property, books and records of the police department
and also all property lost and found, or stolen and recovered for which no
owner can be found, has come into the possession of any of the officers or
members of the police department.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the City to
promptly deliver, to the person designated by the chief of police, all lost or
stolen property found by them, or coming in to their possession. The chief of
police shall cause a record to be kept of the time of receiving such property
and a description thereof in the official files of the police department and
shall hold such property or dispose of it in accordance with state law.
   (c)   All property confiscated under state law, or the provisions of this
Code or other ordinances of the City, shall be delivered to the chief of
police, and it shall be the chief's duty to take charge of the same and to
carry out the orders and directions of any court of law with reference to such
property, or according to state law.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2110 repealed; new Sec. 26-2110 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2111.   USE OF EQUIPMENT.
   The use of all motorized equipment, radios and other police department
property shall be limited to the official business of the City.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2111 repealed; new Sec. 26-2111 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2112.   REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT BY THE
COMMITTEE-OF-THE-WHOLE OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Prior to action by the City Council, the Committee-of-the-Whole shall review
and study on a continuing basis, the responsibilities, functions, procedures,
and activities of the police department; it shall make such recommendations to
the city administrator as it believes will improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the police department, and it shall recommend such ordinances
or revisions of this Code or other City ordinances as it believes necessary and
proper for the preservation of peace and good order, and the enforcement of the
provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the City, and the laws of the
United States and this state.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2112 repealed; new Sec. 26-2112 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2113.   MANNER OF AMENDING THIS ARTICLE.
   Prior to action by the City Council, the Committee-of-the-Whole shall review
any additions to or amendments of this article as are deemed appropriate from
time to time. Upon adoption thereof, any such changes, additions or amendments
shall be posted on the bulletin board in the headquarters of the police
department immediately upon the publication of the amendatory ordinance. The
publication shall be made in the form of pamphlets containing the ordinance,
changes, additions or amendments, which pamphlets shall be kept in the office
of the city clerk, and shall be furnished to any member of the police
department or other person on request.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2113 repealed; new Sec. 26-2113 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 2. THE CHIEF OF POLICE
SEC. 26-2200.   RESERVED.
SEC. 26-2201.   OFFICE OF CHIEF OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of chief of the police department who
shall be appointed by the city administrator with the advice and consent of the
City Council.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2201 repealed; new Sec. 26-2201 enacted; 06/20/23)
   
SEC. 26-2202.   QUALIFICATIONS; FILLING OF VACANCY; REMOVAL.
   (a)   Applicants for the position of police chief shall have a thorough
knowledge of all aspects of law enforcement service and shall have attained a
rank of deputy chief, lieutenant or sergeant in the Moline Police Department,
or shall have attained an equivalent in knowledge, rank and position in a
police department outside of the City of Moline. Sergeants shall be considered
only if they possess an Associate Degree in police science or a related field
of study.
   (b)   In the event of a vacancy in the office of the chief of the police
department, the board of fire and police commissioners shall examine each
applicant from within or from outside the police department to determine each
applicant's qualifications for the position. Following examination, the board
of fire and police commissioners shall submit a list of the names of the top
six applicants in alphabetical order to the city administrator, along with a
report of their findings on each applicant prior to the consideration for
appointment of any such applicant by the city administrator. After
consideration of each applicant and the report on the applicant from the board
of fire and police commissioners, the city administrator shall appoint the
chief of the police department with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (c)   The city administrator shall have the power to remove the chief of the
police department from office in accordance with the provisions of this Code
for the removal of officers set forth in §
2-3202(c)(3).
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2202 repealed; new Sec. 26-2202 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2203.   POWERS AND DUTIES IN GENERAL.
   The chief of police shall be subject to the orders of the city administrator
and the ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council, and shall be
the chief executive officer of the police department. The entire time of the
chief shall be devoted to the duties of this office; and said chief shall make
certain that all laws of the state and all provisions of this Code or other
ordinances of the City, the execution of which depends upon the police force,
are enforced, and make certain that all orders are promptly executed and all
departmental rules and regulations are complied with fully. The chief of police
is the final departmental authority in all matters of policy, operations,
administration and discipline.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2203 repealed; new Sec. 26-2203 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2204.   ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS; PRESERVATION OF ORDER.
   The chief of police shall make certain that the laws of the state and the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City and the rules and
regulations of the police department are strictly enforced. The chief shall
cause public nuisances to be removed, preserve peace and order at elections,
provide adequate police force at every fire and at every public assembly of
citizens and make such suggestions as said chief may deem advisable for the
improvement of the police department and its operation.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2204 repealed; new Sec. 26-2204 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2205.   ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES IN GENERAL.
   The chief of police is responsible for planning, directing, coordinating,
controlling, and staffing all activities of the police department; for its
continued and efficient operation; for the completion and forwarding of such
reports as may be required by competent authority; and for the police
department's relations with the citizens of the City, the City government, and
other municipal, state, and federal law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2205 repealed; new Sec. 26-2205 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2206.   EQUIPMENT.
   The chief of police shall have control and be responsible for all police
equipment belonging to the City.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2206 repealed; new Sec. 26-2206 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2207.   REGISTER OF MEMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of police, as superintendent of the
department, to keep a register of the police department. This record shall
contain the names of the officers and members of the department, and their
residence, age, date of appointment, and place of birth.
Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2207 repealed; new Sec. 26-2207 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2208.   PROMULGATION OF RULES.
   The chief of police shall have the power to promulgate orders to the police
force not inconsistent with law or the rules and regulations; such orders shall
be written or printed, and all members of the police force shall obey them.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2208 repealed; new Sec. 26-2208 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2209.   ASSIGNMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   The chief of police shall be held responsible for the preservation of the
public peace and the protection of life and property in the City, and is
invested with the power to post police officers in such parts of the City and
assign them to such duties within the City as deemed appropriate to carry out
the responsibilities. In addition thereto, subject to the approval of the city
administrator, the chief of police may assign police officers to duties or
intercity units for duties outside the City as deemed appropriate for carrying
out the mission as herein described.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2209 repealed; new Sec. 26-2209 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2210.   DESIGNATION OF ASSISTANT DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   The chief of police, with the approval of the city administrator, will
designate one of the several deputy chiefs of the department to act in the
chiefs’ behalf and in conformance with this article, during any extended
absence occasioned by vacation, illness, or any other cause. As a consequence,
the chief of police and the deputy chiefs will be designated as the department
head and assistants.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2210 repealed; new Sec. 26-2210 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2211.   RECORDS.
   The chief of police shall cause a record to be kept of all the transactions
and affairs of the police department, the arrests made, actions brought by the
police department, and the expenditures of all other things pertaining to the
department.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2211 repealed; new Sec. 26-2211 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2212.   MONTHLY AND ANNUAL REPORTS.
   The chief of police shall make a monthly report of the affairs and
transactions of the police department to the City Council, and shall annually
at the close of the fiscal year, make a detailed report to the City Council of
the transactions and affairs of the police department.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2212 repealed; new Sec. 26-2212 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2213.   ESTIMATED BUDGET.
   The chief of police shall make an estimate of the financial requirements of
the police department for the coming fiscal year and file said estimate with
the city director of finance according to the budget calendar.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2213 repealed; new Sec. 26-2213 enacted; 06/20/23)
DIVISION 3. PERSONNEL
SEC. 26-2300.   APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the police department, except the chief of police, and the
promotion of such officers and members of the department shall be in accordance
with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-29 (Illinois
Municipal Code.). In accordance with such provisions, the city administrator
and the City Council shall retain the power and authority to appoint and remove
the chief of police.
   (b)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude shall be considered for appointment as a member of
the Moline Police Department.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2300 repealed; new Sec. 26-2300 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2301.   AGE OF PROSPECTIVE APPOINTEES.
   Prospective police officers shall be twenty-one (21) years of age or older
at the time of their original appointment.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2301 repealed; new Sec. 26-2301 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2302.   OATH OF OFFICE.
   The chief of police and all police officers, including special police
officers shall, before entering upon their duties, take and subscribe to the
oath provided by law.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2302 repealed; new Sec. 26-2302 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2303.   PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS.
   At the time of offer of appointment to the police department, a police
officer candidate shall pass a complete physical examination to be given by a
physician selected by the board of fire and police commissioners. A report of
the physician's findings shall be on a standard form provided by the board of
fire and police commissioners. The physician's examination fee shall be paid
for by the City.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2303 repealed; new Sec. 26-2303 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2304.   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   Newly hired police officers shall serve a probationary period during which
there shall be no responsibility on the part of the City for continued
employment of the newly hired police officers. Termination of employment during
the probationary period is not subject to challenge by newly hired police
officers. Probationary periods for newly hired police officers and for
promotional ranks shall be determined in the following order:
   (1)   Pursuant to any applicable collective bargaining agreement;
   (2)   Pursuant to the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners;
   (3)   Pursuant to police department policy.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2304 repealed; new Sec. 26-2304 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2305.   SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Salaries of all members of the police department shall be established
from time to time by the City Council.
   (b)   Police officers who are required to appear in court or before the
coroner during their off-duty time shall be compensated in accordance with the
then current Memorandum of Understanding.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2305 repealed; new Sec. 26-2305 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2306.   MILITARY LEAVE.
   (a)   Any member of the police department who is inducted into the armed
forces of the United States for training or service, shall, upon written
application to the board of fire and police commissioners, be granted a leave
of absence without pay for the duration of the time required for such purposes,
and for a period of ninety calendar days following the period of actual
service. Upon termination of the service, the police officer shall have the
right to be reemployed, if said officer makes application for reemployment
within the ninety days. One voluntary enlistment shall be considered the same
as induction for the purpose of this section, but reenlistment shall not.
   (b)   Police officers who are members of regular reserve components of the
armed forces, or the National Guard, may be granted two weeks leave each year
for active duty. Upon presentation of the proper evidence, the difference in
pay between the employee's regular pay and the military pay will be allowed.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2306 repealed; new Sec. 26-2306 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2307.   SPECIAL LEAVE.
   (a)   Police officers absent because of official City business, special
education, or training, upon authorization of the City Council, shall receive
regular pay during the period. It is further provided that the City Council may
authorize that all necessary expenses be paid by the City.
   (b)   A leave of absence, without pay, may be authorized for a period not to
exceed thirty days when the granting of such leave is in the mutual interests
of the City and the employee. The leave shall require approval of the chief of
police and the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2307 repealed; new Sec. 26-2307 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2308.   EMPLOYEES' ORGANIZATION; DUES.
   (a)   Police officers, as employees, may fully and freely associate
themselves in organizations of their own choosing for their mutual benefit, as
provided and allowed under state and federal law. No police officer shall be
required to join any such organization as a condition of employment or
continuation thereof and the right of a police officer, with or without such an
organization, to petition the city administrator and the City Council, as
provided and allowed under state and federal law, is hereby recognized. Police
officers shall have the right to organize and designate representatives of
their own choosing from among themselves for the purpose of negotiation and the
right of such representatives to meet with the city administrator and the City
Council is hereby recognized.
   (b)   Upon the majority of police officers of the City joining an
organization for negotiation or representation, each police officer belonging
to the organization may authorize the director of finance to deduct or check
off from said officer's paycheck the amount of the membership dues as may be
established from time to time by the organization in accordance with the
constitution and bylaws of the said organization. The request must be made in
writing on the approved "authorization for checkoff of dues" form. If any
police officer desires to revoke said authorization, said officer shall so
notify the director of finance in writing at least thirty days prior to the
date said officer wishes to revoke the authorization.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2308 repealed; new Sec. 26-2308 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2309.   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
   Police officers shall have the right to negotiate with the city
administrator and the City Council without representation if the police
officers see fit to do so. Such negotiation shall be conducted at a designated
time and place as is agreed upon by the police officers and their
representatives, and the city administrator and the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2309 repealed; new Sec. 26-2309 enacted; 06/20/23)
 
SEC. 26-2310.   RESIGNATION.
   To resign in good standing, a police officer shall submit a resignation in
writing one calendar month in advance of the effective date of such
resignation.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2310 repealed; new Sec. 26-2310 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2311.   SUPERANNUATION.
   Police officers shall retire from City duty on the first day of the calendar
month next following their sixty-fifth (65) birthday.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2311 repealed; new Sec. 26-2311 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2312.   PENSION.
   The pension of police officers shall be according to the laws of the state
and the United States.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2312 repealed; new Sec. 26-2312 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2313.   TERMINAL PAY.
   Police officers who leave the service of the City for any reason shall
receive all pay which may be due them with the following qualifications:
   (1)   Police officers shall be paid for all unused accrued vacation provided
that the chief of police is notified by the police officer of such leaving one
month in advance, or a sufficient reason is given for the absence of such
notice.
   (2)   A police officer who owes any money to the City at the time of said
officer's separation shall have said officer's final pay applied against the
account in whatever amount may be needed to satisfy it and shall be given a
receipt for the amount credited. Partial settlement of an account by
application of final pay shall not release a police officer from any balance
remaining due.
   (3)   In case of the death of a police officer, such officer's estate shall
be paid for accrued vacation and regular pay then accrued.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2313 repealed; new Sec. 26-2313 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2314.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following are hereby established and adopted as regulations of the
police department, which shall be in addition to, and not in exclusion of, all
other regulations now or hereafter established by the chief of police, or
adopted by the laws of the state or by this Code or other ordinances of this
City, for governing or regulating the conduct of the members of the police
department:
   (1)   Outside employment is generally incompatible to full-time public
service. No police officer shall engage in any outside employment which will
impair the performance of such officer's duties or be detrimental to such
officer's municipal service. At all times, said officer must be prepared to act
immediately on notice that said officer's services are required.
   (2)   While on duty or in uniform, all members of the police force are
strictly prohibited from discussing politics, from engaging in gossip with
citizens, from attending any political convention as a delegate, from
distributing literature at any election, from connecting said officer directly
or in any way with a society, club, committee or organization of any kind the
object of which is political advancement of a party, clique or individual, from
interfering with the exercise of the elective franchise of any citizen, and
from taking any part whatever in political matters otherwise than to exercise
the right of suffrage.
   (3)   No police officer of any rank shall loiter in or patronize any
gambling house or disorderly house at any time. No police officer shall loiter
in or patronize any tavern during such officer's "on-duty" hours; however, any
officer may enter any tavern, gambling house or disorderly house in the
discharge of such officer's duties.
   (4)   Any officer or member of the police force shall be subject to
reprimand, suspension from duty, or dismissal, according to the nature and
aggravation of the offense, for any of the following causes, or the willful
violation of any rule or order, general, special or oral, or any regulation
governing the department:
      a.   Intoxication.
      b.   Drinking intoxicating liquors while on duty.
      c.   Asleep while on duty.
      d.   Insubordination.
      e.   Disobeying orders.
      f.   Disrespect to superior officers.
      g.   Unnecessary violence to prisoners.
      h.   Immorality.
      i.   Incompetency.
      j.   Inefficiency in service.
      k.   Neglect or inattention to duty.
      l.    Laziness and lounging on post.
      m.   Disorderly conduct.
      n.   Conduct unbecoming an officer.
      o.   Violation of any criminal law.
      p.   Using coarse or insolent language to a superior officer, or to a
member of the police force, or to a citizen.
      q.   Willful maltreatment of a prisoner or a citizen.
      r.   Neglect to wear uniform and equipment according to regulations.
      s.   Neglect to appear clean and tidy at all times.
      t.   Neglecting or refusing to pay just debts within reasonable time.
      u.   Negligent handling or improper use of City property.
      v.   Reckless or wanton mishandling of a police vehicle or any police
department equipment.
   (5)   No member of the police department shall directly or indirectly be
involved in making any compromise or arrangement between criminals and persons
who have suffered by their acts, with a view of permitting the criminal to
escape the penalties provided by law, and any member who has any knowledge of
any violation of this rule and fails to give information thereof to the chief
of police shall be subject to dismissal.
   (6)   Members of the police force must keep themselves informed concerning
the provisions of this Code and other City ordinances and the criminal laws of
the state which they are required to enforce and whenever they are without
information or in doubt as to their duty in any particular, or under unusual
circumstances, they shall apply to their superior officer for instructions.
   (7)   The hours of regular on-duty service shall be specified by the chief
of police. Each member must give sufficient notice of said member's inability
to report for duty as specified. Any police officer detailed or working in the
place of any other member shall be governed by the rules relating to the
position of the member in whose place such member is working. No police officer
shall leave said member's post, or exchange beats or position or be absent from
duty without permission of said member's superior officer or the chief of
police.
   (8)   Every member of the police department shall, unless otherwise engaged
or excused, attend roll call every day. Members having their day off or on
furlough are excused from attendance. The roll call of members of the police
department shall be held every day at the beginning of each shift.
   (9)   All members of the police department while on leave of absence, on
vacation, or off duty, will be held accountable for their conduct, and no
member shall accept a special detail when off duty, on vacation or on leave of
absence without first obtaining the permission of the chief of police.
   (10)   No police officer shall grant special consideration, treatment, or
advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen
or group. Police officers shall at all times conscientiously and faithfully
perform their duties. They shall be tactful, patient and courteous in answering
all calls, requests, and inquiries.
   (11)   No member of the police department shall make a false official
report, or make a false statement or gossip about a member or members of the
police department, either concerning personal character or conduct, or the
business of the police department to the discredit or detriment of any such
member or members of the police department.
   (12)   Acceptance or solicitation of property or money.
      a.   Members and employees of the police department shall not under any
circumstances, solicit any gift, gratuity, loan or fee where there is any
direct or indirect connection between the solicitation and their departmental
membership or employment.
      b.   Members and employees of the police department shall not accept
either directly or indirectly any gift, gratuity, loan, fee or any other thing
of value arising from or offered because of police employment or any activity
connected with said employment; or which might tend to cast an adverse
reflection on the police department or any member or employee thereof. No
member or employee of the police department shall receive any gift or gratuity
from other members or employees junior in rank without the express permission
of the chief of police.
   (13)   Members of the police department shall not communicate information to
any person which may enable such person to escape arrest, or secure or remove
stolen or embezzled goods or other property or money, or give information of
any kind in relation to police matters, and members shall not communicate to
other members without permission, any information or orders which have been
issued by superior officers.
   (14)   All requests, complaints, or grievances of members of the police
department must first be presented to the chief of police for the chief's
decision or action. In case such decision or action of the chief of police is
not considered by the person making such request to be right and just, appeal
may be had by such person from such decision or action to the board of fire and
police commissioners, by notifying the president or secretary thereof in
writing of such an appeal.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2314 repealed; new Sec. 26-2314 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2315.   COMPLAINTS AGAINST MEMBERS BY THE PUBLIC.
   Any citizen of the City shall have the right to make charges of any
violation by a member of the police department of the provisions of this Code
or other City ordinances, rules and regulations governing the police
department, if the complaint is reduced to writing by the complainant and
signed by said complainant, and filed with the chief of police or the secretary
of the board of fire and police commissioners.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2315 repealed; new Sec. 26-2315 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2316.   SERVICE OF CIVIL PROCESS AND OTHER ACTIVITIES INTERFERING WITH
DUTIES.
   No member of the police department shall serve any civil process or engage
in any business or do any service that will interfere with the member's duties
as a police officer.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2316 repealed; new Sec. 26-2316 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2317.   WORKDAY.
   The workday of the members of the police department shall be divided into
three eight- hour shifts. The designation of the hours of such shifts and the
assignment of members of the police department to such shifts shall be under
the supervision of the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2317 repealed; new Sec. 26-2317 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2318.   UNIFORMS.
   (a)   Each police officer shall wear an appropriate uniform or a badge of
office.
   (b)   The chief of police shall appoint and regulate the style and quality
of the uniforms to be worn by all members of the police department in
accordance with subsection (a). All uniforms shall be alike in style and cut,
material used, and in color, to the extent possible consistent with the purpose
of the uniform or each component thereof.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03)
   (c)   All members of the police department, while on duty, shall keep
themselves neatly dressed and clean.
   (d)   A uniform allowance will be paid to each police officer, the amount of
which will be set annually by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2318 repealed; new Sec. 26-2318 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2319.   INSIGNIA OF RANK.
   The insignia of rank for the officers of the police department shall be as
follows:
   (1)   For the chief of police, 4 gold stars on each side of the collar of
the garment.
   (2)   For deputy chiefs, 3 gold stars on each side of the collar of the
garment.
   (3)   For lieutenants, one gold bar, identical to those worn in the armed
forces of the United States, on each side of the collar of the garment.
   (4)   For sergeants, three blue chevrons on each sleeve of the garment.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2319 repealed; new Sec. 26-2319 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2320.   BADGES.
   The official badge of authority worn by each member of the police department
shall be furnished by the City, and no other device shall be worn as a badge of
authority. A badge shall not be changed, transferred or exchanged, except by
order of the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2320 repealed; new Sec. 26-2320 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2321.   WEAPONS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.
   Each member of the police department shall be armed while on duty with a
firearm of the pattern and caliber approved by the chief of police. All members
of the police department shall take good care of the weapons and other property
furnished them by the City, or in their possession as members of the police
department, and all members will be held responsible for any property furnished
to them by the City, and they shall reimburse the City for the loss of any such
property.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2321 repealed; new Sec. 26-2321 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2322.   RETURN OF BADGE AND EQUIPMENT UPON TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Upon the termination of the office or employment of a member of the police
department, any badge, weapon or other property belonging to the City shall be
returned to the chief of police in as good condition as received, ordinary wear
and use expected.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2322 repealed; new Sec. 26-2322 enacted; 06/20/23)
SEC. 26-2323.   SPECIAL POLICE.
   (a)   Special police officers may be appointed to assist the police
department from time to time upon authorization and resolution of the City
Council.
   (b)   Special police officers shall not be members of the regular police
department and shall not possess conservator of the peace powers as defined in
Section 3.1-15-25 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25).
   (c)   Special police officers will serve and act at the direction and
control of the chief of police and may perform such duties, other than
conservators of the peace, as specified by the chief of police.
   (d)   Special police officers may carry firearms while on duty only when
authorized by the chief of police.
   (e)   All special police officers shall successfully complete the 40-Hour
Mandatory Firearms Training Course before being permitted to carry a firearm,
as specified in Section 3.1-30-20 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
3.1-30-20). Upon completion of the course of training, the chief of police
shall file a certificate attesting to the special police officer's successful
completion of the required 40-Hour Mandatory Firearms Training Course.
   (f)   Special police officers shall receive no compensation for services
rendered.
   (g)   Special police officers may wear uniforms as specified by the chief of
police. Uniforms and identification symbols worn by special police officers
must be different and distinct from those worn by regular police officers.
(Ord. No. 3020-2023; Sec. 26-2323 repealed; new Sec. 26-2323 enacted; 06/20/23)
CHAPTER 27
PURCHASING
   Art. I.   General Provisions
      Div. 1.   Purpose and Application, §27-1100 - §27-1103
      Div. 2.   Definitions, §27-1200 - §27-1201
      Div. 3.   Public Access to Procurement Information, §27-1300
   Art. II.   Purchasing Responsibilities of City Officers and Employees, §27-
2100 - §27-2105
   Art. III.   Source Selection and Contract Information
      Div. 1.   Methods of Source Selection, §27-3100 - §27-3110
      Div. 2.   Rights and Responsibilities, §27-3200 - §27-3203
      Div. 3.   Types of Contracts and Contract Administration, §27-3300 - §27-
3306
   Art. IV.   Specifications, §27-4100 - §27-4104
   Art. V.   Procurement of Construction, Architect, Engineer, and Land
Surveying Services
      Div. 1.   Bid Security and Performance Bonds, §27-5100 - §27-5103
      Div. 2.   Architect, Engineer and Land Surveying Services, §27-5200 -
§27-5201
   Art. VI.   Debarment or Suspension, §27-6100 - §27-6102
   Art. VII.   Appeals and Remedies, §27-7100
   Art. VIII.    Cooperative Purchasing, §27-8100 - §27-8106
   Art. IX.   General Rules and Regulations, §27-9100 - 27-9102
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
DIVISION 1. PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
SEC. 27-1100.   TITLE.
   This chapter, along with any policies adopted pursuant thereto, shall be
known as the "Moline Purchasing Code."
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-1101.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the City, to maximize
the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards
for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-1102.   APPLICATION.
   (a)   This Code applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies,
services, and construction, entered into by the City after the effective date
of this ordinance, unless the parties agree to its application to contracts
entered into prior to the effective date. It shall apply to every expenditure
of public funds by any City department for public purchasing irrespective of
the source of the funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of
federal or state assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be
conducted in accordance with any mandatory applicable federal or state laws and
regulations. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent any City department from
complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or request that is
otherwise consistent with law. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's
home rule powers and, where inconsistent, shall supersede any state
requirements unless otherwise specified herein.
   (b)   Violation of any part of this
Chapter 27 shall be deemed an ordinance violation punishable as set forth in
Section
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-1103.   FILING OF PURCHASING POLICY; PUBLIC ACCESS; FEES.
   The policy adopted and amended pursuant to Sec.
27-2101 shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be
available for public review at any time. Members of the public or interested
vendors of the City may obtain a copy of said Policy by payment to the city
clerk of an appropriate fee; said fee to be identical to that allowed for
public records pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1103 amended; 07/18/23)
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS
SEC. 27-1200.   GENERAL.
   Terms not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Sec.
1-1101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances or, if no definition is contained
therein, in the American Bar Association's Model Procurement Code for State and
Local Governments, 2000 Edition and the Model Procurement Regulations, 2002
Edition.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1200 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-1201.   DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   Architect, Engineer and Land Surveying Services. Those professional
services within the scope of practice of architecture, professional
engineering, or land surveying as defined by Section 5 of the Illinois
Architecture Practice Act, Section 4 of the Professional Engineering Practice
Act, and Section 5 of the Illinois Professional Land Surveyor Act,
respectively.
   (2)   Change Order. A written order signed and issued by the appropriate
purchasing official of the City or designee, unilaterally directing the
contractor to make changes which the "changes" clause of the contract or
purchase order authorizes the City to order without the consent of the
contractor.
   (3)   Competitive Sealed Bidding. The process whereby the City accepts
sealed bids after issuing public notice in accordance with the terms of this
Chapter.
   (4)   Competitive Sealed Proposal. The process whereby the City accepts
sealed proposals after issuing public notice in accordance with the terms of
this Chapter.
   (5)   Confidential Information. Any information which is available to an
employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the City and
is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.
   (6)   Construction. The process of building, altering, repairing, improving,
or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements
of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine
operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures,
buildings, or real property, or the addition thereto of equipment.
   (7)   Contract. All types of City agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.
   (8)   Cooperative Purchasing. Means procurement conducted by, or on behalf
of, more than one Public Procurement Unit, or by a Public Procurement Unit with
an External Procurement Activity.
   (9)   Cost Analysis. The evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving
at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be
paid, and costs to be reimbursed.
   (10)   Cost Data. Factual information concerning the cost of labor,
material, overhead, and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred
or which have actually been incurred by the contractor in performing the
contract.
   (11)   Cost-Reimbursement Contract. A contract under which a contractor is
reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the
contract terms and provisions of this chapter, and a fee or profit, if any.
   (12)   Designated Professional Services – Professional Services as defined
hereinafter, excluding architect, engineering, and land surveying services.
   (13)   Emergency Procurement. Purchases of supplies, services, construction
or other work necessitated by a probable, imminent or continuing threat to the
property of the City or the public health, safety, welfare or property of the
City, its residents, workers, or visitors.
   (14)   Invitation for Bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids.
   (15)   Price Analysis. The evaluation of price data, without analysis of the
separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in
arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed.
   (16)   Pricing Data. Factual information concerning prices for items
substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer
to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices, and current
selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and
subcontract prices.
   (17)   Procurement. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise
acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all
functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or
construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation
of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   (18)   Professional Services. Services within the scope of a particular area
of practice; such as the practice of accounting, architecture, landscape
architecture, land surveying, law (inclusive of bond counsel services),
financial services including without limitation financial advisors,
accountants, banking services, credit rating agencies, and auditing services;
professional engineering, real estate appraising, safety and security risk
assessment, computer and data assessment and services, physicians, attorneys,
and dentists or other such areas of expertise as defined by State law.
   (19)   Public Agency. A public entity subject to or created by the City,
(e.g. a City department).
   (20)   Public Procurement Unit. Means either a Local Public Procurement
Unit, a State Public Procurement Unit or an External Procurement Activity. A
Local Public Procurement Unit means any county, city, town, and any other
subdivision of the state or public agency of any such subdivision, public
authority, educational, health, or other institution, and to the extent
provided by law, any other entity which expends public funds for the
procurement of supplies, services and construction, and any nonprofit
corporation operating a charitable hospital. An External Procurement Activity
means any buying organization not located in this state which, if located in
this state, would qualify as a Public Procurement Unit. An agency of the United
States is an External Procurement Activity.
   (21)   Public Works. Shall have the meaning ascribed in 820 ILCS 130/2, as
interpreted by the Illinois Department of Labor.
   (22)   Purchasing Official. Shall mean that person designated by ordinance,
or the city administrator, to procure a particular supply, service, product,
item, or construction. For differing procurement, the official designated may
be a different person.
   (23)   Qualified Products List. An approved list of supplies, services, or
construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to
competitive solicitation, the City has determined will meet the applicable
specification requirements.
   (24)   Request for Proposals. All documents, whether attached or
incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.
   (25)   Responsible Bidder or Offeror. A person who has the capability in all
respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity,
perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities,
equipment, and credit which will assure good faith performance.
   (26)   Responsive Bidder. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in
all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids.
   (27)   Services. The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor,
not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which
are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
   (28)   Specification. Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item
for delivery.
   (29)   State Public Procurement Unit. Means the Office of the Chief
Procurement Officer and any other Purchasing Agency of this State.
   (30)   Supplies. All property, including, but not limited to, equipment,
materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or
a permanent interest in land.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1201 amended; 07/18/23)
DIVISION 3. PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION
SEC. 27-1300.   PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION.
   Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in
the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.) and 720 ILCS 5/
33E-1 et seq., and shall be available to the public as provided in such
statutes.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-1300 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE II. PURCHASING RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SEC. 27-2100.   RESPONSIBILITIES.
   In accordance with this chapter, and subject to the supervision of the city
administrator, the appropriate purchasing official or his or her designee shall
procure or supervise the procurement of the supplies, services, or
construction, as assigned by ordinance or the city administrator, and shall
establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract
administration, and inspection and acceptance, within the particular department
of each such appropriate purchasing official, all of which programs shall
comply with the Moline Purchasing Code.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-2101.   RULES AND OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES.
   Consistent with this chapter, and with the approval of the City Council, by
special ordinance, the city administrator may adopt operations procedures and
other policies relating to the execution of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-2102.   DELEGATIONS TO OTHER OFFICIALS.
   (a)   Unless and until disapproved by the City Council on a case-by-case
basis, the city administrator may delegate authority to purchase supplies,
services, or construction items to other officials or employees, if such
delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items.
   (b)   Procurement authority for all construction, construction or demolition
of Public Works; architect, engineer and land surveying services; and other
professional services such as land appraisal contracts for roads, bridges,
sidewalks, storm drains, and other projects funded by Motor Fuel Tax funds;
Illinois or U. S. Department of Transportation grants, funds, or contracts; or
special assessments is hereby delegated to the Director of Engineering or said
Director of Engineering’s designee with the approval of the city administrator.
   (c)   Procurement authority for all legal services; legal representation or
assistance; and other professional legal services is hereby delegated to the
law director and as necessary to comply with Sec. 2-3203(e) of the Moline Code
of Ordinances with the approval of the city administrator.
   (d)   Procurement authority for intergovernmental purchases shall be
assisted by the city administrator and other officials as provided by the
intergovernmental agreement providing for said intergovernmental purchases.
   (e)   Procurement authority for all financial services is hereby delegated
to the Finance Director or said Director’s designee with the approval of the
City Administrator.
   (f)   Procurement authority related to the construction, operation or
maintenance of sanitary or storm sewer facilities and appurtenances, and of all
water treatment facilities and appurtenances is hereby delegated to the
Director of Utilities or said Director of Utilities’ designee with the approval
of the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-2103. AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT.
   (a)   Purchases or leases of any supply, service, product, equipment, item,
or construction of whatever nature, whose estimated costs do not exceed $5,000,
may be made by any supervisory-level employee of the department needing such
item pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
   (b)   Purchases or leases of any supply, service, product, equipment, item,
or construction of whatever nature, whose estimated costs range from $5,001 to
$15,000, may be made by the director of the relevant department pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter, unless the procurement authority therefor is
delegated to a particular person(s) by Section
27-2102.
   (c)   Purchases or leases of any supply, service, product, equipment, item,
or construction of whatever nature, whose estimated costs range from $15,001 to
$25,000, may be made by the director of the relevant department with the
advance approval of the City Administrator.
   (d)   Purchases or leases of any supply, service, product, equipment, item,
or construction greater than $25,000 up to $100,000 shall be made or awarded in
accordance with this Chapter by the City Administrator and Finance Director
jointly or, for projects within the scope of Section
27-2102(b), the Director of Engineering and Finance Director, or, for projects
within the scope of Section
27-2102(f), the Director of Utilities and Finance Director, shall jointly award
contracts in the amount of $25,001 up to $100,000. All contracts in excess of
$100,000 shall be awarded by the City Council.
   (e)   No purchase shall be made unless an appropriation therefor has been
made by the City Council. The cost of the purchases by the City shall not
exceed the appropriation ordinance for the relevant fiscal year.
   (f)   Prior to the issuance of any purchase order, contract, change order or
contract modification, the Finance Director or his or her designee shall
certify that sufficient budgeted funds are available.
   (g)   Whenever any official or employee of the City purchases or contracts
for any supplies, services, products, equipment, items, or construction beyond
the scope of his or her authority or otherwise contrary to the provisions of
this Chapter or the rules and regulations made pursuant to this Chapter, such
order or contract shall be void and of no effect unless ratified by an official
with proper authority based on the expenditure level. Such ratifications shall
be promptly reported to the City Administrator.
   (h)   Each officer or employee of the City who shall make a purchase on the
credit of the City in any manner other than is authorized by ordinance shall be
liable for the amount of such purchase(s) personally and on his or her bond.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2103 added; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-2104. SMALL PURCHASE PROCEDURES.
   All purchases not exceeding $25,000 shall be made in accordance with this
Section.
   (a)   Purchases Equal to or Less than $2,499.99. Purchases at this level do
not require informal quotes unless specifically requested by the employee’s
Supervisor, Department Director, City Administrator or the City Council.
   (b)   Purchases $2,500.00-$4,999.99. Purchaser must obtain three (3)
informal quotes. Quotations do not need to be solicited by public
advertisement, but may be solicited by either oral or written invitation and
may be tendered orally or in writing. If fewer than three (3) informal
quotations are received, the Supervisor or his or her designee shall prepare a
written explanation that no additional quotations were obtained despite
reasonable efforts to do so and explain the efforts undertaken to obtain quotes
from at least three sources. Award may be made notwithstanding the limited
number of responsive quotations. Upon approval by the Supervisor, the award is
made to the lowest responsible quote meeting the specifications, delivery date,
and other required terms and conditions of purchase.
   (c)   Purchases $5,000.00-$14,999.99. Purchaser must obtain three (3)
informal quotes. Bids do not need to be solicited by public advertisement, but
should be solicited by oral or written invitation that makes express reference
(as appropriate) to the Prevailing Wage Act and other legal requirements.
Quotations shall be in writing. If fewer than three (3) informal quotations are
received, the Department Director or his or her designee shall prepare a
written explanation that no additional quotations were obtained despite
reasonable efforts to do so and explain the efforts undertaken to obtain quotes
from at least three sources. Award may be made notwithstanding the limited
number of responsive quotations. Upon approval by the Department Director, the
award is made to the lowest responsible quote meeting the specifications,
delivery date, and other required terms and conditions of purchase.
   (d)   Purchases $15,000.00-$24,999.99. Purchaser must obtain three (3)
informal quotes. Bids do not need to be solicited by public advertisement, but
should be solicited by written invitation that makes express reference (as
appropriate) to the Prevailing Wage Act and other legal requirements.
Quotations shall be in writing. If fewer than three (3) informal quotations are
received, the Supervisor or his or her designee shall prepare a written
explanation that no additional quotations were obtained despite reasonable
efforts to do so and explain the efforts undertaken to obtain quotes from at
least three sources. Award may be made notwithstanding the limited number of
responsive quotations. Upon approval by the Department Director with the
advance approval of the City Administrator, the award is made to the lowest
responsible quote meeting the specifications, delivery date, and other required
terms and conditions of purchase.
   (e)   Exceptions to Subsections (b), (c) and (d), requiring (3) informal
quotes include purchases of Professional Services, sole suppliers, emergency
procurement, and those instances where the City Council has found that the
nature of the goods or services are such that factors other than the proposed
pricing should receive consideration.
   (f)   Purchases $15,000.00-$24,999.99. Purchaser must obtain three (3)
written quotes. Bids do not need to be solicited by public advertisement, but
should be solicited by written invitation that makes express reference (as
appropriate) to the Prevailing Wage Act and other legal requirements.
Quotations shall be in writing. Upon approval by the Department Director and
the City Administrator or Finance Director, the award is made to the lowest
responsible quote meeting the specifications, delivery date, and other required
terms and conditions of purchase.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2104 added; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-2105. PURCHASES EXCEEDING $25,000 BUT LESS THAN $100,000 NOT REQUIRING
COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.
   All purchases of supplies, services or equipment exceeding $25,000 other
than such purchases qualifying as Public Works requiring competitive sealed
bidding as provided in this Chapter shall require the purchaser to solicit a
minimum of five (5) written quotations following a public advertisement
providing reasonable notice. If fewer than five (5) written quotations are
received, one of the Purchasing Officials shall prepare a written explanation
that no additional quotations were obtained despite reasonable efforts to do so
and explain the efforts undertaken to obtain quotes from at least five sources.
Award may be made notwithstanding the limited number of responsive quotations.
Quotations shall be in writing. Upon joint approval by the City Administrator
and Finance Director, the award is made to the lowest responsible quote meeting
the specifications, delivery date, and other required terms and conditions of
purchase.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-2105 added; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE III. SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT INFORMATION
DIVISION 1. METHODS OF SOURCE SELECTION
SEC. 27-3100.   COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.
   (a)   Conditions for Use. All contracts of the City for Public Works or
other public improvements made by or on behalf of the City which is not to be
paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when
the expense is in excess of the greater of (i) twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) or (ii) such other minimum threshold as is established in Section
8-9-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-9-1) as amended from time to
time (the “Competitive Bid Threshold”), shall be awarded by competitive sealed
bidding, as provided for in the Moline Purchasing Code, unless waived by a vote
of two-thirds of all alderpersons then holding office or where the contract
pertains to the following subject matters (in which case no supermajority
competitive bidding waiver is necessary):
   1.   Competitive Sealed Proposals (Sec.
27-3101)
   2.   Sole Source Procurement (Sec.
27-3105)
   3.   Emergency Procurements (Sec.
27-3106)
   4.   Public Announcement and Selection Process (Sec.
27-5200)
   5.   Contracting for Designated Professional Services (Sec.
27-5201)
   6.   When the City's own employees perform the Public Works project or other
public improvement without an outside contractor, then such labor, even when
the cost thereof exceeds the Competitive Bid Threshold, shall be excluded from
competitive bidding requirements, provided that all material exceeding the
Competitive Bidding Threshold used in the construction of such Public Work or
other public improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder.
   7.   Any collective bargaining agreement or employment contracts to which
the City is a party.
   8.   Any purchase, sale or lease of real property to which the City is a
party.
   9.   Contracts entered into pursuant to economic development agreements.
   10.   Contracts for supplies, equipment or services not related to Public
Works or public improvements.
   11.   Contracts with or purchases from the federal government or any agency
thereof.
   12.   Purchases made pursuant to any joint purchasing program sponsored by
the state or other governmental agency or association.
   (b)   Invitation for bids/public notice. An invitation for bids shall be
issued and shall include specifications and all contractual terms and
conditions applicable to the procurement. All notices of request for bids shall
be given to the appropriate purchasing official prior to publication. Adequate
public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time, not
less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set forth therein, for the
opening of bids. Such notice may, but need not, include publication in a
newspaper of general circulation and posting on the City’s official website and
shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. The purchasing official
or his or her designee may additionally advertise for bids in recognized trade
journals. Tabulations are required for all purchases over $24,999.99 and must
be prepared by the appropriate purchasing official.
   (c)   Bid evaluation, recommendation and acceptance.
   (1)   Bids shall be unconditionally received without alteration or
correction, except as authorized in the Moline Purchasing Code. Bids shall be
evaluated based on the requirements set forth in Moline Code of Ordinances and
in the invitation for bids, which may include additional criteria to determine
acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery,
availability of support services, compatibility with existing systems and
equipment of the City, and suitability for a particular purpose. The City may
also research and consider all publicly available information about the Bidder
that is relevant to the published criteria. The criteria may also include
information about cost, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or
life cycle costs. Telegraphic, electronic mail, facsimile, or other similar
forms of bid submitted shall not be accepted unless specifically permitted by
the terms of the invitation for bid. Only bids signed by a person authorized to
sign a bid will be accepted. All bids and formal contracts shall be approved as
to form by Corporate Counsel. Any bidder who provides false information in
their bid shall be disqualified from receiving any work from the City for one
(1) year, starting on the date the false information is discovered.
   (2)   For any project for the construction or demolition of any Public
Works, where the contract sum equals or exceeds $75,000, the City shall require
all of the following criteria to determine the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder, unless an exception is granted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the City Council. Therefore, each bidder shall certify or otherwise supply
information concerning all of the following:
   a.   Corporate standing and authority to transact business within the State
of Illinois, including but not limited to current registration with the
Illinois Department of Revenue, and the Illinois Department of Employment
Security.
   b.   Evidence of compliance with:
   i.   Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social Security Number
(for individuals).
   ii.   "Equal Opportunity Employer" and Sexual Harassment Policy and Training
requirements and provisions.
   c.   Evidence of insurance coverage, including (but not limited to): general
liability, workers' compensation, automobile, hazardous occupation, pollution,
product liability and professional liability.
   d.   Participation in apprenticeship and training programs applicable to the
work to be performed on the project which are approved and registered with the
United States Department of Labor's Office of Apprenticeship and Training (the
City may require evidence, including a copy of all applicable apprenticeship
standards and agreements for any apprentice(s) who will perform work on the
public works project).
   e.   Compliance with all the provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those
trades as covered in the Act.
   f.   Disclosure of the names and address of each subcontractor from whom the
contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of this
project.
   g.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse.
Bidder shall also certify that only workers that are enrolled and tested in
company-based controlled substance and alcohol testing programs will be allowed
to participate on the project.
   h.   Statements as to past performances, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all work projects completed in the last three (3) years by
the contractor.
   i.   The contractor and officers of the contractor disclose any tax lien or
delinquency and any lien, determination or judgment concerning the contractor’s
failure to pay benefits in the last five (5) years.
   j.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on the
project have completed a 10-hour or greater OSHA safety program within the last
five (5) years. Only workers that have satisfactorily completed a 10-hour or
greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate on the project. The
bidder must have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the City may
request the bidder provide copies of employees' OSHA cards; failure to produce
an employee's OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder is not a
responsible bidder.
   k.   Bidder shall commit to employ local workers with strong consideration
given to bidders employing residents of the City of Moline and/or the State of
Illinois or explain in writing why such a commitment is not feasible or
practical.
   l.   Bidder provides written record of compliance with State of Illinois
Equal Employment Opportunity requirements for public works projects, including
the hiring of women and minority workers to perform the contracted work.
   m.   Any other factors which are relevant to the determination of a bidder's
ability to carry out the requirements of the project in accordance with what
may be expected or demanded under the terms of the contract. Where required by
State law or the terms of a grant, the ability of the bidder to fulfill MBE/
WBE/DBE/VBE requirements may apply.
   (3)   For any project for the construction or demolition of any Public
Works, where the contract sum equals or exceeds $500,000, the City shall have
the contract bid and constructed under the terms of the Illowa Construction
Labor and Management Council’s IMPACT Agreement, unless an exception is granted
by two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council.
   a.   The terms of the IMPACT Agreement are fully incorporated herein.
   b.   All contractors performing work under an IMPACT Agreement that falls
within the job classifications of the Illinois Department of Labor Prevailing
Wage Rate Determinations shall be signatory to the craft listed with such craft
classification.
   c.   All contractors must directly perform at least 51 percent of the
services identified in the invitation for bid. Subcontractors, affiliates and/
or subsidiaries shall not contribute to the minimum performance percentage
required.
   d.   All contractors acting as construction managers shall secure a bond for
the entire project up to $15 million.
   e.   Apprentice ratios shall be as provided in each respective craft’s local
labor agreement.
   (4)   The Director of Engineering is authorized to develop, on an annual
basis, a list of prequalified “responsible bidders” for the purpose of
soliciting bids and making a market for the contracts proposed to be let by the
City. Following the completion or termination of any contract let under this
section, the City Engineer assigned to the Project shall, together with the
Director of Public Works, evaluate the performance of the contractor and
prepare a written report to the Director of Engineering (that shall also be
available to City Council) and the Director of Engineering may consider that
report as a preliminary memorandum for the Director’s use in evaluating and
updating the list of pre-qualified responsible bidders accordingly. A
contractor that is not included on the list of pre-qualified bidders or removed
from the list of pre-qualified bidders may appeal the decision of the Director
of Engineering to the City Administrator for final determination.
   (5)   The Director of Engineering shall present all recommendations to
disqualify a contractor as “not responsible” for any project let under this
Section to the City Administrator who, after consulting with Corporate Counsel,
shall make the determination as to whether the bidder is a responsible bidder.
Any bidder that the City Administrator determines is not “responsible” may have
the right of appeal to the full City Council unless exigent circumstances
concerning the timing of the work to be performed that was the subject of the
bidding process make such an appeal impractical.
   (d)   Bid opening; receipt; procedure. The receipt and opening of all bids
shall follow the procedures set forth hereinbelow:
   (1)   All sealed bids shall be received by the City Clerk, as set forth in
the advertised invitation or notice.
   (2)   The appropriate purchasing official, accompanied by the City Clerk,
shall publicly open and read aloud all bids as published in the invitation for
bids.
   (3)   The appropriate purchasing official or City Clerk shall record the bid
information and maintain the bid file. At a minimum, the bid file shall include
the amount of each bid, the name of each bidder, bid documents, and such other
relevant information as the appropriate purchasing official directs, in
writing, to include. The bid documents shall be retained for at least seven (7)
years or as required by the State of Illinois (Local Records Unit). The bid
file and procurement information shall be open for public inspection as
provided in the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.) and 720 ILCS
5/33E-1 et seq. and subject to the terms, qualifications and exceptions of each
such act.
   (4)   The soliciting department shall provide such information, as deemed
necessary by the department director, to the purchasing official, City
Administrator and/or Finance Director, Committee-of-the-Whole of the City
Council vested with authority to award the contract in accordance with the
terms of this Chapter.
   (5)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to contracts awarded
by methods other than competitive sealed bidding, which are referenced in
Section 27-3100(a); provided, however, such referenced methods may not be used
solely as a means to avoid compliance herewith.
   (e)   Award.
   i.   The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate
written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets
the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids unless all
bids are rejected.
   ii.   The City Administrator and Finance Director or, for projects within
the scope of Section
27-2102(b), the Director of Engineering and Finance Director, or, for projects
within the scope of Section
27-2102(f), the Director of Utilities and Finance Director, shall jointly award
contracts in the amount of $25,001 up to $100,000. All contracts in excess of
$100,000 shall be awarded by the City Council.
   iii.   In the event the lowest responsible and responsive bid for a
construction project exceeds available funds, as certified by the finance
director, and such bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent
(5%), the city administrator or designee is authorized, when time or economic
considerations preclude solicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate
an adjustment of the bid price with the lowest responsible and responsive
bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. Any such
negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating independent
deductive items specified in the invitation for bids.
   (f)   Non-effective notice; procedures. When the public notice prescribed in
Section
27-3100(b) is non-effective, or has historically been non-effective in terms of
producing competitive bidding on public projects, or when it is believed such
notice will be non-effective because of an insufficient supply of local or
responding vendors, then the appropriate purchasing official may so find in
writing, stating the reasons therefore in detail. Upon making such written
finding, said appropriate purchasing official may, in addition to such required
public notice, and after diligent search for other vendors, directly solicit
all known vendors of the product, service or construction and provide such
solicitation to any member of the public, so long as such solicitation at all
times maximizes competition and is conducted in the best interests of the City
and fair, equitable, and competitive pricing.
   (g)   Award to other than lowest bidder. When the contract award is not
recommended to be given or is not given to the lowest responsive bidder, a
written statement of the reasons for such award recommendation shall be made by
the purchasing official.
   (h)   Waiver of defects. In awarding a contract pursuant to sealed
competitive bidding, the purchasing official or City Council may waive any
variation from the bid requirements or defect in a bid which does not
materially affect the competitive nature of the bid, is not in violation of any
ordinances, statute or law and does not prejudice the rights of the public. A
variance or defect does not materially affect the bid if the terms are clear
and unambiguous, the bid contains all essential elements of the contract, if
the amount or competitive nature of the bid is not affected and if the bidder
has not received an unfair advantage by virtue of the variance or defect. In
considering any waiver, the purchasing official or City Council shall make such
determination in a manner as to fairly and reasonably accomplish such purpose
with sole reference to the public interest.
   (i)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. Correction
or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be
permitted by the City where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening
may be modified or withdrawn by written, telegraphic, electronic mail, or
facsimile notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids
prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids
shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder can show by clear and
convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the
nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended; such corrections
shall only be made if they are in the best interests of the City. After bid
opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to
the interest of the City or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid
correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may, in the City's
discretion, be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
   (1)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the
intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
   (2)   The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the correction or
withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes,
shall be supported by a written determination made by the city administrator.
   (j)   Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to
prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on price, an
invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers
to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers
have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth
in the first solicitation.
   (k)   Tie bid. In the unlikely event that any bid, proposal, quotation, or
other offer are in all respects equal, then separate equal size sheets of paper
shall be placed in a hat, bearing the name of each separate identical bidder,
and the mayor shall draw one sheet of paper at the next City Council meeting.
The name of the bidder on such sheet as drawn by the mayor shall then be
awarded the contract.
(Ord. No. 3001-2021; Sec. 27-3100(c) repealed; Sec. 27-3100(c) enacted; 01/19/
21; Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3100 amended; 07/18/23; Ord. No. 3053-2023;
Sec. 27-3100(c) amended; 11/21/23)
SEC. 27-3101.   COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS.
   (a)   Conditions for use. Unless otherwise directed by the Moline Purchasing
Code, when competitive bidding is otherwise required pursuant to the terms of
Section
27-3100(a), but the appropriate purchasing official determines in writing that
the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the City, a contract may be entered into by use of the
competitive sealed proposal method.
The words "practicable" and "advantageous" are to be given ordinary dictionary
meanings. This section shall be interpreted broadly, so as to encourage
flexibility of the appropriate purchasing official in achieving the purposes
set forth in Sec.
27-1101.
   (b)   Request for Proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request
for proposals. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluation factors.
   (c)   Public Notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals
shall be given in the same manner as provided in Section
27-3100(b) (Competitive Sealed Bidding, Invitation for Bids/Public Notice);
provided that the minimum time shall be ten (10) calendar days unless the
appropriate purchasing official determines in writing that emergency conditions
dictate a shorter time period.
   (d)   Receipt of Proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit
disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to
competing offerors during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals
shall be prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of
modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the
item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection
only after contract award.
   (e)   Discussion with Responsible Offerors and Revisions to Proposals. As
provided in the request for proposals and in contrast with the City’s
competitive sealed bidding procedures, discussions may be conducted with
“responsible offerors” who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to
assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation
requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect
to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions
may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of
obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussion, there shall be no
disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived
from proposals submitted by competing offerors. For any project for the
construction or demolition of any “public works” as defined in 820 ILCS 130/2,
as interpreted by the Illinois Department of Labor, where the contract sum
equals or exceeds $75,000, the City shall consider the requirements of Section
27-3100(c) to determine the lowest “responsible offeror.” The City
Administrator and Finance Director or, for projects within the scope of Section
27-2102(b), the Director of Engineering and Finance Director, or, for projects
within the scope of Section
27-2102(f), the Director of Utilities and Finance Director shall jointly award
contracts in the amount of $25,001 up to $100,000. All contracts in excess of
$100,000 shall be awarded by the City Council.
   (f)   Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal
is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the City, and in the
City's best interest, taking into consideration price and the evaluation
factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria
shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain a detailed
description of the basis on which the award is made.
(Ord. No. 3001-2021; Sec. 27-3101(e) repealed; Sec. 27-3101(e) enacted; 01/19/
21; Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3102.   CANCELLATION OF INVITATIONS FOR BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.
   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may
be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in
part as may be specified in the solicitation or otherwise, when it is for good
cause or in the best interests of the City. The reasons therefor shall be made
part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state
that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be
rejected in whole or in part for good cause or when in the best interests of
the City as the City, in its sole and exclusive discretion, may determine.
Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited, or from whom
bids or proposals were received. The notice shall identify the solicitation,
explain the reason for cancellation and, where appropriate, explain that an
opportunity will be given to compete on any re-solicitation or any future
procurement of similar items. Reasons for rejection shall be provided upon
request by unsuccessful bidders or offerors.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3103.   CHANGE ORDERS; AUTHORITY AND LIMITATION.
   A.   The City shall be bound by and liable only for those change orders or
contract modifications authorized in accordance with Sections
27-3103 and
3104. A change order in a contract for supplies, equipment or services not
subject to competitive bidding under Section
27-3100 may be issued by the appropriate purchasing official in an amount up to
his/her/their authorized expenditure limit as set forth in this Chapter prior
to approval by the City Council; provided, however, that all the following
restrictions apply:
   i.   The change order is within budgeted amounts;
   ii.   The need for the product or service was not anticipated at the time of
award;
   iii.   The change order is in the best interest of the City; and
   iv.   The amount of the change order or contract modification does not
exceed the contract contingency amount, if any, established at the time of
awarding the original contract.
   B.   If the aggregate dollar amount of every contract modification, change
order, or contract price adjustment for a single project exceeds one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), such modification(s), change order(s) and
adjustment(s) shall be subject to prior approval by the City Council after
receiving a report from the purchasing official as to the effect of the
contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment on the total
project budget or the total contract budget.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in Sections
27-3103(A) or (B) or
27-3104(A) or (B), the City Council shall approve all change orders and
contract modifications.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3103 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3104.   CHANGE ORDERS; CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   A.   The City shall be bound by and liable only for those change orders or
contract modifications authorized in accordance with Sections 27-3103 and 3104
and in accordance with the Illinois Public Works Contract Change Order Act, 50
ILCS 525/1, et seq. When a contract for a Public Works project has been awarded
by competitive bidding pursuant to Sec.
27-3100, a change order may be issued by the appropriate purchasing official or
the city administrator prior to the approval by the City Council, said change
order not to exceed the amount of the purchasing official’s authorized
expenditure limit as set forth in this Chapter or, for change orders exceeding
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) up to a maximum of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000), the change order may be issued by the joint action
of the Director of Engineering and Finance Director, prior to the approval by
the City Council; provided, however, that all the following restrictions apply:
   (i)   The change order is within budgeted amounts;
   (ii)   The amount of the change order or contract modification does not
exceed the contract contingency amount, if any, established at the time of
awarding the original contract.
   (iii)   The need for products or services was not anticipated at the time of
award;
   (iv)   The need to accommodate unknown or unforeseen events occurring in the
field;
   (v)   That the City Council be informed of the change order in a timely
manner, but in no case later than the next applicable committee-of-the-whole
meeting;
   (vi)   That waiting for prior Council approval would delay the project;
   (vii)   The change order is in the best interest of the City; and
   (viii)   The change order does not exceed 50% of the original contract
price.
   B.   All change orders in excess of $100,000 shall be awarded by the City
Council. No change orders that would result in an increase in the original
contract amount of 50% or more shall be authorized. In such cases where the
change order would increase the original contract amount by 50% or more, the
portion of the contract subject to the change order must be competitively bid
in accordance with the original bidding procedures.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in Sections
27-3103(A) or (B) or 27-3104(A) or (B), the City Council shall approve all
change orders and contract modifications.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3104 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3105.   SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Chapter, a contract for (i)
Public Works or other public improvements made by or on behalf of the City
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or
special taxation, when the expense is in excess of the Competitive Bid
Threshold; (ii) a contract or purchase order for Public Works or other
improvements made by or on behalf of the City when the expense is less than the
Competitive Bid Threshold, and (iii) a contract or purchase order in any amount
for supplies, equipment, service or a construction item may be awarded without
competitive sealed bidding or any other form of competition when the
appropriate purchasing official determines in writing, subject to review and
approval of the city administrator, after conducting a good faith review of
available sources, that there is only one source for the Public Works project
or other public improvement or the required supply, equipment, service, or
construction item. The appropriate purchasing official or his or her designee
shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. A
record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and
shall list each contractor’s name, the amount and type of each contract, a
listing of the Public Works project or other public improvement or other item
(s) or service procured under each contract or purchase order, and the
identification number of each contract file. Final approval of such sole source
contract or purchase order shall be only by the City Council or such person(s)
as are vested with authority by this Chapter to bind the City to such contract
based on the amount of the expenditure.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3105 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3106.   EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the appropriate
purchasing official may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements
of supplies, services, construction or other work necessitated by a probable,
imminent or continuing threat to the property of the City or the public health,
safety, welfare or property of the City, its residents, workers, or visitors in
an amount up to $100,000; provided that such emergency procurements shall be
made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the
particular contractor shall be drafted by the appropriate purchasing official
and included in the contract file. For purchases less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the purchase order or purchase card transaction
may constitute the “contract file” required herein. As soon as practicable, a
record of each emergency procurement shall be made by the purchasing agent and
shall set forth the contractor’s name, the amount and type of the contract, a
listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, and the identification
number of the contract file. Notwithstanding provisions of this Chapter
reserving final approvals of expenditures exceeding $100,000 to the City
Council, Emergency Procurements exceeding $100,000 may be authorized by the
City Administrator and Finance Director or, for projects within the scope of
Section
27-2102(b), the Director of Engineering and Finance Director, or, for projects
within the scope of Section
27-2102(f), the Director of Utilities and Finance Director, shall jointly
approve such Emergency Procurement. The record of any Emergency Procurement
shall be reported to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3106 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3107.   COST OR PRICING DATA.
   (a)   Required Submissions Relating to the Award of Contracts. A prospective
contractor shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is expected to
exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and is to be awarded by
competitive sealed proposals pursuant to Sec.
27-3101 (Competitive Sealed Proposals), or by sole source procurement authority
pursuant to Sec.
27-3105 (Sole Source Procurement).
   (b)   Exception. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the
award of a contract is not required when:
   (1)   The contract price is based on adequate price competition;
   (2)   The contract price is based on established catalogue prices or market
prices;
   (3)   The contract price is set by law or regulation; or
   (4)   It is determined in writing by the appropriate purchasing official
that the requirements of Sec.
27-3108 (Cost or Price Analysis) may be waived, and the determination states
the reasons for such waiver.
   (c)   Required Submissions Relating to Change Orders or Contract
Modifications. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the
pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to
contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing
data was required in connection with the initial pricing of the contract, when
the change or modification involves aggregate increases or aggregate decreases
in costs plus applicable profits that are expected to exceed ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00).
   (d)   Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the
pricing of a change order or contract modification is not required when:
   (1)   Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing
data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or
   (2)   It is determined in writing by the appropriate purchasing official
that the requirements of Sec.
27-3107(c) (Cost or Pricing Data; Required Submissions Relating to Change
Orders or Contract Modifications) may be waived, and the determination states
the reasons for such waiver; or
   (3)   The City department or division submits a certification demonstrating
that the changes comply with 720 ILCS 5/33E-1 et seq.
   (e)   Certification Required. A contractor, actual or prospective, required
to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this rule, shall certify
that, to the best of its knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data
submitted was accurate, complete, and current as of a mutually specified date
prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the change order or
contract modification.
   (f)   Price Adjustment Provision Required. Any contract award, change order,
or contract modification under which the submission and certification of cost
or pricing data are required shall contain a provision stating that the price
to the City, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any
significant sums by which the City finds that such price was increased because
the contractor-furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete, or
not current as of the date agreed upon between the City and the contractor.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3107 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3108.   COST OR PRICE ANALYSIS.
   A cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted
prior to award of the contract other than one awarded under Sec.
27-3100 (Competitive Sealed Bidding) except as the City Council directs
otherwise, from time to time, by a written purchasing policy. A written record
of such cost analysis or price analysis, when required, shall be made a part of
the contract file.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3108 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3109.   BID AND PERFORMANCE BONDS ON SUPPLY OR SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   Bid and performance bonds or other security may be requested for supply
contracts or service contracts as the appropriate purchasing official deems
advisable to protect the City's interests. In such cases, the contractor or
vendor shall post a surety bond in the amount of the contract in order to
ensure full and faithful performance of the contract in accordance with its
terms and the payment for the material and labor, if any, used in such
completion. The bond shall be executed on a form provided by or otherwise
deemed acceptable as to form by the City.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3109 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3110.   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3110 repealed; 07/18/23)
DIVISION 2. RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
SEC. 27-3200.   CONTRACT RENEWALS; NON-COMPETITIVE.
   Contract renewals which are maintenance contracts or contracts of service,
which are not for Public Works in excess of the Competitive Bidding Threshold,
may be executed by City staff pursuant to the approval of the appropriate
purchasing official, City Council or such person(s) as are vested with
authority by this Chapter to bind the City to such contract renewal based on
the amount of the expenditure. In order for a renewal to proceed without any
competition, all of the following must apply:
   (a)   The written contract or other document is identical in all material
respects to that executed in prior years and is submitted, along with the
original agreement, to the law director for review and approval as to form;
   (b)   The amount has been approved in the City's annual budget process;
   (c)   The service subject to renewal is not a contract for new service but
only a renewal of existing service;
   (d)   The appropriate purchasing official has made a written determination
that the item is not subject to competitive bidding or solicitation of
competitive proposals and that such solicitation would not reduce or lessen the
price of said service;
   (e)   That all performance bonds and/or appropriate insurance, for the
particular contract or contract of service, if any is so required, is renewed
in the City's then prevailing amounts or requirements. Any contract executed in
accordance with this section, must be reviewed no less than bi-annually.
Provided that each of the foregoing requisites are satisfied, a contract may be
renewed or extended with the current vendor for a period of up to the lesser of
(x) five (5) years or (y) the term of the base agreement, in conjunction and in
accordance with Sections
27-3100 and
27-3300(b) of the Code. Conditions for extending those contracts include:
   i.   preparation and execution of documents memorializing renewal terms;
   ii.   an increase in price for the renewal term no greater than the lesser
of:
      a.    the increase of the most recently available Consumer Price Index
for all Urban Consumers (“CPI-U”) United States City Average for All Items as
determined and published by the Bureau of Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor 1982-84=100 (the “Index”), as compared with the price of
the final year of the base contract sought to be renewed. By way of
illustration, a base contract for services entered into for a July 2020 – June
2022 term may be renewed in accordance with this Section 27-3200 for up to two
years, with a price increase not to exceed the inflationary increase from the
most recently available Index over the Index associated with the July 2021 –
June 2022 period; or
      b.   3.0% increase over the price of the final year of the base contract
sought to be renewed; and
   iii.   no material change in governing law and/or labor agreement
requirements impacting the services or current vendor subject to renewal.
   Items falling into this category include, by way of illustration and without
limitation:
   * Intergovernmental training programs(s).
   * Printing or engraving of bonds.
   * Contracts for utility service (i.e. lights, water, heat, telephone).
   * Evidences of indebtedness.
   * Governmental & Intergovernmental purchasing arrangements.
   * Certain computer/information services contracts.
   * Insurance contracts.
   * Professional services.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3200 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3201.   RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS.
   (a)   Determination of Non-Responsibility. If a bidder or offeror who
otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a
written determination of non-responsibility setting forth the basis of the
finding shall be prepared by the appropriate purchasing official. Without
limitation, the unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply
information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be
grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to such bidder
or offeror. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the non-
responsible bidder or offeror. The final determination shall be made part of
the contract file and be made a public record.
   (b)   Right of Nondisclosure. Information furnished by a bidder or offeror
pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed by the City outside of the
office of the appropriate purchasing official or the law director, without
prior written consent by the bidder or offeror, except as otherwise required by
law.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3201 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3202.   RIGHT TO INSPECT PLANT.
   The City may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of
business, or work site of a contractor or subcontractor at any tier which is
pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the
City.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3202 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3203.   RIGHT TO AUDIT RECORDS.
   (a)   Audit of Cost or Pricing Data. The City may at reasonable times and
places, audit the books and records of any contractor who has submitted cost or
pricing data pursuant to Sec.
27-3107 (Cost or Pricing Data) to the extent that, in the City's judgment, such
books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing
data. Any person who receives a contract, change order, or contract
modification for which cost or pricing data is required, shall maintain such
books, documents, papers, and records that are pertinent to such cost or
pricing data for three years from the date of final payment under the contract.
   (b)   Contract Audit. The City shall be entitled to audit the books and
records of a contractor or a subcontractor at any tier under any negotiated
contract or subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent
that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the
performance of such contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be
maintained by the contractor for a period of three (3) years from the date of
final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of
three (3) years from the date of final payment under the subcontract.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3203 amended; 07/18/23)
DIVISION 3. TYPES OF CONTRACTS AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 27-3300.   TYPES OF CONTRACTS.
   (a)   General Authority. Subject to the limitations of this section any type
of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the
best interests of the City may be used; provided said contract is approved as
to form by the law director and provided that the use of a cost-plus-a-
percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be
used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely
to be less costly to the City than any other type or that it is impracticable
to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such
a contract.
   (b)   Multi-Term Contracts.
   (1)   Specified Period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for
supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in
the best interests of the City, provided the term of the contract and
conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation,
if any, and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of
contracting; provided further that no such contract shall exceed a period of
twenty years. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods
shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor.
   (2)   Determination Prior to Use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term
contract, it shall be determined in writing:
      a.   That estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are
reasonably firm and continuing; and
      b.   That such a contract will serve the best interests of the City by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in City
procurement.
   (3)   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, renewal of non-
competitive multi-term contracts shall be as provided in Section
27-3200.
   (4)   Cancellation Due to Unavailability of Funds in Succeeding Fiscal
Periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support
continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall
be canceled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of
any non-recurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the supplies
or services delivered under the contract unless otherwise agreed in such
contract. The cost of cancellation may be paid from any appropriations
available for such purposes.
   (c)   Multiple Source Contracting.
   (1)   General. A multiple source award is an award of an indefinite quantity
contract for one or more similar supplies or services to more than one bidder
or offeror. The obligation to order the City's actual requirements is limited
by the provision of Uniform Commercial Code Section
2-306(1) (810 ILCS 5/2-306-1).
   (2)   Limitations on Use. A multiple source award may be made when award to
two or more bidders or offerors for similar products is necessary for adequate
delivery, service, or product compatibility. Any multiple source award shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or the written
purchasing policy adopted from time to time by the City Council, as applicable.
Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the
City's needs without sacrifice of economy or service. Awards shall not be made
for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier
selection to allow for user preference unrelated to utility or economy, or
avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the
least number of suppliers necessary to meet the valid requirements.
   (3)   Contract and Solicitation Provisions. All eligible users of the
contract shall be named in the solicitation, and it shall be mandatory that the
actual requirements of such users that can be met under the contract be
obtained in accordance with the contract, provided that:
      a.   The City shall reserve the right to take bids separately if a
particular quantity requirement arises which exceeds its normal requirement or
an amount specified in the contract; and
      b.   The City shall reserve the right to take bids separately if the
appropriate purchasing official approves a finding that the supply or service
available under the contract will not meet a nonrecurring special need of the
City.
   (4)   Intent to Use. If a multiple source award is anticipated prior to
issuing a solicitation, the City shall reserve the right to make such an award
and the criteria for award shall be stated in the solicitation.
   (5)   Determination Required. The appropriate purchasing official shall make
a written determination setting forth the reasons for a multiple source award,
which shall be made a part of the procurement file.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3300 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3301.   REPORTING OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES.
   When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are
suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall
be transmitted to the state's attorney and the law director.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3301 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3302.   CITY PROCUREMENT RECORDS.
   (a)   Contract File. All determinations and other written records pertaining
to the solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained
for the City in a contract file by the appropriate purchasing official.
   (b)   Retention of Procurement Records. All procurement records shall be
retained and disposed of by the City in accordance with records retention
guidelines and schedules approved by the Illinois State Local Records
Commission.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3302 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3303.   CONTRACT CLAUSES AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Contract Clauses. All City contracts for supplies, services, and
construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities
and rights of the parties to the contract. The appropriate purchasing official,
or other City official specified in the written purchasing policy from time to
time adopted by the City Council, after consultation with the law director, may
issue clauses appropriate for supply, service, or construction contracts,
addressing among others the following subjects:
   (1)   The unilateral right of the City to order in writing changes in the
work within the scope of the contract;
   (2)   The unilateral right of the City to order in writing temporary
stopping of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of
the contract;
   (3)   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in contract
and actual quantities;
   (4)   Defective pricing;
   (5)   Liquidated damages;
   (6)   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;
   (7)   Termination of the contract for default;
   (8)   Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of
the City;
   (9)   Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the City; and
   (10)   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or
ordinarily encountered, except that a differing site conditions clause need not
be included in a contract;
   a.   When the contract is negotiated;
   b.   When the contractor provides the site or design; or
   c.   When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of
differing site conditions.
   (b)   Price Adjustments.
   (1)   Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses
required by subsection (1) of this section shall be computed in one or more of
the following ways:
   a.   By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the
pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
   b.   By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
   c.   By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such
clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon;
   d.   In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or
   e.   In the absence of agreement by the parties, by a unilateral
determination by the City of the costs attributable to the events or situations
under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee as computed by the City, as
accounted for in accordance with reference to costs principals and subject to
the provisions of the City's chapter concerning purchasing.
   (2)   A contractor shall be required to submit cost or pricing data if any
adjustment in contract price is subject to the provisions of Sec.
27-3107 (Cost or Pricing Data).
   (c)   Standard Clauses and Their Modification. The appropriate purchasing
official, after consultation with and permission from the law director, may
establish standard contract clauses for use in City contracts. If the
appropriate purchasing official establishes any standard clauses addressing the
subjects set forth in Sec.
27-3303(a), such clauses may be varied provided that any variations are
supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying
such variations, and provided that notice of any such material variation be
stated in the invitation for bids or request for proposals.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3303 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3304.   CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION.
   A contract administration system designed to insure that a contractor is
performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract was
awarded, and the terms and conditions of the contract, shall be maintained by
each department or division for whom the contract is being performed. This
provision shall be independent of any other requirement to maintain contracts
or copies thereof imposed elsewhere in the Moline Purchasing Code.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3304 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3305.   COST REIMBURSEMENT PROVISION.
   The City shall follow applicable federal rules and regulations or grant
conditions whenever federal funds are used in a procurement and cost
reimbursement principles are required by such rule, regulation, or grant
condition. The appropriate purchasing official shall establish and require
provisions relating to cost reimbursement contracts, and said provisions shall
be followed whenever a cost reimbursement contract is awarded pursuant to the
Moline Purchasing Code.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3305 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-3306.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTION OF METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACTING MANAGEMENT.
   The appropriate purchasing official shall have discretion to select the
appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular
project. In determining which method to use, the purchasing official shall
consider the City's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractors'
capabilities. In determining which method to use, the purchasing official shall
consider the City’s requirements, its resources and the capabilities of
potential contractors. The appropriate purchasing official shall execute, and
include in the contract file, a written statement setting forth the facts,
which led to the selection of a particular method of construction contracting
management for each project. Any final contract must be approved as to form by
the law director and, for such contracts in excess of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), must still be approved by the City Council and approved
as to form by the law director.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-3306 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE IV. SPECIFICATIONS
SEC. 27-4100.   QUALIFIED PRODUCTS LIST.
   The appropriate purchasing official may designate a qualified products list;
provided, the state or federal government has performed all necessary testing
on the products listed thereon, the state or federal government has included
said products on a qualified products list, and the appropriate purchasing
official has determined that the state or federal government's specifications
are sufficiently similar to City requirements to allow the use of the state or
federal government's qualified products list in a City procurement.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-4100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-4101.   BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION.
   (a)   Use. Brand name or equal specification may be used when the
appropriate purchasing official determines in writing that:
   (1)   No other design or performance specification or qualified products
list is available; or
   (2)   Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase
description, not including a brand name specification; or
   (3)   The nature of the product or the nature of the City's requirements
makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement;
or
   (4)   Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the City's best
interests.
   (b)   Designation of Several Brand Names. Brand names or equal
specifications shall seek to designate three, or as many different brands as
are practicable, as "or equal" references and shall further state that
substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for
award.
   (c)   Required Characteristics. Unless the appropriate purchasing official
determines in writing that the essential characteristics of the brand names
included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade,
brand names or equal specifications shall include a description of the
particular design, functional, or performance characteristics which are
required.
   (d)   Nonrestrictive Use of Brand Name or Equal Specification. Where a brand
name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall
contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of
describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics desired
and is not intended to limit or restrict competition.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-4101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-4102.   BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION.
   (a)   Use. Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product
competition, it may be used only when the appropriate purchasing official makes
a written determination that only the identified brand name item or items will
satisfy the City's need; such written determination shall be approved, in
writing, by the city administrator prior to procurement.
   (b)   Competition. The appropriate purchasing official shall seek to
identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be
obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price
competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the
procurement shall be made under Sec.
27-3105 (Sole Source Procurement).
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-4102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-4103.   LEGAL REQUIREMENTS.
If a procurement is funded in whole or part by federal or state funds, then the
specifications and general conditions or contract shall state all applicable
requirements of federal or state public policy including but not limited to,
and as applicable based on the funding source:
   (1)   Equal employment opportunity;
   (2)   Fair labor standards;
   (3)   Energy conservation;
   (4)   Prevailing wages;
   (5)   Environmental protection;
   (6)   Buy American or other labor or material preferences;
   (7)   Affirmative action and contract set asides;
   (8)   Wage, hour, and other contractor record keeping requirements;
   (9)   Patent, copyright, and other intellectual property ownership
protections; and
   (10)   Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women's business
enterprises on solicitation lists;
   (11)   Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women's business
enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;
   (12)   Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into smaller
tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and minority
businesses, and women's business enterprises;
   (13)   Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits, which
encourage participation by small and minority businesses and women's business
enterprises;
   (14)   Using the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such
organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Minority Business
Development Agency of the Department of Commerce;
   (15)   Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, to
take the affirmative steps listed in Section 27-4103(10) through (14); and
   (16)   Other similar socioeconomic programs.
In addition, the specifications and general conditions, or the contract, shall
state any mandatory legal requirements, including, without limitation, and as
applicable, compliance with the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Section 6002, as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
(Ord. No. 3030-2021; Sec. 27-4103 amended; 11/02/21; Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec.
27-4103 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-4104   NEIGHBORHOOD IMPACT
   (a)   The Director of Engineering shall, in the course of design for each
project involving the construction or demolition of a “public work” as defined
in 820 ILCS 130/2, determine whether the project will, during the course of
construction or demolition, have a significant impact on one or more businesses
or residential households that are adjacent or proximate to the project
location. For those projects that the Director of Engineering determines will
have such an impact, the Director of Engineering shall, prior to publishing the
plans and specifications to the market, host a meeting (which may be conducted
by electronic means) at which the design professionals for the project will
present the project and during which the neighboring properties (owners and
tenants) will have an opportunity to comment and raise concerns. The Director
of Engineering shall cause notice of the meeting to be given to the neighboring
properties by mail, signage and notice on the City website. The design
professionals shall, as reasonable, consider the concerns of the neighboring
properties when completing the plans and specifications to be presented to the
market. The meeting shall be held sufficiently in advance of issuing the bid to
allow concerns to be considered and the project documents amended prior to
bidding.
   (b)   For any project involving the construction or demolition of a “public
work” as defined in 820 ILCS 130/2 for which the Director of Engineering has
determined that the project will have a significant impact on one or more
businesses or residential households that are adjacent or proximate to the
project location, the specifications for the project shall require the
Contractor to host, prior to mobilization, a meeting (which may be conducted by
electronic means) with the neighboring properties at which the Contractor will
introduce its project management team and its points of contact for the
neighbors during the course of construction. Notice of the meeting shall be
given by mail, signage and notice on the City website.
(Ord. No. 3001-2101; Sec. 27-4104 enacted; 01/19/21; Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec.
27-4104 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE V. PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, ARCHITECT, ENGINEER, AND LAND SURVEYING
SERVICES
DIVISION 1. BID SECURITY AND PERFORMANCE BONDS
SEC. 27-5100.   BID SECURITY.
   (a)   Requirement for Bid Security. Bid security shall be required for all
competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts. Bid security may be
required, in the sole discretion of the purchasing official, for construction
contracts awarded by competitive sealed proposals or other methods. Bid
security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business
in the state, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form
satisfactory to the City. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least
five percent (5%) of the amount of the bid.
   (b)   Rejection of Bids for Noncompliance with Bid Security Requirements.
Noncompliance with bid security requirements shall require that the bid be
rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails to comply only in a non-
substantial manner with the security requirements.
   (c)   Withdrawal of Bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid
before award as set forth in Sec.
27-3100(g) (Competitive Sealed Bidding; Correction or Withdrawal of Bids;
Cancellation of Awards), no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid
security.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-5101.   ALTERNATE PROCEDURES.
   Nothing in this Article V shall prevent the City from following the
provisions of the Local Government Professional Services Selection Act (50 ILCS
510/1 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-5102.   CONTRACT PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS.
   (a)   When Required – Amounts. When a contract for construction or other
improvements to Public Works is awarded in excess of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the City
and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract:
   (1)   A performance bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner
satisfactory to the City, in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the price specified in the contract;
   (2)   A payment bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company
authorized to do business in the state or otherwise secured in a manner
satisfactory to the City, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and
materials to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the
work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract; and
   (3)   Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the requirement of a combined
performance and labor and material payment bond in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract.
   (b)   Reserved.
   (c)   Authority to Require Additional Bonds. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to limit the authority of the City to require a performance bond
or other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than
specified in subsection (a) of this section.
   (d)   Suits on Payment Bonds - Right to Institute. Unless otherwise
authorized by law, any person who has furnished labor or material to the
contractor or subcontractors for the work provided in the contract, for which a
payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has not been paid in full
within ninety (90) days from the date on which that person performed the last
of the labor or supplied the material, shall have the right to sue on the
payment bond for any amount unpaid at the time the suit is instituted and to
prosecute the action for the amount due that person. However, any person having
a contract with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no express or implied
contract with the contractor furnishing the payment bond, shall have a right of
action upon the payment bond upon giving written notice to the contractor
within ninety (90) days from the date on which that person performed the last
of the labor or supplied the material. That person shall state in the notice
the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was supplied
or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to
the contractor at any place the contractor maintains an office or conducts
business.
   (e)   Suits on Payment Bonds - Where and When Brought. Unless otherwise
authorized by law, every suit instituted upon a payment bond shall be brought
in a court of competent jurisdiction for the county or district in which the
construction contract was to be performed.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-5103.   COPIES OF BOND FORMS.
   Any person may request and obtain from the City a certified copy of a bond
upon payment of the cost of reproduction of the bond and postage, if any. A
certified copy of a bond shall be prima facie evidence of the contents,
execution, and delivery of the original.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5103 amended; 07/18/23)
DIVISION 2. ARCHITECT, ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES
SEC. 27-5200.   PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT AND SELECTION PROCESS.
   (a)   Public Announcement. Unless the City has a satisfactory relationship
with one or more firms providing such services, it is the policy of the City to
announce publicly all requirements for architect, engineer or land surveying
services when such services are expected to exceed $40,000, which shall be
increased annually by a percentage equal to the annual unadjusted percentage
increase, if any, as determined by the Index as defined in Section 27-3200(e)
(ii) (the “Architect, Engineer or Land Surveying Services RFQ Threshold”). When
such services are expected to exceed the Architect, Engineer or Land Surveying
Services RFQ Threshold, the City shall negotiate such contracts on the basis of
demonstrated competence and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In
the procurement of architect, engineer and land surveying services expected to
exceed the Architect, Engineer or Land Surveying Services RFQ Threshold, the
appropriate purchasing official shall request firms to submit a statement of
qualifications and performance data.
   (b)   Selection Process. An ad-hoc selection committee composed of three
members, including the director of public works or Director of Utilities,
Director of Engineering, and, if different, the director of the City department
in need of the architect, engineer or land surveying services (if such director
is either the director of public works or the director of engineering, then the
third member shall be a person to be appointed by the city administrator),
shall select no less than three (3) responding firms for interviews on the
basis of evaluative criteria set forth in the request for qualifications
(“RFQ”) regarding the proposed contract and the relative utility of alternative
methods of approach for furnishing the required services and shall select from
among them no less than three (3) of the firms deemed most qualified to provide
the required services. The selection shall be made in order of preference,
based on criteria established and detailed in the RFQ. There will be no public
opening and reading of responses received by the City pursuant to this request.
Fees will not be a consideration in the selection process.
   (c)   Negotiation. The appropriate purchasing official shall negotiate a
contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified for architect,
engineer or land surveying services at compensation which the purchasing
official determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the City and within
the project budget. In making this decision, the purchasing official shall take
into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the
professional nature of the services to be rendered. Should the purchasing
official be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm
considered to be the most qualified at a price the purchasing official
determines to be fair and reasonable to the City, negotiations with that firm
shall be formally terminated. The purchasing official shall then undertake
negotiations with the second most qualified firm. Failing accord with the
second most qualified firm, the purchasing official shall formally terminate
negotiations. The purchasing official shall then undertake negotiations with
the third most qualified firm. Should the purchasing official be unable to
negotiate a contract at a fair and reasonable price with any of the selected
firms, the selection committee shall select additional responding firms in
order of their competence and qualifications, and the purchasing official shall
continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is
reached. Contracts for architect, engineer or land surveying services up to
$25,000 may be awarded by the Director of Utilities or Director of Engineering
acting alone, while such contracts in amounts between $25,001 and $100,000
require the joint authorization of the director of engineering or director of
utilities and the Finance Director or the City Administrator, and contracts for
such services in excess of $100,000 shall be awarded only by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5200 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-5201.   CONTRACTING FOR DESIGNATED PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   (a)   Authority. For the purpose of procuring Designated Professional
Services, any department or division requiring such services may procure them
on its own behalf, in accordance with the selection procedures specified in the
Moline Purchasing Code (Sec.
27-5201(b)) and pursuant to written policies adopted from time to time by the
City Council. A department or division procuring such services shall consult
with the appropriate purchasing official. No contract for the services of legal
counsel may be awarded without the written consent and approval of the law
director.
   (b)   Selection Procedure.
   (1)   Conditions for use. Except as provided under Sec.
27-3105 (Sole Source Procurement) or Sec.
27-3106 (Emergency Procurements), the Designated Professional Services
designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be procured in accordance
with this subsection.
   (2)   Statement of Qualifications. Persons engaged in providing the
Designated Professional Services may submit statements of qualifications and
expressions of interest in providing such professional services. A department
or division using such professional services may specify a uniform format for
statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these statements at any time by
filing a new statement on an annual basis.
   (3)   Public Announcement and Form of Request for Proposals. Adequate notice
of the need for such services shall be given by the department or division
requiring the services through a request for proposals to those submitting an
annual statement of qualifications and, unless at least three (3) persons have
submitted an annual statement of qualifications and interest in a particular
type of work, or, unless the city administrator makes a written determination
that such procedure is impracticable in a particular circumstance, or, unless
governed by the purchasing policy adopted pursuant hereto, in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the City. The request for proposals shall
describe the services required, list the types of information and data required
of each offeror, and state the relative importance of particular
qualifications.
   (4)   Discussions. The director of a department or division procuring the
required professional services or a designee of such officer may conduct
discussions with any offeror who has submitted a proposal to determine such
offeror's qualifications for further consideration. Discussions shall not
disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by other offerors.
   (5)   Award. Award for contracts for Designated Professional Services up to
$25,000 shall be made to the offeror determined in writing by the director of
the department or division procuring the required professional services or a
designee of such officer to be best qualified based on the evaluation factors
set forth in the request for proposals, and negotiation of compensation
determined to be fair and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon
with the best qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated
with the selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more other
offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted with such
other offeror or offerors, in the order of their respective qualification
ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror then ranked best
qualified if the amount of compensation is determined to be fair and
reasonable. For Designated Professional Services contracts between $25,001 and
$100,000, such award shall be jointly made by the City Administrator and the
Finance Director, and contracts for such services in excess of $100,000 shall
be awarded only by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-5201 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE VI. DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION
SEC. 27-6100.   AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND.
   After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity
for that person to be heard, the appropriate purchasing official, after
consulting with the law director, is authorized to debar a person for cause
from consideration or award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period
of not more than three years unless otherwise provided by law. After
consultation with the law director, the appropriate purchasing official is
authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if
there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity
which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to
exceed three (3) months. The causes for debarment include:
   (1)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;
   (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a City contractor;
   (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of
the submission of bids or proposals;
   (4)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character
which is regarded by the appropriate purchasing official to be so serious as to
justify debarment action:
      a.   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with
the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
      b.   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided
that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the
control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment;
   (5)   Any other cause the appropriate purchasing official determines to be
so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a City contractor,
including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause; and
   (6)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in 720 ILCS 5/33E-
1 et seq.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-6100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-6101.   DECISION TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND/NOTICE.
   The appropriate purchasing official, after consultation with the law
director, shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision
shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or
suspended person involved of such person's rights concerning judicial or
administrative review. A copy of the decision required by this section shall be
mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-6101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-6102.   FINALITY OF DECISION.
   A decision under Section
27-6101 (Decision to Debar or Suspend/Notice) shall be final and conclusive,
unless fraudulent, or unless the debarred or suspended person within ten (10)
days after receipt of the decision takes an appeal to the City Council. If
unsatisfied after such an appeal, the debarred or suspended person may then
commence a timely action in court in accordance with applicable law, but in no
event after thirty-five (35) days has elapsed from the date of decision on
appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-6102 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE VII. APPEALS AND REMEDIES
SEC. 27-7100.   BID PROTESTS.
   (a)   Right to Protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a
contract may protest to the city administrator. Protestors are urged to seek
resolution of their complaints initially with the appropriate purchasing
official. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids or request for
proposals shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or the
closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know and should
not have known of the facts giving rise to such protest prior to bid opening or
the closing date for proposals. The protest shall be submitted within ten (10)
calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or should have known of the
facts giving rise thereto.
   (b)   Stay of Procurements During Protests. In the event of a timely protest
under subsection (a) of this section, the appropriate purchasing official shall
not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all
administrative and judicial remedies have been exhausted or until the city
administrator makes a determination on the record that the award of a contract
without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the City.
   (c)   Entitlement to Costs. In addition to any other relief, when a protest
is sustained and the protesting bidder or offeror should have been awarded the
contract under the solicitation, said protesting bidder or offeror shall
receive only bid preparation costs other than attorney's fees; in no event
shall attorney's fees be awarded hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-7100 amended; 07/18/23)
ARTICLE VIII. COOPERATIVE PURCHASING
SEC. 27-8100.   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AUTHORIZED.
   The City may either participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a
cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any supplies, services,
or construction with one or more Public Procurement Units or External
Procurement Activities in accordance with an agreement entered into between the
participants whenever such approach is deemed to be in the best interests of
the City in accordance by the appropriate purchasing official and where funds
for such a contract has been budgeted and appropriated by the City Council and
where such contract is entered into pursuant to and in accordance with the
Governmental Joint Purchasing Act, 30 ILCS 525/1, et seq. as now or hereinafter
amended or its federal equivalent when authorized by the U.S. General Services
Administration in accordance with its rules and regulations. Such cooperative
purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts
between Public Procurement Units and open-ended State Public Procurement Unit
contracts which are made available to Public Procurement Units. Such
cooperative purchasing shall be conducted pursuant to Article VIII.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8100 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8101.   SALE, ACQUISITION, OR USE OF SUPPLIES BY A PUBLIC PROCUREMENT
UNIT.
   The City may sell to, acquire from, or use any supplies belonging to another
Public Procurement Unit independent of the requirements of Article III (Source
Selection and Contract Formation) of this Code. Final approval of agreement or
purchase order shall be only by the City Council or such person(s) as are
vested with authority by this Chapter to bind the City to such contract based
on the amount of the expenditure.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8101 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8102.   COOPERATIVE USE OF SUPPLIES OR SERVICES.
   The City may enter into an agreement, independent of the requirements of
this Code, with any other Public Procurement Unit for the cooperative use of
supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties, so long
as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8102 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8103.   JOINT USE OF FACILITIES.
   The City may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of
warehousing facilities, capital equipment, and other facilities with another
Public Procurement Unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8103 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8104.   SUPPLY OF PERSONNEL, INFORMATION, AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   (a)   Supply of Personnel. The city administrator is authorized, in the
exercise of appropriate discretion, upon written request from another Public
Procurement Unit, to provide personnel to the requesting Public Procurement
Unit. The Public Procurement Unit making the request shall pay the Public
Procurement Unit providing the personnel the direct and indirect cost of
furnishing the personnel, in accordance with an agreement between the parties.
   (b)   Supply of Services. The informational, technical, and other services
of any Public Procurement Unit may be made available to any other Public
Procurement Unit upon the authorization of the city administrator, provided
that the requirements of the Public Procurement Unit tendering the services
shall have precedence over the requesting Public Procurement Unit. The
requesting Public Procurement Unit shall pay for the expenses of the services
so provided, in accordance with any agreement between the parties.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8104 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8105.   PUBLIC PROCUREMENT UNITS IN COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   Where the Public Procurement Unit administering a cooperative purchase
complies with the requirements of this Code, any Public Procurement Unit
participating in such a purchase shall be deemed to have complied with this
Code. Public Procurement Units may not enter into a cooperative purchasing
agreement for the purpose of circumventing this Code.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8105 amended; 07/18/23)
SEC. 27-8106.   CONTRACT CONTROVERSIES.
   Contract controversies arising under a cooperative purchasing agreement
shall be resolved in the manner specified in the intergovernmental purchase
agreement authorizing said purchasing or, if none is so specified, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code.
(Ord. No. 3029-2023; Sec. 27-8106 amended; 07/18/23)
CHAPTER 28
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   Art. I.   In General, §28-1100 - §28-1101
   Art. II.   Street Use
      Div. 1.   In General, §28-2100 - §28-2108
      Div. 2.   Street Cut, New Paving, §28-2200 - §28-2206
      Div. 3.   Permits, §28-2300 - §28-2305
      Div. 4.   Design and Construction Standards, §28-2400 - §28-2409
   Art. III.   Sidewalks
      Div. 1.   In General, §28-3100 - §28-3104
      Div. 2.   Construction, §28-3200 - §28-3202
   Art. IV.   Encroachments
      Div. 1.   In General, §28-4100 - §28-4102
      Div. 2.   Highway Projects, §28-4200 - §28-4204
      Div. 3.   Highway Authority Agreements, §28-4300 - §28-4302
   Art. V.   Numbering Buildings, §28-5100 - §28-5112
   Art. VI.   Interring of Utility Facilities, §28-6100 - §28-6104
   Art. VII.   Adopt-A-Street Program, §28-7100 - §28-7109
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 28-1100.   DUTIES OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (a)   The occupant of property abutting a public right-of-way or the owner
thereof if said property is vacant, or any person acting as the agent of
either, shall have the following duties in relation to said public right-of-
way:
   (1)   To remove within a reasonable time from the portion of any public
sidewalk abutting said property all snow and ice.
   (2)   To refrain from putting, pushing, blowing or otherwise depositing any
snow removed from a public sidewalk or private property upon any improved
public roadway.
   (3)   To refrain from allowing, causing, permitting or making any
accumulation of sand, gravel, soil, ashes, debris, or other matter to be
washed, blown, carried or deposited by the elements or otherwise from private
property to the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, catch basins and storm drains, and to remove any such matter
so washed, blown, carried or deposited onto said public right-of-way within a
reasonable time.
   (4)   To maintain the boulevard in accordance with the ordinances of the
City.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, "reasonable time" shall mean as follows:
   (1)   "Snow removal." Within twelve (12) hours after cessation of a snowfall
or, if a snowfall ceases in the nighttime hours, within twelve (12) hours after
sunrise.
   (2)   "Other material." Within twelve (12) hours after such matter has been
washed, blown, carried or deposited onto the public right-of-way or; if the
cause of said washing, blowing, carrying or depositing of such matters onto
public right-of-way is an ongoing activity such as excavation, construction or
transportation; within two (2) hours after the close of each workday,
providing, of course, that all necessary permits to carry on such activity have
been obtained and that all necessary precautions to protect the traveling
public have been employed.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, any accumulation of snow six (6) inches
or greater in depth constitutes prima facie evidence of a violation of
subsection (a)(1) above.
   (d)   The failure to comply with the requirements listed hereinabove shall
constitute a public nuisance.
SEC. 28-1101.   DISCHARGE OF WATER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   The occupant of property abutting a public right-of-way or the owner
thereof if said property is vacant, or any person acting as the agent of
either, shall not discharge water originating from sumps, sump pits, sump pumps
or other pumps or any reservoir serving as a drain or receptacle for water onto
any roadway surface or sidewalk when the daily low ambient temperature is
thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit or less or forecast by the National Weather
Service or related agency to be thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit or less.
   (b)   The failure to comply with the requirements listed hereinabove shall
constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord No. 94-11-1; new §28-1101 enacted 11/01/94; EFFECTIVE 07/01/95)
ARTICLE II. STREET USE
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 28-2100.   SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known, cited and referred to, as the "Street Use
Ordinance."
SEC. 28-2101.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Public place shall be construed to include any public park or public
parkway in the City.
   (2)   Public way shall be construed to include any public street, avenue,
boulevard, sidewalk, public utility easement on public property, alley, or any
intersection thereof, in the City.
   (3)   Street Use shall be construed as any use of a public place or public
way within the City.
SEC. 28-2102.   PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE.
   This article is adopted to:
   (1)   Protect the City from suits caused by negligence and other acts of
omissions.
   (2)   Prevent damage to streets, alleys and other property of the City.
   (3)   Prevent encroachments upon and obstructions thereof.
   (4)   Regulate the use of space in, on, over, or under such streets and
alleys.
   (5)   Regulate public utility easements on public property and other
property.
   (6)   Set standards for the use and work for such places.
   (7)   Require permits for such use and prescribe fees therefor.
SEC. 28-2103.   APPLICABILITY OF THIS ARTICLE TO THE CITY.
   The various departments of the City shall be exempted from this article as
it pertains to applications, permits and fees, but not to the standards of
replacement prescribed in this article.
SEC. 28-2104.   WHEN CONTINUING GUARANTY BOND IS REQUIRED FOR STREET USE.
   In the event of a street opening, sidewalk opening or other modifications of
any improved portion of the public ways by a public utility, the construction
must meet designed standards or restoration standards prescribed by this
article. If the public utility has a franchise agreement or other agreement
regulating and permitting Street Use, it shall be included as part of any such
agreement that all improvements, repairs and/or reconstruction be warranted for
a period of four (4) years after acceptance of such work by the City. In the
event that the public utility does not have such an agreement, said utility
shall provide a guaranty bond in the amount of the total cost of the
improvement or repair or, in lieu thereof, may execute a Street Use agreement
with the City and provide a blanket bond pursuant thereto.
SEC. 28-2105.   BARRICADES.
   (a)   The street use permit holder shall ensure that the street use occurs
with minimal inconvenience and minimal hazard to the public safety. The permit
holder shall provide, erect, and maintain all barricades and signs necessary to
protect the work and the public, in compliance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, subject to the amendments set forth in the Illinois
National Supplement to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. These
standards may be obtained from the Code Compliance Office. If the signing and
barricading at any street use is found by the city engineer to be inadequate
and the permit holder is unable or unwilling to correct the problem
immediately, the Municipal Services Division of the Public Works Department
will make the necessary corrections and all the costs for this work will be
charged to the permit holder.
   (b)   No street or alley may be closed without the written permission of the
city engineer. Fire hydrants, gutters, and storm inlets adjacent to the work
may not be obstructed without the written permission of the city engineer.
   (c)   No street or alley may be closed, barricades installed, or public way
encroached upon without first notifying the affected nearby businesses, homes,
and/or property owners. The affected parties shall be notified forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the beginning of the public way encroachment. The proposed
extent and method of notification shall be submitted in writing to the city
engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours before notification is to begin.
SEC. 28-2106.   OPENINGS ON PUBLIC WAYS TO BE PROTECTED.
   No person shall leave open, uncovered, unguarded, or in any unsafe
condition, any cellar door, hatchway, pit, vault, excavation or excavations,
upon or adjoining any sidewalk, street, alley or public place of the City.
SEC. 28-2107.   UNDERGROUND AREAS TO BE FILLED.
   All underground areas shall be sealed from any adjacent building and filled
with compacted sand when such area is no longer used or when the presence of
the underground area is detrimental to the safe use of the public way or public
place. Upon notification, this work shall be performed within fifteen (15) days
by a licensed, bonded contractor, under the supervision of, and to the
satisfaction of, the city engineer.
SEC. 28-2108.   DUMPSTERS.
   (a)   The owner of dumpsters and refuse containers shall enter into a
licensing agreement with the City prior to placing dumpsters and/or refuse
containers in the right-of-way. The licensing agreement shall:
   (1)   Serve as a blanket agreement which covers all dumpsters or refuse
containers placed in any right-of-way in the City;
   (2)   Be renewed annually through the building division for a fee of two-
hundred dollars ($200.00);
   (3)   Include an owner provided insurance certificate naming the City as an
additional insured, in the City’s usual and customary form, in amounts
determined sufficient by the loss control manager after consultation with the
city attorney.
   (b)   All dumpsters and refuse containers shall be placed on private
property whenever practicable. Where the private property does not allow space
for a dumpster or refuse container, it may be placed in the right-of-way
provided that the dumpster or refuse container:
   (1)   Does not block the flow of traffic in the public way;
   (2)   Is not placed within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
   (3)   Is not placed within fifteen (15) feet of a private driveway;
   (4)   Is not placed within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection;
   (5)   Is located in a legal parking area if placed on a street;
   (6)   Exhibits legible identification of the owner of the dumpster or refuse
container, including address, contact information, and a 24-hour contact
telephone number;
   (7)   Has sufficient reflective stripes and/or reflectors to identify the
dumpster or refuse container to motorists;
   (8)   Possesses a barricade with flashing lights at each street-side corner.
   (c)   Special circumstances will be addressed by the building official and/
or city engineer on a case-by-case basis.
   (d)   The owner of the dumpster or refuse container shall be responsible for
acquiring the licensing agreement and ensuring compliance with all applicable
sections of the code.
(Ord. No. 3009-2004; new Sec. 28-2108, entitled “DUMPSTERS” enacted; 02/10/04;
Ord. No. 3003-2019; Sec. 28-2108 repealed; new Sec. 28-2108 enacted; 03/05/19)
DIVISION 2. STREET CUT, NEW PAVING
SEC. 28-2200.   DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS TO MAKE CONNECTIONS PRIOR TO PERMANENT
IMPROVEMENTS; SPECIFICATIONS; SUPERVISION.
   Whenever the Council orders any street, alley, public ground or place
permanently improved by paving, it shall be the duty of the owners of the
property abutting thereon and adjacent there to make the connections from gas,
water, sewer, underground electric conduit or underground telephone cables to
the curb line of the abutting or adjacent property before the improvement is
made. The excavations, connections, and backfilling shall be made under the
direction of the city engineer; the work shall be done according to the
specifications of the Engineering Division.
SEC. 28-2201.   LOCATION OF CONNECTION; NUMBER REQUIRED.
   (a)   Connections required by this division shall be made for each sixty-six
(66) feet of frontage in the residence district and for each twenty-two (22)
feet of frontage in the business district, or as determined to be necessary for
future development by the Director of Planning and Development and the Director
of Public Works.
   (b)   Each separate building and piece of property shall have a separate
connection, except where there are two (2) adjacent buildings or where there is
any number of buildings not abutting upon a street where any gas, water, sewer,
underground electric conduit or underground telephone cables are located, are
connected by one common service, only a replacement of the common connections
being required.
SEC. 28-2202.   NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS; FILING OBJECTIONS; ACTION IF
OBJECTIONS OVERRULED.
   The Council shall cause notice to be given to the owners of property
abutting a proposed improvement subject to this division by publication of the
notice in two (2) issues of any newspaper published in the City and by mailing
the notice to the last known address of the owner of record of the property by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before
connections to underground utilities work is required to be done, notifying the
owners to make the connections or to show cause in writing why such connections
should not be made. At the expiration of the time fixed, the Council shall
consider all objections so filed and, if overruled, shall by resolution order
the making of such connections as it deems necessary.
SEC. 28-2203.   TIME WITHIN WHICH CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE.
   When the Council orders any street or place permanently improved, the
Council shall by resolution fix the time within which connections from gas,
water, sewer, underground electric conduit or underground telephone cable shall
be made to property abutting the improvement, which time shall not be less than
ten (10) days after the notice required by this division is given.
SEC. 28-2204.   CITY MAY MAKE CONNECTIONS UPON FAILURE OF PROPERTY OWNER TO
ACT; ASSESSMENT, COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   (1)   If the owners of the property on public ways or grounds subject to
this division fail to make the connections required by this division in the
manner and within the time fixed by the Council, the Council may cause the
connections to be made and assess the cost thereof against the property for
which they are made.
   (2)   An invoice will be sent to the owner of the property for the cost of
the connections, and if the invoice is not paid within ten (10) days of the
mailing of the invoice, the City shall certify the cost to the county auditor
as a special tax against the property for which the connections were made.
SEC. 28-2205.   MORATORIUM ON PAVING CUTS.
   No paving cuts shall be allowed on any street, alley, public ground or place
permanently improved by paving within four (4) years of date of opening of said
improvement to the public except as provided for in section 28-2206.
SEC. 28-2206.   EMERGENCY REPAIRS TO UTILITIES.
   Paving cuts shall be allowed at any time for emergency repairs to public
utilities by the City or its contractor, or to private utilities having a valid
franchise with the City by the respective utility company or its contractor
under the following conditions:
   (1)   Said repairs shall be of emergency nature only and shall not
constitute normal maintenance to the utility or extension thereof.
   (2)   Notice shall be served to the Public Works Department at the first
available opportunity during normal City working hours stating the location of
the cut, the nature of the emergency, and when said portion of the pavement
will be patched and open to traffic.
   (3)   Removal and replacement of pavement and traffic control for the
duration of closing shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of the
Code of Ordinances.
   (4)   No paving cut will be allowed if utility is within six (6) feet of the
back of the curb or edge of pavement.
DIVISION 3. PERMITS
SEC. 28-2300.   WHEN REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following
acts without first obtaining a permit therefore from the building division in
the manner provided in this division:
   (1)   Driveways . To construct or build any driveway or culvert over,
across, or upon any public way or sidewalk, or that enters or connects with any
public street.
   (2)   Excavations and other openings in the public way . To make any opening
in or cut in, or to remove any dirt or earth, or pavement, from any public way
or public place.
   (3)   Overhead structure or devices . To build, construct, erect, maintain
or replace any structure on or over any public way or public place.
   (4)   Underground devices . To place, replace or maintain any underground
transmission or conduction device, such as, electric or gas devices.
   (5)   Underground area . To construct, build, or use any space underneath
the surface of any public way or public place, or to construct or maintain any
structure thereunder.
   (6)   Sidewalks, etc . To construct, build, maintain, or replace a sidewalk,
crosswalk, steps or landing on any public way or public place.
   (7)   Other areas . To construct, build, establish, use, or occupy any space
or area in, on, or under any public way or public place.
      Failure to obtain proper street use permits or properly follow said
street use permit requirements shall result in a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), for a first offense, as against the adjacent property owner or
licensed contractor or other violator for each such occurrence. Any subsequent
offense shall result in a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any fine shall be due in
addition to the required permit fees.
      Article I of
Chapter 6 of this code and franchise, license, or other agreement fees,
conditions or requirements shall take precedent over requirements of this
division.
(Ord. No. 3040-2008; Sec. 28-2300 repealed; new Sec. 28-2300 enacted; 10/07/08;
Ord. No. 3003-2019; Sec. 28-2108 repealed; new Sec. 28-2108 enacted)
SEC. 28-2301.   APPLICATION.
   (a)   An application for a permit required by this division shall be
submitted to the building official and shall set forth:
   (1)   The nature or purpose of the permit applied for.
   (2)   The time when the street use or work will be commenced and completed,
or the duration of the use or occupancy of any public way or public place
described in the application.
   (3)   A plat or drawing showing the location and dimensions of the proposed
driveway, opening, device or structure, space or area.
   (4)   The signature of the applicant.
   (b)   An application for a permit required by this article shall be
accompanied by the fees and documents required by this division.
   (c)   The building official will approve or deny the application, or forward
it to the proper City official for approval. If a permit is denied, that
decision may be appealed to the city administrator. The form of such an appeal
should be in letter form addressed to the city administrator.
SEC. 28-2302.   BOND.
   (a)   The application for a permit required by this division shall be
accompanied by a bond executed by the applicant and the contractor, if any, in
a reasonable sum as determined by the Director of Public Works conditioned as
follows: That the applicant and the contractor, their heirs, successors and
assigns, will indemnify, save and keep harmless the City from any loss, cost
damage, expense, or liability of any kind whatever which the City may suffer,
or to which the City may be put, or which may be recovered from the City from
or on account of any act or thing done by virtue of the authority given in the
permit.
   (b)   In case the use of any space underneath the surface of any public way
or public place, or any structure thereunder is contemplated, the applicant
will maintain the public way, public place, or sidewalk over such space or
structure in a safe condition for the use of persons and vehicles passing over
and upon the same; and that such spaces so used shall be forever free and open
for the construction, repair and maintenance of all sewers, water pipes, gas
pipes, electric conduits or wires which may be authorized or directed by said
City, either above or below or through any part of the space, and provided
further that the applicant will remove the device or structure and will replace
or restore the public way or public place to a condition as required by the
city engineer's office for the safe passage of persons and vehicles thereon as
at the time of the removal.
(Ord. No. 3040-2008; Sec. 28-2302 repealed; new Sec. 28-2302 enacted; 10/07/08)
SEC. 28-2303.   FEES.
   (a)   One or more of the following fees shall be paid to the building
official at the time application is made for a permit required by this
division:
   (1)   DRIVEWAYS
      a.   The fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first fifteen
(15) feet measured at the property line and five dollars ($5.00) for each
additional foot; this fee is applicable to original construction as well as
widening or replacement. Widening shall be at five dollars ($5.00) for each
foot.
      b.   The fee shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the first fifteen
(15) feet, measured at the property line and five dollars ($5.00) for each
additional foot; this fee is applicable to original construction as well as
widening or replacement. Widening shall be at five dollars ($5.00) for each
foot.
   (2)   EXCAVATIONS AND OTHER OPENINGS IN THE PUBLIC WAY
      There shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each excavation
or other opening in the public way.
   (3)   DUMPSTERS / REFUSE CONTAINERS
      There shall be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a four (4) day
permit. After four (4) days, the fee shall increase to one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each additional 7 day period, or fraction thereof, the dumpster
is on the public way.
      It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to provide proof of
duration to the building official. All refuse container permits will be held in
strict accordance with Sec.
28-2105, “BARRICADES” and pursuant to Sec.
28-2305, “PERMITTEE TO HOLD CITY HARMLESS.”
   (4)   Reserved.
   (5)   Reserved.
   (6)   Reserved.
   (7)   SIDEWALKS
      The fee shall be as follows:
      a.   Residential, ten dollars ($10.00).
      b.   Nonresidential, ten dollars ($10.00).
      c.   Exempt : Any properties participating in the Tax Increment Financing
(TIF) Facade Improvement Program are exempted from paying the fee required
herein, although all right-of-way ordinance requirements and all other City
fees still apply.
      This fee is applicable to original construction as well as widening or
replacement.
   (b)   Additionally, the following fees shall be due and payable to the
accounts and finance director on the first day of January of each year in
advance; however, if any permit is granted during the last six (6) months of
any calendar year, one half (1/2) of the annual fee shall be paid for the
period to the first day of January next after the granting of said permit:
   (1)   SIGNS / STRUCTURES
      a.   In the event application is made for permission to erect or maintain
any structure on or in any street, sidewalk, or other public way or place, a
reasonable fee shall be charged for permission to erect the structure and for
the use of the space occupied thereby, as may be determined by resolution or
motion adopted or passed by the City Council at the time the permission is
considered.
      b.   When any sign is replaced during any calendar year for which the fee
or rental has been paid, no additional payment for a new permit shall be
required for said year unless said replacements shall be of such size as to
require payment of a fee in excess of the amount previously paid.
   (2)   TEMPORARY USE
   In the event application is made for temporary use of, on, or in any street,
sidewalk, or other public way or place not covered by this section, a
reasonable fee shall be charged for temporary use of the use of the space as
may be determined by resolution or motion adopted or passed by the City Council
at the time the permission is considered.
(Ord. No. 3019-2017; Sec. 28-2303(b)(1), “NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES,”
repealed; remaining subsections of 28-2303(b) consecutively renumbered; 10/10/
17)
SEC. 28-2304.   DURATION.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued pursuant to this division for any period
longer than six (6) months; and each permit shall be accompanied by the fees
and documents required by this division. Code Compliance shall have the
authority to approve the application.
   (b)   The person granted the permit shall perform the work with all possible
speed. From the time the Street Use begins, the permit holder shall have four
(4) business days to complete said permit holder's responsibilities and, if
required, turn the work area over to the City for restoration and/or
resurfacing, or have a franchised utility or licensed contractor replace the
improvement according to City specification. The permit shall always be in the
possession of the person in charge of the work allowed, or in the possession of
the individual working at the location so that the permit may be produced for
inspection at any time upon request by authorized City officials.
   (c)   Extensions for extraordinary purposes may be granted in the sole
discretion of the city engineer, but any such extension must be requested, in
writing, prior to the expiration of the original four (4) business day time
period.
(G.O. 3040-2008; Sec. 28-2304 repealed; new Sec. 28-2304 enacted; 10/07/08)
SEC. 28-2305.   PERMITTEE TO HOLD CITY HARMLESS.
   In all cases where any person shall perform any work or do any act subject
to this article, by virtue of or pursuant to any permit obtained from the City
Council in accordance with this article, such person, by making an application
for the permit and by the acceptance of the permit, acknowledges thereby that
said person will hold harmless the City from any and all damage or loss to
persons or property using the public streets and ways of the City related to or
arising out of any activity within the purview of this article.
DIVISION 4. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SEC. 28-2400.   CONFORMANCE WITH THIS DIVISION REQUIRED.
   All work done shall conform to the design and restoration standards
prescribed in this division. All work done pursuant to this section shall be
performed by a licensed, bonded contractor.
SEC. 28-2401.   SUPERVISION OF WORK IN GENERAL.
   The construction of any such driveway, an opening in any public way, the
construction or erection of overhead or underground devices or structures, the
use of any space above or underneath the surface of any public way or public
place, the construction of any structure thereunder, and the use of any other
area, shall be subject to the supervision of, and inspection by, the city
engineer.
SEC. 28-2402.   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   Standard specifications for improvement replacement shall be governed by
City standards which change from time to time and are maintained on file in the
Engineering Division. It shall be the affirmative duty of any permit holder to
investigate and ascertain such standards. Variance requests to deviate from the
City standards shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer.
SEC. 28-2403.   DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   For all driveways abutting or entering upon State right-of-way, the
Policy for Permits for Access Driveway of the State of Illinois shall apply.
   (b)   Except for those cases not covered by Sec.
28-2403 (a) or (c), curb cuts and/or driveways shall be limited to one such
curb cut or driveway per taxable parcel.
   (c)   A property owner may request relief from the limitation imposed by
Sec.
28-2403 (b) when, in the professional opinion of the city engineer, significant
evidence demonstrates special circumstances which would prevent a strict
application of such requirements without working an undue hardship upon the
property owner and where adequate protection to the public safety can otherwise
be provided. Criteria reviewed by the city engineer in determining whether to
grant such relief shall include, without limitation, the following:
   (1)   The impact of the proposed curb cut/driveway on public safety,
including without limitation, whether the curb cut creates an unnecessary
hazard to pedestrians or creates a traffic hazard;
   (2)   Whether there is vehicular access to a lot from an existing alleyway;
   (3)   Substantial impairment of reasonable access to an abutting public
street or utility;
   (4)   Lot size, topography, existing structures, or use of the property;
   (5)   Whether the requested curb cut would result in the loss of existing
on-street parking;
   (6)   The Average Daily Traffic (ADT) volume of the street;
   (7)   Proximity of the requested curb cut to an intersection or other high
volume use entrance/exit, with all distances conforming to the City’s Standard
Details for Construction, then in effect. A copy of said Standard Details shall
be available for public inspection in the office of the city engineer;
   (8)   How close the curb cut or driveway is to be located to the side
property line, with all distances conforming to the City’s Standard Details for
Construction, then in effect. A copy of said Standard Details shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the city engineer.
   (9)   Whether one way traffic is to be utilized on the curb cut street;
   (10)   Whether the objective for which relief is sought (i.e., a second
garage, handicapped accessibility) can e met using an existing curb cut;
   (11)   The length of property frontage on the street.
   (d)   Curb cuts or driveways may be ordered to be removed, relocated or
closed upon a finding by the city engineer that said curb cut or driveway
opening has been abandoned or is no longer required or used for purposes of
gaining access to property. Written notice of such finding shall be sent to the
owner of property abutting the curb cut or driveway opening and it shall be the
responsibility of said abutting owner to close, remove or relocate such curb
cut or driveway, at said owner’s sole cost and expense.
   (e)   Within the application form submitted for the relief specified in this
Sec.
28-2403, the property owner shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City
of Moline and its duly appointed officers, agents and employees against any
action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the
exercise of the relief.
(Ord. No. 2003-06-01; Sec. 28-2403 repealed; new Sec. 28-2403 enacted; 06/10/
03)
SEC. 28-2404.   PROHIBITED METHODS.
   (1)   Cuts of pavement shall be avoided whenever possible and tunneling/
boring procedures shall be used instead. Where paving cuts must be made, the
patch must bear upon one (1) foot of undisturbed subbase beyond the limits of
the excavation, and the minimum distance to a crack or joint shall be two (2)
feet.
   (2)   No excavation or opening shall be made in any improved or unimproved
street for the purpose of crossing said street for the installation of three
(3) inch or smaller water, gas or electric pipe; tubing or conduit shall
normally be bored, augured or driven under the roadbed of the street.
   (3)   Pavement cuts shall not be made in any street which has been paved
within the preceding four (4) years.
SEC. 28-2405.   RECONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Temporary repair . Each person obtaining a permit required by this
article for street use or excavations and other openings in the public way,
shall properly fill the opening with the proper materials described herein and
shall continue to maintain the fill flush with the adjacent surfaces until the
permanent repair is made. During this maintenance period, the permit holder
shall make any repairs within two (2) working days after notification by the
City. If the permit holder fails to make the necessary repairs within the two
(2) working day period, the City will make the repairs and charge the permit
holder for all the costs including any barricading and signing necessary to
protect the public. The city engineer shall approve the backfill material and
compaction methods. The type of repair shall be determined by the location of
the excavation/opening and shall be as follows:
   (1)   Openings in streets, alleys, sidewalks, driveways, and other paved
surfaces. The opening shall be filled with compacted IDOT gradation FA-6 sand
to an elevation twelve (12) inches below the top of the opening. The top twelve
(12) inches shall be replaced at the discretion of the city engineer with
either twelve (12) inches of IDOT gradation CA-6 aggregate or nine (9) inches
of IDOT gradation CA-6 and three (3) inches of bituminous material.  
   (2)   Openings within two (2) feet of streets, alleys, sidewalks, driveways
and other paved surfaces. The opening shall be filled with compacted with IDOT
gradation FA-6 sand to an elevation twelve (12) inches below the top of the
opening. The top twelve (12) inches shall be replaced with material similar in
kind to the type removed.
   (3)   Openings more than two (2) feet from paved surfaces. The opening shall
be backfilled with earthen material free from broken concrete, asphalt, large
rocks or other debris. All areas disturbed by the construction shall be
resodded or reseeded at the discretion of the city engineer. The permit holder
shall be responsible for the repaired area until the new growth is established.
   (4)   Permanent repair. Each person obtaining a permit required by this
article for Street Use or excavations and other openings in the public way
shall begin permanent repair procedures as soon as the area is available for
permanent repairs. Except when weather conditions prohibit proper repair
procedures, the delay shall be no more than seven (7) days. Only a licensed,
bonded contractor may make any permanent repair to any City street, except as
provided in Sec.
28-2104.
   (5)   Additional requirement. In addition to City standard specifications
for sidewalk and driveway requirements, the restoration of complete blocks of
sidewalk and driveway shall be required in all cases and the walk shall be cut
at the joints with a concrete saw.
   (6)   Brick Pavement. City staff will produce costs estimates for repairing
and/or replacing the brick pavement with both concrete pavement and brick
pavement. If the adjoining property owners agree to pay their proportionate
share of the increased cost of using brick instead of concrete, the street will
be replaced with brick in accordance with current City specifications. If not,
the City will proceed with the appropriate repairs at the City’s cost.
   (7)   Brick Pavement Specifications. Current standard specifications for the
restoration, improvement, or replacement of brick pavement and the location of
brick pavement governed by the requirements of this Code shall be maintained on
file in the public works department.
(Ord. No. 3013-2010; Sec. 28-2405(6) repealed; new Sec. 28-2405(6) enacted; 03/
23/10)
SEC. 28-2406.   INSPECTION REQUEST.
   The Street Use permit holder shall notify the Engineering Division twenty-
four (24) hours in advance of any work to be done in order that an inspection
may be scheduled.
SEC. 28-2407.   TIME FOR REJECTION OF WORK.
   The Street Use permit holder shall be responsible for the permanent repairs
for a period of four (4) years after the date the repair is completed. This
responsibility shall include all costs for reopening the street/excavation,
correcting the causing of the problem, and replacing the permanent repair.
Holder will be responsible even if inspected and accepted through oversight or
otherwise.
SEC. 28-2408.   REPLACING CURBS AND SIDEWALKS; ELIMINATING DEPRESSIONS IN
SIDEWALKS AND BOULEVARDS.
   (a)   Whenever undeveloped property is developed and curb cuts exist which
are unusable or which will not be used in connection with the property as
developed, the curb shall be replaced, and all depressions in the sidewalk or
boulevard shall be eliminated by the owner at the expense of the owner, and a
level sidewalk shall be installed by owner or occupant at said owner or
occupant's expense.
   (b)   Whenever developed property is redeveloped in such a way as to render
an existing driveway and/or a curb cut either unusable, obsolete, or not usable
for the purpose for which it was originally allowed, the owner or occupant of
the premises shall replace the curb and the sidewalk.
   (c)   When undeveloped property with existing curb cut and/or driveways
abuts or is adjacent to any planned street or alley improvement, the said curb
cuts and/or driveways shall be removed as part of the improvements. The curb
shall be replaced, all depressions in the sidewalk or boulevard shall be
eliminated, and a level sidewalk shall be installed as part of the improvement
at the property owner's expense.
SEC. 28-2409.   DRAINAGE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS.
   (a)   No design shall be approved and no permit issued that provides for the
point discharge of stormwater and other waters from private property onto or
upon a roadway surface or sidewalk and all such stormwater and other waters
shall be discharged into an underground storm drain, a ditch maintained as a
storm drain, or a ravine or other natural geological formation serving as a
natural water course.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter "discharged" and "discharged from private
property onto or upon a roadway surface or sidewalk" includes any discharge
which is discharged in such a manner that such discharge flows from private
property onto or upon other private property before coming onto or upon a
roadway surface or sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-04; Art. II. “STREET USE” repealed; new Art. II. “STREET USE”
enacted; 08/20/02)
ARTICLE III. SIDEWALKS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 28-3100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meaning
ascribed to it:
   (1)   Sidewalk hazard shall mean the vertical misalignment of adjacent
pieces or sections of sidewalk of one (1) inch or more.
SEC. 28-3101.   WATER NOT TO BE CONDUCTED TO SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or possessing any
building or structure situated upon the line of any street, avenue or public
building within the City, to fail to maintain and keep affixed thereon proper
and sufficient eave troughs, water conductors and spouts to prevent water from
falling or flowing from the building or structure to and upon the sidewalk
adjacent thereto.
SEC. 28-3102.   HOLES IN SIDEWALKS; LIABILITY.
   Any person making or causing to be made any hole in any sidewalk in the City
shall be held responsible to the City for any and all damages to persons or
property, in consequence of such hole, which the City shall suffer or be
adjudged to pay.
SEC. 28-3103.   REPORT OF DEFECTS IN SIDEWALKS; ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of city officers to report promptly to the Council all
defects in sidewalks or bridges, and in case of accident they shall report the
accidents to the city attorney, together with the name of any witnesses to such
accidents, if known to them.
SEC. 28-3104.   (REPEALED; RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)
(Ord. No. 3015-2018; Sec. 28-3104 “DUTY OF ABUTTING OWNER TO MAINTAIN”
repealed; reserved for future use; 4/17/18)
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION
SEC. 28-3200.   WHEN REQUIRED; ENGINEER'S GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY; TEMPORARY
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; VARIANCES.
   (a)   Concrete sidewalks, consistent with Section 35-4218, shall be
constructed along any public street right-of-way line which is also a boundary
of any lot upon which any principal building or principal use is established
after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
Such sidewalks shall be constructed and located under the direction of, and the
installation approved by, the public works department prior to occupancy or use
of the principal building or principal use. If a use is completed at a time of
year when sidewalk construction is not prudent, a temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued, provided that a cashier's or certified check made
payable to the City for the amount of the cost of the sidewalk construction, as
estimated by the city engineer, is deposited with the accounts and finance
officer. Such check will be cashed and the money deposited in the appropriate
City account. The money will be returned if the sidewalk is properly
constructed within one (1) year. If not, the money will be used to construct a
sidewalk by the City of Moline.
   (b)   When the owner of the property affected by this section can show that,
if strictly adhered to, this section would cause undue hardship because of
topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a variance can be
requested. The owner shall apply in writing for such variance.
   (c)   When a sidewalk variance is granted by the City Council, an agreement
shall be entered into between the City and the landowner. This variance
agreement shall be a covenant which shall run with the land whereby the City
may require the installation of the sidewalk at that location at some future
date. This agreement shall be filed with the Rock Island County Recorder of
Deeds and the landowner shall bear such costs and shall serve only as
notification and not affect merchantability of title. A copy of this agreement
shall be retained in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 3016-2018; Sec. 28-3200(a) repealed; Sec. 28-3200(a) enacted; 4/17/
18)
SEC. 28-3201.   ADHERENCE TO GRADE.
   (a)   All sidewalks built or constructed within the City by property owners
or lessees, where no special ordinance has been provided therefor, shall be
built and constructed upon a permanent grade of the street, when such grade has
been established, or upon a grade to be given by the city engineer when no
permanent street grade has been established, and shall be constructed so that
the outer edge of the walk is one-quarter (1/4) of an inch to the foot below
the inside edge of the walk or established grade. All sidewalks shall be built
to the grade as given.
   (b)   No part or portion of any sidewalk, where the grade has been
established, shall be laid or relaid at any different grade or any other level
than the adjacent portions of the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall be so altered
as to conform with the established grade, and unless the sidewalk shall be so
altered within five (5) days after notice from the Council, it shall be lawful
for the City to alter the sidewalk, and the cost and expense thereof may be
recovered from the abutting owner in an action in the name of the City.
SEC. 28-3202.   LOCATION WITH RESPECT TO PROPERTY LINE.
   All sidewalks built or constructed within the City by property owners or
lessees, where no special ordinance has been provided therefor, shall be built
and constructed so that the inner edge of the walk is not more than one (1)
foot from the property line, or on a line to be given by the city engineer when
it is impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as aforesaid.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-04; Art. III. “SIDEWALKS” repealed; new Art. III. “SIDEWALKS”
enacted; 08/20/02)
ARTICLE IV. ENCROACHMENTS
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 28-4100.   DISPLAY OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   No dealer in motor vehicles, either new or used, shall permit a vehicle or
any part thereof, to remain on or over a public sidewalk or the area of any
public street or alley within one (1) foot of such sidewalk longer than one (1)
hour.
SEC. 28-4101.   PLACING BUS BENCHES, OR VENDING MACHINES ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   No person shall install bus benches or vending machines on any public way
except upon special contract between the City and the person seeking to place
the bench or vending machine on the public way.
SEC. 28-4102.   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS TO ABATE ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the director of public works to abate any
encroachment upon any public way in the City, unless the encroachment is under
a permit or a special contract which allows the encroachment.
DIVISION 2. HIGHWAY PROJECTS
SEC. 28-4200.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   Construction easement area shall mean that area lying between the
project right-of-way limits and the platted street limits within which the
City, by concurrence in the establishment of the project right-of-way lines,
will permit the state to enter to perform all necessary construction
operations.
   (2)   Encroachmen t shall mean any building, fence, sign or any other
structure or object of any kind, with the exception of utilities, landscape
materials less than six inches (6") in height, and public road signs, which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project
right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has
been established.
   (3)   Permissible encroachment shall mean any existing awning, marquee,
advertising sign or similar overhanging structure supported from a building
immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there is a
sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free and
safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging
signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs supported from
poles constructed outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by
adjacent building.
   (4)   Project right-of-way is defined as those areas within the project
right-of-way lines established jointly by the City, state, and the United
States Bureau of Public Roads which will be free of encroachments.
   (5)   Roadway right-of-way shall mean those areas existing or acquired by
dedication or by fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by
temporary easement during the time the easement is in effect.
SEC. 28-4201.   ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to
retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment, except as provided in Section
28-4202, within the limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way
where no project right-of-way lines have been established.
SEC. 28-4202.   ENCROACHMENTS PERMITTED ON I-74.
   Revocable permits have been issued by the City for the temporary retention
of the following permissible encroachments on the project for the proposed
route for Interstate Highway Route 74 as follows:
   (1)   None.
SEC. 28-4203.   ENCROACHMENTS PERMITTED AT THE 16TH STREET OVERPASS.
   Revocable permits have been issued by the City for the temporary retention
of the following permissible encroachments on the grade separation project, FAU
Project M-5074, Section
77-00130-00-GS (16th Street Overpass) as follows:
   (1)   None.
SEC. 28-4204.   ESTABLISHMENT OF PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES.
   Project right-of-way lines have been established at the following locations:
   (1)   None.
(Ord. No. 2002-08-04; Art. IV “ENCROACHMENTS” repealed; new Art. IV
“ENCROACHMENTS” enacted; 08/20/02)
DIVISION 3. HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENTS
SEC. 28-4300.   APPLICATION.
   Any person, business or corporation requesting the City to enter into a
Highway Authority Agreement or other similar Agreement pursuant to 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 742.1020 in effect on the date of the adoption of this ordinance shall
make application to the City on a form created by the City for said purpose. At
a minimum, such form shall include the location for which the Agreement is
requested, the nature of the contamination present, believed present or
possibly present at the City, an acknowledgment of the applicant’s familiarity
with this ordinance and its terms and conditions, and such other information
deemed necessary by the city attorney and city engineer.
SEC. 28-4301.   REVIEW OF APPLICATION; PROCESS.
   a)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application pursuant to this
division and the fee specified therein, the city engineer shall promptly review
all items necessary to enter into a proposed Highway Authority Agreement,
including without limitation, the proposed agreement, any site plans submitted
by the applicant, any other materials submitted by the applicant as well as
perform a physical inspection of the site when deemed necessary by the city
engineer in his sole discretion.
   b)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application pursuant to this
division and the fee specified therein, the city attorney shall promptly review
all items necessary to enter into a proposed Highway Authority Agreement,
including without limitation, the proposed agreement and accompanying
attachments and shall approve said agreement as to form prior to submission to
the City Council.
   c)   Upon completion or discharge of the responsibilities hereinabove, the
city attorney shall promptly prepare the appropriate council bill and submit it
to the City Council to permit the Mayor and city clerk to execute the proposed
Highway Authority Agreement upon approval of the council bill by the City
Council.
SEC. 28-4302.   APPLICATION FEE.
   The application required in Sec.
28-4300 shall be accompanied by an application fee of $750.00 payable upon
submission of the application. Said fee shall cover all costs and expenses of
the City in fulfilling the responsibilities imposed pursuant to this division.
(Ord. No. 2003-09-03; new Art. IV, Division 3, “HIGHWAY AUTHORITY AGREEMENTS,”
enacted; 09/09/03)
ARTICLE V. NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
SEC. 28-5100.   NUMERICAL SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   The numerical system of naming streets, avenues and public places within the
corporate limits of the City, together with such modification of the system as
are authorized by this article, are hereby approved.
SEC. 28-5101.   NUMBERING SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   All principal and through "streets" shall be given numbers commencing with
number one (1) at the westerly City limits and running with consecutive numbers
to the easterly City limits. All principal and through "avenues" shall be given
numbers commencing with number one (1) for the avenue adjoining the south side
of Sylvan Park, and the south side of the City waterworks pumping station, and
running with consecutive numbers to the southerly City limits.
SEC. 28-5102.   "STREETS" AND "AVENUES" DEFINED.
   All streets having courses approximately north and south shall be designated
"streets," and all streets having courses approximately east and west shall be
designated "avenues."
SEC. 28-5103.   DESIGNATION OF LOCAL AND INTERMEDIATE STREETS; USE OF THE TERM
"PLACE;" USE OF THE TERM "COURT."
   Fractional numbers shall not be used to designate and name local
intermediate streets and avenues and those streets and avenues which do not
conform in alignment and extension with the principal and through streets and
avenues or whose course and location is such as to cause the numbering system
to break down shall be designated as follows:
   (1)   Intermediate or local streets and avenues shall bear the same number
as the next preceding street or avenue, with successive, index letters as A, B,
C, etc., affixed after the designation "Street", or "Avenue." Such index letter
depending upon the number of intermediate streets or avenues to be named.
   (2)   A street which has a diagonal course and is situated in such manner as
to connect with two (2) or more streets, or two (2) or more avenues, as the
case may be, which bear different numbers, shall bear the same number and
designation as the street or avenue at which such diagonal deflection first
originates and in addition thereto shall bear the name "Place."
   (3)   A street, without access to any other street other than its origin
intersection, and terminating in a cul-de-sac or other vehicle turnaround and
without probability of extension, shall bear the name of the appropriate street
and in addition thereto may bear the name "Court."
SEC. 28-5104.   "DRIVES" DEFINED.
   For the purposes of this Article V a "drive" shall mean a private street,
alley or traveled way which is the only source of reasonable access to two (2)
or more structures from publicly owned right-of-way and which is located within
a validly recorded easement of ingress and egress for two (2) or more parcels
of land.
SEC. 28-5105.   DESIGNATION OF DRIVES.
   (a)   A drive shall be designated a "drive" only under the following
conditions:
   (1)   That, in the judgment of the director of public works, the designation
of a drive as a drive and proper addressing of a structure along said drive is
in the best interest of public convenience and safety and facilitates good
traffic movement.
   (2)   That a structure along said drive cannot be assigned a house number
that will coincide with a dedicated public right-of-way which has been improved
with an all-weather surface.
   (3)   That said drive shall have been or will be improved with an all-
weather surface capable of supporting emergency equipment.
   (b)   Upon a determination that designation is permissible, said drive shall
be designated as "X Street Drive" or "X Avenue Drive" in accordance with
existing street naming policy. The term "place" or "court" shall not be used in
conjunction with term "drive."
   (c)   In addition to all conditions precedent to the designation of a drive
as a "drive," there shall be the following conditions subsequently placed upon
said designation:
   (1)   The owner or owners of said drive shall maintain same in a safe and
sanitary condition and shall have filed or shall file restrictive covenants
providing for the private maintenance thereof and the distribution of the cost
of same among the various owners.
SEC. 28-5106.   OFFICIAL MAP APPROVED.
   The numbers assigned to the various streets and avenues as shown on the
current map of the City and on file in the public works department, is approved
as the official street map of the City.
SEC. 28-5107.   RECORDING CHANGES IN STREET NAMES.
   The public works department shall note the changes to the City street system
made from time to time, upon the map in the director's office. The director of
public works is charged with the duty of faithful transcribing upon all future
official maps of the City, made under the director's direction, the numbers and
names of streets and avenues authorized and approved by the Council, and to
assign the proper names to all streets, avenues or places upon plats of
additions and subdivisions submitted to the Council for acceptance and
approval.
SEC. 28-5108.   BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM, IN GENERAL.
   For the purpose of assigning house numbers, each block shall be divided into
parcels having a frontage of twenty (20) feet on street, avenue, place, or
drive and a number shall be given thereto in the following manner:
   (1)   The number of the street bordering the west side of any block shall be
the hundred within which the numbers of that block shall be used, omitting the
index letter in the case of intermediate or local streets, and all numbers
shall run consecutively to the east with even numbers on the south side of the
avenue, place or drive and with odd numbers on the north side of the avenue,
place or drive and the even numbers shall commence with the hundred number and
the odd numbers shall start with the hundred number plus one.
   (2)   The number of the avenues bordering the north side of any block shall
be the hundred within which the numbers for that block shall be used, omitting
the index letter in the case of intermediate or locals streets, and all numbers
shall run consecutively to the south with even numbers on the east side of the
street, place or drive and with odd numbers on the west side of the street,
place or drive.
SEC. 28-5109.   MAP OF BUILDING NUMBER SYSTEM.
   The Council shall from time to time cause official maps of the several
streets, avenues, drives, courts and places, showing numbers for all houses in
additions where streets, avenues, drives, courts and places have been extended
so as to permit numbering, and it shall be the duty of the public works
department to extend the house numbering on the official map from time to time
as additions or subdivisions are accepted and approved by the Council.
SEC. 28-5110.   NOTICE TO NUMBER BUILDING.
   Any person who owns any building on any street, avenue, drive or place in
the City, who, after being notified by the public works department that the
building has no number or has an incorrect number and that the correct number
of such building is on file, shall, within thirty (30) days, affix the
appropriate number on the building.
SEC. 28-5111.   REQUIREMENTS FOR NUMERALS; AFFIXING TO BUILDING.
   House numbers shall be of such size, character and color as to be legible at
a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet, and the same shall be affixed
on, about, below or either side, or other conspicuous place, in close proximity
to the main entrance of the building to which the number applies.
SEC. 28-5112.   CERTIFICATE OF OFFICIAL NUMBER.
   Upon demand from the owner of any building subject to number under the
provisions of this article, the public works department shall issue without
cost to a building owner, a certificate giving the official number for such
building.
ARTICLE VI. INTERRING OF UTILITY FACILITIES
SEC. 28-6100.   INTERRING REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install utility
facilities above ground in any of the following areas:
   (1)   In any shopping center or subdivision platted or accepted after the
passage of this article (August 17, 1971);
   (2)   In any shopping center or subdivision where utility facilities have
not been emplaced at the date of passage of this section.
   Provided, however, that the director of public works may authorize the
emplacing of overhead wires where interring would be impossible or impractical
due to ground, water or other emergency conditions.
SEC. 28-6101.   "UTILITY FACILITY" DEFINED.
   (a)   For purposes of this article, the term "utility facility" means:
   (1)   Electrical lines;
   (2)   Telephone lines;
   (3)   Electrical poles;
   (4)   Telephone poles;
   (5)   Guy wires to electrical poles;
   (6)   Guy wires to telephone poles;
   (7)   Items commonly found attached to electrical or telephone poles;
   (8)   CATV facilities of a nature similar to items listed in (1) through
(7).
   (b)   For purposes of this article, "utility facility" shall not include:
   (1)   Power stations;
   (2)   Transformers;
   (3)   Pad mounted equipment (such as switches, service terminals or voltage
regulators);
   (4)   Electric distribution circuits where the soil or topography cause the
cost to be impractical and unreasonable;
   (5)   High voltage electric transmission circuits;
   (6)   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits where excepted by the
director of engineering;
   (7)   Telephone service terminals;
   (8)   Cable markers;
   (9)   Telephone equipment necessarily related to other exempt equipment not
conveniently placed underground;
   (10)   Traffic light poles;
   (11)   Streetlight poles.
SEC. 28-6102.   EXCEPTION.
   Utility facilities need not be placed underground in new subdivisions where
those facilities directly service perimeter lots of the subdivision, and where
such lots abut lots or lands where overhead lines have heretofore been
emplaced, where such service enters the perimeter lots from the rear or side.
For purposes of this section, abut means touching and does not include lots
across a street or alley from an existing overhead line.
SEC. 28-6103.   BURDEN OF COST.
   Additional costs involved in placing utility facilities underground shall be
borne by the developer.
SEC. 28-6104.   METHOD OF INTERRING.
   Where utilities are required to be interred, the work shall be done by the
utility company in accordance with the Moline, Illinois street use ordinance,
and under the direction of the public works department, and pursuant to
applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission,
as then existing.
ARTICLE VII. ADOPT-A-STREET PROGRAM.
SEC. 28-7100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed
to them:
   (1)   Adopted section shall mean a length of municipal right-of-way,
identified as a safe section of street or highway. It also includes a length of
state right-of-way located within the corporate limits of a municipality and
identified by the Illinois Department of Transportation and the sponsoring
jurisdiction as a safe, adoptable section of right-of-way. A section of right-
of-way may be determined as inappropriate for adoption for safety reasons. NO
INTERSTATES MAY BE DESIGNATED AS AN ADOPTED SECTION UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (2)   Group shall mean members or employees of a civic or not-for-profit
organization, or commercial or private enterprises, who have requested to
participate in the City's Adopt-A-Street program.
   (3)   Group Coordinator shall mean the individual selected by the group to
serve as its liaison with the sponsoring jurisdiction.
   (4)   Group President shall mean the individual who is the recognized
leader, president, chairman, or other authorized executive officer for a group.
   (5)   Litter shall mean any unsightly or offensive matter that may include,
but is not limited to, disposable packaging, containers, cans, bottles, paper,
ashes, cigar and cigarette butts, or any other debris defined elsewhere in the
Moline Code of Ordinances as litter, refuse or debris. Litter does not include
hazardous, heavy, large items, or carcasses.
   (6)   Program shall mean the "Adopt-A-Street" program.
   (7)   Sponsoring jurisdiction shall mean the City of Moline in the
establishment of an "Adopt-A-Street" program within its jurisdictional area.
   (8)   Director shall mean the director of public works who is responsible
for the administration of the City's program.
   (9)   Youth shall mean any person over the age of ten (10) years and under
the age of eighteen (18) years.
SEC. 28-7101.   APPLICATION.
   Upon application to the director of public works by any legitimate and
qualified group or public service entity, the City Council may accept any such
application, and authorize the execution of a written agreement with said group
or public service entity; such agreement shall be signed by the group
coordinator or president or otherwise authorized individual.
SEC. 28-7102.   INDEMNIFICATION.
   Each group or public service entity for which an application has been
accepted shall be required to obey and abide by all laws and regulations
relating to safety, as well as provide written indemnification of the City,
including naming the City as an additional insured, if the City Council
requires such insurance certificate.
SEC. 28-7103.   ADULT SUPERVISORS.
   Each group or public service entity for which an application has been
accepted shall provide one (1) adult supervisor for every five (5) youths
participating in the program. For purposes of this section, youth is defined as
any person under age eighteen (18) who is present or participating in the
clean-up of any particular adopted section. Under no circumstances shall any
person under the age of ten (10) be permitted to volunteer or in any way
participate for the purpose of litter collection.
SEC. 28-7104.   SAFETY MEETING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The director of public works, in conjunction with other appropriate
officials or entities, shall develop and administer safety training programs to
each group or public service entity for which an application has been accepted.
Any such programs administered shall be appropriate for the particular project
and the various types of roadways that may be adopted for litter clean-up.
   (b)   Each group or public service entity for which an application has been
accepted shall conduct its own group safety meetings and receive safety
training as required by the director of public works. No person shall be
allowed to participate in any litter collection unless such person has attended
a safety meeting conducted by the group or public service entity prior to said
collection.
SEC. 28-7105.   ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Each group or public service entity for which an application has been
accepted shall be required to comply with the following additional
requirements:
   (1)   Obtain and wear safety apparel provided by the City at all times while
collecting litter in the designated adopted section;
   (2)   Maintain an adequate first aid kit, subject to the written approval of
paramedics in the City's fire department;
   (3)   The group coordinator must prohibit group members and any and all
individuals collecting litter upon an adopted section from being under the
influence of alcohol or drugs of any type or from possessing or consuming the
same;
   (4)   The group coordinator must require all group members and any and all
individuals collecting litter upon an adopted section to place the litter in
trash bags, which trash bags will be provided by the City;
   (5)   The group coordinator must require all group members and any and all
individuals collecting litter upon an adopted section to place all filled trash
bags at the location on the adopted section designated by the director of
public works in the granting of written permission required in Section
28-7101 above.
SEC. 28-7106.   LITTER CONTAINERS.
   The City shall provide trash bags for use by the group or public service
entity and its members. Upon conclusion of the litter collection, it shall be
the responsibility of the City to remove all filled trash bags and any other
large, heavy or hazardous items.
SEC. 28-7107.   INSTALLATION OF SIGNS.
   The City shall provide signs that conform with state statute with the name
or acronym of the participating group or public service entity. Such signs
shall be installed under the supervision of the director of public works at
each end of the adopted section.
SEC. 28-7108.   TERM OF AGREEMENT AND REGULATION OF COLLECTIONS.
   Each group or public service entity for which an application has been
accepted shall be required to adopt a section for a minimum of two (2) years
and to collect litter along that adopted section no less than four (4) times
per year. No such litter collection shall be commenced prior to the group or
public service entity's attainment of written permission by the director of
public works, which prior written permission must be obtained each time the
group or public service entity wishes to collect litter.
SEC. 28-7109.   NON-ASSIGNABILITY.
   At no time will the duties and responsibilities imposed by this article be
subcontracted, transferred or in any way assigned to any other group or public
service entity.
CHAPTER 29
SUBDIVISIONS
   Art. I.   General Provisions, §29-1100 - §29-1105
   Art. II.   Definitions, §29-2100 - §29-2101
   Art. III.   Design and Improvement Standards, §29-3100 - §29-3141
   Art. IV.   Plats and Plans, §29-4100 - §29-4126
   Art. V.   Other Administrative Matters, §29-5100 - §29-5106
   Appendix 1.   Standard Curb Sections
   Appendix 2.   Letter of Credit
   Appendix 3.   Subdivision Performance Bond
   Appendix 4.   Escrow Agreement
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 29-1100.   PURPOSE.
   In accordance with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 through 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12;
and 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.) this ordinance regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to implement the City of Moline's comprehensive
plan and Official Map. Thus this ordinance assists in achieving the following
specific objectives:
   (1)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
   (2)   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to the
productive development of the City;
   (3)   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   (4)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and
buildings;
   (5)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
   (6)   To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new
developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
   (7)   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, stormwater runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   (8)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design, and construction
of streets and sidewalks;
   (9)   To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains,
sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and other utilities and services;
   (10)   To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be
made available to serve the residents of new developments; and
   (11)   Provide for the acceptance of lands for public rights-of-way.
SEC. 29-1101.   JURISDICTION.
   This ordinance shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City
of Moline and within all unincorporated territory located within one and one-
half (1.5) miles of said limits, provided such territory is not located within
the subdivision jurisdiction for another municipality. (See 65 ILCS 5/11-9 for
state requirements concerning jurisdictional boundary lines.)
SEC. 29-1102.   INTERPRETATION.
   Every provision of this ordinance shall be construed liberally to achieve
the purposes outlined in Sec.
29-1100.
SEC. 29-1103.   MORE RESTRICTIVE REQUIREMENTS APPLY.
   (a)   Whenever the requirements of this ordinance differ from those of any
statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or regulation, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance
with state law (65 ILCS 5/11-12-11), whenever this ordinance imposes higher
standards than the county subdivision ordinance, said higher standards shall
supersede the county regulations in the unincorporated territory located within
the City of Moline's subdivision jurisdiction.
   (b)   This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant,
deed restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided,
that, where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction,
or other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this ordinance
shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction,
or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this ordinance or the
determinations of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
ordinance, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this ordinance
or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative
and supplemental to this ordinance and determinations made thereunder. The City
does not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the
plat and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature
of the document and the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement
rights over same.
SEC. 29-1104.   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (a)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City shall be personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of duties set forth under this
ordinance. (See "Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act," 745 ILCS 10/1-101, et seq.)
   (b)   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
duties under this ordinance, shall be defended by the city attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
SEC. 29-1105.   VARIANCES.
   When the subdivider can show that a provision of this ordinance, if strictly
adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship, and when, in the opinion of
the City plan commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar
to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the City plan commission may recommend a variance or modification to
the Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance or
modification of the action. Any variance or modification thus authorized shall
be attached to and made a part of the final plat.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS.
SEC. 29-2100.   CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS.
   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this ordinance,
the following rules shall be observed:
   (1)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Sec.
29-2101; terms not defined in Sec.
29-2101 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Moline; if any term is not defined either in Sec.
29-2101 or in the Zoning Ordinance, said term shall have its standard English
dictionary meaning;
   (2)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders;
   (3)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense;
   (4)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular;
   (5)   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary;
   (6)   Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended
merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive
application of the provisions set forth thereunder;
   (7)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection; and
   (8)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
SEC. 29-2101.   SELECTED DEFINITIONS.
   (1)   Administrator . The official appointed to administer this Land
Subdivision Ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.
   (2)   Alley . A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
   (3)   Amendment . A change in the provisions of this ordinance, properly
effected in accordance with state law and the procedures set forth herein.
   (4)   Area, Gross . The entire area within the lot lines of the property
proposed for subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/
reserved for street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses.
   (5)   Block . An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways,
barriers, or ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a
subdivision unless exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded
by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
   (6)   Centerline Offset . The distance between the centerlines of two
roughly parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said
"parallel" streets intersect.
   (7)   Collector Street . A street used primarily to collect limited amounts
of residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and on which the
speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
   (8)   Comprehensive Plan . The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the
City Council to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of
the City of Moline. The comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to,
plans and programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways,
bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial
or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
   (9)   Cross-slope . The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way
rather than in the direction traffic moves on said right-of-way.
   (10)   Cul-de-Sac . A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic
and having the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for vehicles;
the term may also be used to refer solely to said turn-around.
   (11)   Curb and Gutter, Integral . The rim forming the edge of a street plus
the channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a
single facility.
   (12)   Dedicate . To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of
land, or improvement to the City of Moline or other public entity without
compensation.
   (13)   Develop . To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a
tract of land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation
therefor.
   (14)   District, Zoning . A portion of the territory of the City of Moline
wherein certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (15)   Easement . A right to use a portion of another person's real property
for certain limited purposes.
   (16)   Erosion . The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water or gravity.
   (17)   Escrow Deposit . A deposit in cash or other approved securities to
assure the completion of improvements within a subdivision.
   (18)   Frontage . The boundary of a lot along a public street.
   (19)   Frontage Road . A minor street fronting on an arterial street or
highway (usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
   (20)   Grade . The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way,
expressed as a percentage. Synonym for "slope."
   (21)   Improvements . Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch,
sewer, catchbasin, newly-planted tree, off-street parking area, or other
facility necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
   (22)   Improvement Plans . The engineering plans showing types of materials
and construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in,
or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
   (23)   Intersection . The point at which two or more public right-of-ways
(generally streets) meet.
   (24)   Local Street . A street serving limited amounts of residential
traffic, and used for access to abutting property.
   (25)   Lot . A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether
immediate or future) of development or transfer of ownership. A "lot" may or
may not coincide with a "lot of record."
   (26)   Lot, Corner . A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut
for their full length upon streets.
   (27)   Lot, Through . A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot
lines that abut two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines
shall be deemed front lot lines.
   (28)   Lot Area . The area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front, side,
and rear lines of a lot.
   (29)   Lot of Record . An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of
subdivision recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois
in accordance with state law.
   (30)   Maintenance Bond . A surety bond, posted by the developer and
approved by the City of Moline, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of
installed improvements for the one (1) year period following their dedication.
   (31)   Marginal Access Street . A local dead end street providing access to
ten or fewer dwelling units.
   (32)   Minor Arterial Street . A street which carries or is proposed to
carry intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets
and which may or may not be continuous.
   (33)   Official Map . The official map may show indication of sites for
planned public facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the
official map may include but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or
widening of existing trafficways; school sites; public building sites; and
sites for future storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility
easements.
   (34)   Performance Bond . A surety bond posted by the developer and approved
by the City of Moline, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements
within, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
   (35)   Plat, Dedication . A plat required for the dedication to the City of
all right-of- way easements, and public improvements outside of a subdivision
plat or within a special use classification.
   (36)   Plat, Final . The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of
the subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the Rock Island County
Recorder of Deeds.
   (37)   Plat, Preliminary . Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and
supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
   (38)   Pre-Filing Conference . A conference held between the developer and
appropriate City staff prior to submission of a preliminary or final plat.
   (39)   Principal Arterial Street . A street designed or utilized primarily
for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route
with intersections at grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
   (40)   Reserve . To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its
acquisition by the City of Moline (or other government entity) for public
purposes.
   (41)   Right-of-Way, Public . A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has
dedicated to the City of Moline or other unit of government for streets,
alleys, and other public improvements.
   (42)   Sediment . Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
   (43)   Setback, Front . The horizontal distance between the street right-of-
way line and the building line. Minimum setback requirements are set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance.
   (44)   Sewerage System, Private . A sewer system including collection and
treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in
an outlying area.
   (45)   Sidewalk . A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the
standards of this ordinance.
   (46)   Soil . All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever
origin that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
   (47)   Stop Order . An order used by the administrator to halt work-in-
progress that is in violation of this ordinance.
   (48)   Street . A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term
"street" includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but
excludes an alley or way for pedestrian use only.
   (49)   Structure . Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or
attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are
structures but not all structures are buildings.
   (50)   Stub Street . A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is
planned for future continuation.
   (51)   Subdivider . Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to
divide land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined in this
article.
   (52)   Subdivision . Any division of land into two or more lots, any of
which is less than five acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress
or egress, except as set forth in the Plats Act, 765 ILCS 205/1.
   (53)   Subdivision, Minor . A division of land into two (2) but not more
than five (5) lots, all of which front upon an existing street, and not
involving any new streets, other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or
other provisions for public areas and facilities.
   (54)   Topography . The relief features or surface configuration of an area
of land.
   (55)   Utility . A business or service which is engaged in regularly
supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of consequence and
need and which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its
service area. A utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes,
without limitation, the following services or commodities:
      a.   electricity;
      b.   gas, oil, or steam;
      c.   water;
      d.   sanitary sewerage;
      e.   storm sewerage;
      f.   telephone or telegraph;
      g.   cable television and other communication lines;
      h.   transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly
stated.
   (56)   Vacate . To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or
subdivision or portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with
the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds (765 ILCS 205/6 through 765 ILCS 205/
8.)
   (57)   Variance, Subdivision . A relaxation in the strict application of the
design and improvement standards set forth in this ordinance.
ARTICLE III. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SEC. 29-3100.   APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
   No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Moline -- other
than land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of the Illinois
Plats Act (765 ILCS 205/1(b) -- shall be subdivided or developed except in
compliance with the regulations of this article and the applicable provisions
of state law. (See 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.) No lot in any
subdivision shall be conveyed until:
   (1)   The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the City
Council and recorded in the office of the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds;
and
   (2)   The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this article or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
   A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of
this section.
SEC. 29-3101.   SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION, IN GENERAL.
   Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage,
rough topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which will be
harmful to the health safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed
unless the subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the
problems caused by the adverse land conditions.
SEC. 29-3102.   LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot area and
dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which said subdivision is
located; land that is under water or proposed for street improvements shall not
be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every corner and through lot
shall be large enough to permit compliance with the district's front setback
requirements on every side of the lot that faces a street. All lot remnants
shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation of unbuildable parcels.
SEC. 29-3103.   ACCESS AND RELATIONSHIP TO STREET.
   Land shall be subdivided in such a way that each lot abuts a street meeting
the requirements of Section
29-3107. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street right-
of- way lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines except where a
deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
SEC. 29-3104.   PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENTS; MATERIALS, SIZE AND LOCATION.
   (a)   Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four (4)
inches in diameter or square and forty-two (42) inches long, shall be set at
the extreme corners of subdivisions.
   (b)   Steel pins, not less than one-half (1/2) of an inch in diameter and
thirty (30) inches long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyor's
registration number, shall be set at locations in accordance with the Plat Act.
   (c)   The intersection of two right-of-way lines at corner lots shall
terminate at a tangent to a curve having a minimum radius of fifteen (15) feet.
SEC. 29-3105.   RESETTING MONUMENTS.
   Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset.
SEC. 29-3106.   STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed
street system indicated in the municipal comprehensive plan and official map,
and shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular form below. For divided
boulevards, the developer shall submit an acceptable plan for maintenance to
the City plan commission.
   TABLE OF STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Type of Street Permitted On-  Required Right- Required Pavement Maximum/Minimum
               Street Parking Of-Way          Width(B-B)        Grades
                Permitted On-  Required Right- Required       Maximum/Minimum
Type of Street  Street Parking Of-Way          Pavement Width Grades
                                               (B-B)
Alley           None           20 ft.          18 ft.         Maximum: 10%
                                                              Minimum: 0.5%
Marginal Access None           50 ft.          20 ft.         Maximum: 10%
                                                              Minimum: 0.5%
Local           One side       50 ft.          27 ft.         Maximum: 10%
                Two side       50 ft.          31 ft.         Minimum: 0.5%
Collectors      Both sides     60 ft.          40 ft.         Maximum: 10%
                                                              Minimum: 0.5%
Minor Arterials None           80 ft.          11 ft. lanes   Maximum: 5%
                                                              Minimum: 0.5%
Principal       None           100 ft.         12 ft. lanes   Maximum: 5%
Arterials                                                     Minimum: 0.5%
Divided         None           70 ft.          14 ft.         Maximum: 10%
Boulevard                                                     Minimum: 0.5%
 
SEC. 29-3107.   HORIZONTAL CURVATURES.
   All changes in horizontal alignment shall be conducted with a horizontal
curve with the following minimum centerline radius, designated "R":
   (1)   For principal, minor and collector streets (Design speed = 35 MPH), R
shall equal five hundred (500) feet;
   (2)   For local streets (Design speed = 30 MPH), R shall equal one hundred
twenty-five (125) feet; and
   (3)   For alleys, R shall equal one hundred (100) feet.
SEC. 29-3108.   THROUGH TRAFFIC DISCOURAGED.
   Marginal access and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage use
by through traffic. The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern should be
avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets
shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable street layout.
SEC. 29-3109.   LIMITED ACCESS TO ARTERIALS.
   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the plan commission may recommend to the City Council that access to
said arterial may be limited by one of the following means:
   (1)   The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street and
front onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
   (2)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from
and generally at right angles to the arterial street; or
   (3)   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting
strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
SEC. 29-3110.   DEAD-END STREETS.
   (a)   Temporary Stub Streets . Streets shall be so arranged to provide for
the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when such continuation
is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire and police
protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
comports with the municipal comprehensive plan. If the adjacent property is
owned by the developer (under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the
street must dead-end temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the
property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets
shall be reserved. A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of
any temporary dead-end street. If the adjacent property is under another
ownership there should be a permanent dead-end.
   (b)   Permanent Dead-End Streets . Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length
of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. A cul-de-sac turn-around, having a minimum
right-of-way diameter of ninety-eight (98) feet, a minimum pavement return
radius of twenty-five (25) feet, and a pavement diameter of seventy-five (75)
feet, shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end street.
SEC. 29-3111.   ALLEYS.
   Alleys shall be prohibited in single-family residence districts. Alleys may
be required in multiple-family districts and in commercial/industrial districts
unless other adequate provisions for service access are made. Adequate
vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of any dead-end
alley.
SEC. 29-3112.   INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Only Two Streets . Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at
any one point.
   (b)   Right Angles . Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles; in no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an
angle of less that eighty (80) degrees or more than one hundred (100) degrees.
An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall be
approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one hundred
(100) feet therefrom.
   (c)   Alignment . Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on
the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less
than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except where
the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either
intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at
least eight hundred (800) feet apart.
   (d)   Curb Radii . To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the minimum
curb radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be fifteen (15) feet
where both streets are marginal access or local and at other intersections, not
less than twenty-five (25) feet.
   (e)   Grade . Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of 0.5%.
In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a two percent (2%) slope for
a distance of sixty (60) feet from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.
   (f)   Cross-Slope . The cross slopes of all streets, including
intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%).
   (g)   Adequate Sight Lines . Where any street intersection will involve
earth banks or existing vegetation, the developer shall cut such ground and/or
vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public
right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance in
accordance with the following chart:
      30 MPH      130 ft. each way from intersection
      35 MPH      155 ft. each way from intersection
   For design speeds exceeding 35 MPH, sight distance will be determined based
upon AASHTO criteria.
SEC. 29-3113.   REVERSE CURVES.
   A tangent at least fifty (50) feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on local streets and one hundred (100) feet long on collector streets.
SEC. 29-3114.   ROAD DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING
STREETS.
   (a)   New Perimeter Streets . Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The plan commission
may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and
dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within the subdivider's
own subdivision boundaries.
   (b)   Existing Roads . Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road
or when the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or zoning setback regulations
indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of
some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve
and dedicate at applicant's expense such areas for widening or realignment of
such roads as are specifically and uniquely attributable to applicant's
subdivision and to reserve for public use any portion of the right-of-way
determined not to be specifically and uniquely attributable to applicant's
subdivision.
   (c)   Excess Right-of-Way . Right-of-way in excess of the standards set
forth in the Table of Street Design Specifications shall be required to be
dedicated when:
   (1)   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes; or
   (2)   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed to
construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
   (d)   "Specifically and Uniquely Attributable" Defined . For purposes of
this section, the phrase "specifically and uniquely attributable" shall mean as
a minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned single family for
residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require marginal access,
local, or collector streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned
or to be zoned for multi-family residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan
shall require local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal
arterial streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be
zoned for commercial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require local,
collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on whether
same is a neighborhood, community, or regional area; and that areas currently
zoned or to be zoned for industrial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall
require collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on
the size of the industrial area.
SEC. 29-3115.   STREET IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS.
   All new streets shall be graded, curbed, and surfaced in accordance with the
standards of Illinois Department of Transportation and the provisions of the
subsections below.
SEC. 29-3116.   CURB AND GUTTER.
   All streets shall be bounded by concrete curbs and gutters. Rollover Curbs
may be allowed on marginal access and local streets pending approval by the
director of public works. Definition of a Rollover Curb and Standard Curb are
more fully explained in diagram form by
Appendix I which is incorporated herein by this reference thereto as if set
forth in haec verba.
SEC. 29-3117.   PAVEMENT.
   (a)   All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the minimum
standards as indicated below:
   (1)   Alleys :
      a.   Six (6) inch thick non-reinforced concrete.
   (2)   Marginal Access, Local :
      a.   Six (6) inch thick reinforced portland cement concrete pavement; or
      b.   Seven (7) inch thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
      c.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting City of Moline specifications.
   (3)   Collector, Minor Arterial :
      a.   Seven (7) inch thick reinforced portland cement concrete; or
      b.   Eight (8) inch thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
      c.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting City of Moline specifications.
   (4)   Principal Arterial:
      a.   Eight (8) inch thick reinforced portland cement concrete; or
      b.   Nine (9) inch thick non-reinforced portland cement concrete; or
      c.   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting City of Moline specifications.
   The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume,
subgrade or other conditions show justifications for increased thickness. A
sub-base or base shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate
articles of the standard specifications when required by the director of public
works. A sub-base or base with an underdrain system may be required in areas
where a combination or proposed street grade and soil type may lead to sub-
grade erosion and pavement undermining. The City may require additional
engineering documentation to establish that the above standards are appropriate
for the reasons stated in this paragraph.
   Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these standard
specifications and in conformity with the lines, dimensions and grades shown on
the plans and to the form and dimensions shown on the detail drawings included
with and being part of these specifications.
SEC. 29-3118.   BLOCKS.
   (a)   Block Width . Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2)
tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district
regulations; provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent
to local collector or collector streets, railroads, or water courses.
   (b)   Block Length . No block shall be longer than one thousand (1,000) feet
nor shorter than three hundred (300) feet.
SEC. 29-3119.   SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall
be installed at the time the lot is developed or prior to issuance of the
occupancy permit.
SEC. 29-3120.   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   Relationship to Curb . Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot inside
the right-of-way line or on a line to be given by the director of public works
when it is impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as
aforesaid.
   (b)   Width . Sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide.
   (c)   Thickness of Concrete . All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete
at least four (4) inches thick, except that across driveways the thickness
shall be increased to six (6) inches.
   (d)   Grade . No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten
percent (10%).
   (e)   Ramps at Intersections . Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be
ramped at all intersection so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped
individuals. Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the Illinois Capital
Development Board.
SEC. 29-3121.   UTILITIES.
   All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be
placed in the right-of-way or in easements, and shall be provided underground,
unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
SEC. 29-3122.   RESPONSIBILITY.
   For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make the necessary
arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the proper installation
of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas, electrical, and
communications service.
SEC. 29-3123.   REQUIREMENTS.
   All underground electric distribution circuits installed by the utility
company within the City shall be installed in accordance with the Safety Rules
for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and Communication
Lines, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, and General
Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication
Lines, Illinois Commerce Commission.
SEC. 29-3124.   ENFORCEMENT.
   The building inspector shall not issue any occupancy permits until all
utilities have been installed in the subdivision.
SEC. 29-3125.   EXCEPTIONS.
   The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply in the following
instances:
   (1)   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric
transmission circuits shall not be required to be installed underground.
   (2)   Any service which is considered by the utility company to be
infeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and
unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when authorized by the City Council.
   (3)   When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding
to be extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be provided overhead when
authorized by the City Council.
   (4)   When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing
development in which the primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
      a.   The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall be
installed underground.
      b.   All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed
underground.
   (5)   When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area
which is fully developed with overhead electric and communication service, the
building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development of
the area.
   (6)   Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial
purposes may be provided overhead.
SEC. 29-3126.   EXEMPTIONS.
   The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of
the Ordinance:
   (1)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
   (2)   Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures, authorized
by the City Council, crossing or entering any portion of a district from which
overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in which
overhead wires are allowed.
   (3)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a
bracket or similar device, and extending from one location on the building to
another on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any
public street or right-of-way.
   (4)   Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for
furnishing communication service.
   (5)   Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment
installed above ground, used to distribute communication and electric service
in underground systems.
SEC. 29-3127.   WATER FACILITIES.
   (a)   Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution
system adequate to serve all lots within the subdivision. The water
distribution system shall be designed according to standard specifications and
shall be approved by the water superintendent and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency. Whenever a water main is extended it shall be extended
across the entire frontage of the property being subdivided and it shall be
connected to any other mains which front on or are adjacent to the subdivision
to provide for looping of the water system.
   (b)   The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the expected fire flow
requirements within the subdivision based upon the intended zoning and expected
land use in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, latest adopted edition. Also
taken into consideration when determining the size of pipe to be installed
shall be the anticipated demand for water by 'downstream' properties based on
anticipated development of such properties based on the Comprehensive Plan for
such expansion areas.
   (c)   Individual service connections within single family residential
subdivisions shall be extended from the main to within one (1) foot of the lot
line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and clearly marked
with a fence post or similar material to facilitate their locations.
   (d)   Upon written request to the water superintendent, the City will
perform fire flow tests on the existing water mains to be extended and provide
the data to the subdivider's engineer.
SEC. 29-3128.   FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants of the type approved by the director of public utilities shall
be installed according to standard engineering practices and shall be placed at
intervals of not more than four hundred (400) feet for residential, and not
more than the maximum specified for commercial and industrial use, in
accordance with the Uniform Fire Code.
SEC. 29-3129.   SANITARY SEWERS.
   All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the water
pollution control superintendent.
SEC. 29-3130.   WHEN PUBLIC SYSTEM AVAILABLE.
   (a)   Whenever the subdivision, any point of which is within three hundred
(300) feet of an existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection system,
and who have the right to extend public sewer mains or private sewer laterals
from said property to said existing publicly owned sewer main or other
collection system either by way of street, alley, public way, public easement,
or private easement, the subdivider shall construct sewer mains, where
technically feasible, which shall be connected to such public sewer and shall
provide sewer to all lots within the subdivision.
   (b)   All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard
engineering practices.
   (c)   Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended
across the entire frontage or frontages of the property to be improved by the
extension unless the City has determined, because of land contours or the
presence of other mains, that no other property can be technically or needs to
be served by such an extension.
SEC. 29-3131.   INTERIM DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as required by Sec.
29-3130, the developer shall construct a sanitary sewer system to serve all
lots within the subdivision and shall provide sewage treatment by means of an
approved sewage treatment plant which shall be operated and maintained by the
developer until such time as the system can be connected to the publicly owned
system. Said system shall be temporarily capped. Where the land covered by the
preliminary plat contains not more than ten (10) lots, individual sewage
disposal systems may be used and must be installed according to applicable laws
and regulations of the appropriate approving agency.
SEC. 29-3132.   EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Utility Easements . Easements at least ten (10) feet wide shall be
provided for public and private utilities along the front right-of-way lines of
the public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty (20)
feet wide and if along lot lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
   (b)   Drainage Easements . Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall
be established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations
where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and
minimum widths of said easements shall be determined by the director of public
works.
SEC. 29-3133.   DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   The plan commission shall not recommend the approval of a plat unless the
director of public works determines that the proposed provisions for stormwater
drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision. Drainage
improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with existing and planned
drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an integrated City system. The
stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary
sewer system and shall meet the following design criteria.
   (1)   Principal and Minor Arterial Streets .
      a.   Flow from a "ten (10)-year storm" shall not inundate the center
twenty (20) feet of the pavement.
      b.   Flow from a "fifty (50)-year storm" shall be carried without damage
to any building.
   (2)   Collector Streets .
      a.   Flow from a "ten (10)-year storm" shall not inundate the center ten
(10) feet of the pavement.
      b.   Flow from a "fifty (50)-year storm" shall be carried without damage
to any building.
   (3)   Local Streets .
      a.   Flow from a "ten (10)-year storm" shall not top the curb.
      b.   Flow from a "fifty (50)-year storm" shall be carried without damage
to any building.
SEC. 29-3134.   CATCH BASINS OR INLETS.
   Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be constructed so that the
majority of surface water shall be intercepted before reaching the
intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four hundred (400)
feet of the pavement.
SEC. 29-3135.   ACCOMMODATION OF UPSTREAM DRAINAGE AREAS.
   A culvert or other drainage facility large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from the entire drainage area upstream from the proposed subdivision
shall be provided in accordance with the City's standard specifications.
Potential runoff shall be determined on the basis of the maximum development of
the upstream area that is permitted or to be permitted under the Comprehensive
Plan.
SEC. 29-3136.   AREAS SUBJECT TO FLOODING.
   Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the
City Council may require appropriate protective measures, including the filling
of the flood prone area to a level equal to the regulatory flood elevation, if
any.
SEC. 29-3137.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and
sedimentation control regulation shall be observed:
   (1)   The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and
shall protect downstream property from sedimentation deposits during the
construction of the subdivision. Practices contained in "Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" shall
be employed in the preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan
which shall be approved by the director of public works prior to any earth
disturbing activity taking place.
SEC. 29-3138.   DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE.
   The City Council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer
without compensation) to the City of Moline or other appropriate governmental
entity suitable parcel(s) of land within the subdivision for public purposes
provided such facilities are otherwise required by this ordinance. Any such
dedicated area shall be shown on the final plat.
SEC. 29-3139.   RESERVATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE.
   Besides requiring the developer to dedicate parcels for public purposes, the
City Council may require that said developer reserve land for parks,
playgrounds, schools, or other public purposes in locations designated in the
City's comprehensive plan. Since public acquisition of reserved land requires
compensation, it is not essential that the need for such land be uniquely and
specifically attributable to the subdivision. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8), i.e.:
   (1)   Adopted . There is hereby adopted an official map dated January, 1980,
which shall be applicable to all land situated within the City, and shall also
be applicable to contiguous territory within one and one-half (1 1/2) miles
from the corporate limits of the City and not included within the corporate
limits of any other municipality. The official map shall be filed in the office
of the city clerk and is made part of this chapter by reference.
   (2)   Planned Public Improvements to be Shown on Map . The official map may
show indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites
which may be indicated on the official map may include but are not limited to:
sites for new trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school sites;
recreational sites; public building sites; and sites for future storm drainage,
electrical or other public service or utility easements.
SEC. 29-3140.   AVAILABILITY OF SITES FOR PLANNED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Whenever the official map indicates the necessity for providing a site
for a planned public facility, the City Council may require that the site for
the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting approval
to such plat; and, furthermore, that the site be held for that specific public
use for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of the final plat.
When such designation has been required, the City Council shall notify the
responsible public agency in writing of the designation within ten (10) days.
   (b)   Whenever a site for public use, shown on the official map, has been
required to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the responsible agency having
jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or
commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one (1) year
from date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within such
period of one (1) year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners
in any other manner consistent with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, or any
other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City.
SEC. 29-3141.   AMENDMENTS OR ADDITIONS TO THE OFFICIAL MAP.
   Amendments to the official map, including the indication of additional
public sites to be shown on the map, shall be considered amendments to this
chapter and therefore shall be as specified in this chapter for amendments to
this chapter. Any public agency requesting the establishment of the official
map of a future public site or easement which is not included in the
comprehensive plan, shall indicate to the plan commission the need for the site
in the particular location specified. The plan commission, before making a
favorable recommendation for the inclusion on the official map of such site by
the City Council, shall find that this public site location is determined to be
necessary to provide public service consistent with the comprehensive plan of
the community and shall so indicate in its minutes.
ARTICLE IV. PLATS AND PLANS
SEC. 29-4100.   PRE-FILING CONFERENCE.
   Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a pre-filing conference may be
held between the developer and appropriate City staff. The developer shall
present a concept sketch of the proposed development. City staff shall use a
standardized checklist to review the proposed development for conformance to
the subdivision ordinance.
SEC. 29-4101.   PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   (a)   Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to
subdivide any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of
Moline shall file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision
with the director of planning and development at least three (3) weeks prior to
a regularly scheduled meeting of the plan commission.
   (b)   One (1) copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with the
appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District shall also be filed. Said
district shall have not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it
might wish to make to the plan commission. (70 ILCS 405/22.02a.)
   (c)   Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion
of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary plat of
the entire tract shall be submitted.
   (d)   All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance
with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the subsections below.
   (e)   EXCEPTION: A preliminary plat shall not be required for:
   (1)   Minor subdivisions; or
   (2)   Land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois Plats Act as now
or hereafter amended (765 ILCS 205/1(b.)
SEC. 29-4102.   INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by an Illinois professional land
surveyor registered in Illinois at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to
the inch provided the resultant drawing does not exceed thirty-six (36) inches
by twenty-four (24) inches. Said preliminary plat, together with the supporting
data, shall provide all of the following information:
   (1)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and
Illinois professional land surveyor;
   (2)   Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
   (3)   Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and
proposed setbacks;
   (4)   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
   (5)   Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
   (6)   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two (2) foot
contour data for land having slopes of zero to four percent (O - 4%), five (5)
foot contour data for land having slopes between four to twelve percent (4 -
12%), and ten (10) foot contour data for land having slopes of twelve percent
(12%) or more;
   (7)   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural
drainage ways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, buildings, areas
subject to flooding, etc.;
   (8)   Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets
and alleys;
   (9)   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements;
   (10)   All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
   (11)   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers,
water mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
   (12)   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and
proposed utilities;
   (13)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
   (14)   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision numbered sequentially;
   (15)   For all contiguous holdings of the owner; including land owned by the
same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
association or owned by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities,
or unincorporated associations in which a stockholder, partner, or associate,
or a member of the owner's family owns an interest in each corporation, firm,
partnership, entity, or unincorporated association; with an indication of the
portion proposed for subdivision: an affidavit of ownership, which shall
include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the
county recorder of deed's office or other official records; the name and
address and telephone number of the legal owner of the property, the
subdivision, if different from the legal owner, the land surveyor and engineer,
and the agents of any of these persons; the name and address and telephone
number of the contract owner, if any, of the property and the date the contract
of sale was executed; and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of
all directors, officers, and stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) of
any class of stock of each corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete
list of the names of the trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone
numbers of all beneficiaries of the trust;
   (16)   The location by township, range, section, or by other legal
description; and
   (17)   A list of requested variances and justifications.
SEC. 29-4103.   UTILITY COMPANY NOTIFICATION.
   It is the subdivider's responsibility to notify the appropriate public
utilities. Proof of notification shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
to the City for City approval.
SEC. 29-4104.   PLAN COMMISSION ACTION.
   The plan commission shall either recommend approval, conditional approval,
or disapproval of the application for the preliminary plat within ninety (90)
days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of
required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the plan commission
and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-
8.) If the plan commission recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat, it
shall furnish to the applicant within the ninety (90) day period a written
statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to
this ordinance and/or the official map. If the plan commission recommends
approval of the preliminary plat, it shall promptly so inform the City Council.
SEC. 29-4105.   APPEALS PROCESS.
   (a)   If the preliminary plat is not approved, the director of planning and
development shall write "Not Approved" and the date of the plan commission's
action on the prints, and shall transmit to the subdivider one (1) print with a
letter stating the reasons for the disapproval. The subdivider may transmit an
amended plat to the plan commission for consideration.
   (b)   If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the plan
commission on the preliminary plat, then the subdivider may appeal the decision
to the City Council. An appeal must be made by letter addressed to the mayor
and City Council, stating the reasons for the appeal. Said letter must be
received by the director of planning and development no less than ten (10) days
following the date of the plan commission's decision. The letter of appeal
shall be placed on the next regular City Council meeting agenda after it is
received by the director of planning and development. The director of planning
and development shall also provide to the City Council the preliminary plat,
the plan commission's meeting minutes pertaining to the plat, and the reports
and recommendations made to the plan commission by the director of planning and
development. The City Council shall have thirty (30) days from the time the
appeal is first placed on its agenda either to: reaffirm the plan commission's
decision on the preliminary plat; to approve the preliminary plat as submitted
by the subdivider; or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications.
SEC. 29-4106.   ACTION BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   If the plan commission has recommended approval of a preliminary plat, the
City Council, by resolution, shall either accept or reject said plat within
thirty (30) days after their next regularly scheduled meeting following the
plan commission's action. If the City Council rejects the preliminary plat,
their resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply
with this ordinance. The city clerk shall attach a certified copy of the City
Council's resolution of approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. One
copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the clerk, one copy shall
be filed with the director of planning and development, and one copy shall be
given to the subdivider. City Council approval shall not qualify a preliminary
plat for recording.
SEC. 29-4107.   IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   After the City Council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to
submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four (4) copies of
the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or in
conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the director of public works for
review. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the
registered professional engineer responsible for their preparation. Until the
director of public works certifies in writing that the proposed improvements
conform to generally-accepted engineering practices and to the standards
imposed in this ordinance:
   (1)   The director of public works shall not issue any permit to allow
construction of said improvements; and
   (2)   The City Council shall not act upon the application for final plat
approval.
SEC. 29-4108.   INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Improvements plans shall consist of black or blue line prints not larger
than thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. These plans and the
related specifications shall provide all of the following information:
   (1)   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the same
scale as required in the preliminary plat;
   (2)   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all streets;
   (3)   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
   (4)   Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including
curbs/gutters and catch basins;
   (5)   Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
   (6)   Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
   (7)   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities;
   (8)   Locate area(s) for removal of trees six (6) inches or larger;
   (9)   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
   (10)   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the
tract; and
   (11)   Such other information as the director of public works may reasonably
require to perform said director's duties under this section.
SEC. 29-4109.   INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (a)   The subdivider/developer shall notify the director of public works of
both the start and completion of construction of approved improvements. The
director of public works shall inspect said improvements while they are under
construction. If the director determines that they are being built in violation
of this ordinance, said director shall promptly notify the administrator who,
in turn, shall issue a stop order. All public improvements proposed to be made
under the provisions of this article shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the director of public works or a duly designated deputy
selected and retained by the subdivider and approved by the City. All fees and
costs connected with such inspection and in reviewing the plan and
specifications for such improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees
and cost shall be set at the prevailing rate.
   (b)   In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector
shall maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to the director of
public works. Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided to the
director of public works on a weekly basis during construction.
   (1)   Content. The daily entries shall include at least the following
information:
      a.   Weather conditions;
      b.   Site conditions;
      c.   Contractor's working hours;
      d.   Inspector's hours on the site;
      e.   An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor that
day;
      f.   Specific information about material tests taken; and
      g.   Description of any problems.
   (2)   Purpose. The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information for
the developer's engineer and the director of public works to recommend
acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and provide actual
construction records of any problems that may develop.
   (3)   Format. The general format of the diary must be approved by the
director of public works before construction begins.
SEC. 29-4110.   INSPECTIONS.
   The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
   (1)   Storm and Sanitary Sewer and Water Main Improvements.
      a.   Inspect all materials, documents and pertinent items such as pipe
manufacturer, class, and size.
      b.   Reject any defective material and ensure that it is not used on the
job.
      c.   Observe the actual pipe laying operation to insure that all joints
are properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and the bedding and
backfill are done according to the specifications.
      d.   Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, location
of all service laterals, backfilling, and location of all utilities installed
and encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and type
required by the director of public works.
      e.   Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by the
specifications.
   (2)   Street Improvements.
      a.   Perform and document sub-grade, sub-base, base, and embankment
compaction tests.
      b.   Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
         1.   Check and document sub-grade depth checks;
         2.   Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
      c.   Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the director of
public works for approval prior to connecting paving operations.
      d.   Inspect all concrete pours.
         1.   Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and
slump measurements;
         2.   Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results of
the tests.
      e.   Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
         1.   Perform and record asphalt compaction tests;
         2.   Perform at least one (1) asphalt extraction test and one (1)
sieve analysis from an asphalt sample taken on the job site;
         3.   The director of public works shall also inspect required
improvements upon their completion. The City of Moline shall not accept any
improvement until the director of public works has certified that it complies
with this ordinance.
SEC. 29-4111.   FILING "AS BUILT" RECORDS.
   The improvements will not be recommended for acceptance until the following
is provided for the director of public works:
   (1)   Copies of all daily diary entries;
   (2)   Copies of all material test results;
   (3)   Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible "as-built"
improvements construction plans of all public improvements;
   (4)   Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was
accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans and
specifications, and that the "as-built" plans accurately reflect actual field
conditions;
   (5)   A Labor and Material Payment and Maintenance Bond posted prior to
construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the installation of all
public improvements, using forms provided by the director of public works;
   (6)   Permanent easements or agreements granted to the City for all public
improvements that are not constructed in dedicated right-of-way, using forms
provided by the director of public works; and
   (7)   Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to
permanent items, e.g. fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer and water services
shall be marked with a 4” X 4” marking, that stands five (5) or six (6) feet
tall including a curb notch.
SEC. 29-4112.   PRIVATELY DEVELOPED AND OPERATED FACILITIES.
   Where the subdivision is to contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water
supply systems, park areas, or other physical facilities which will not be
maintained by existing public agencies, provision should be made by trust
agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is acceptable to
the proper public agencies, for jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance,
supervision, operation and reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners
in the subdivision.
SEC. 29-4113.   ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council shall not approve any final plat (and, hence, said final
plat shall not be entitled to recording) until:
   (1)   All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been
completed by the subdivider/developer at said subdivider/developer's expense,
inspected by the director of engineering, and dedicated to the City of Moline
or other appropriate entity; or
   (2)   In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer has
provided the City of Moline with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements;
   (3)   Necessary title assurances have been given.
SEC. 29-4114.   FORMS OF ASSURANCE.
   The required legal assurance may be a performance bond, an escrow deposit or
a letter of credit. Every performance bond shall be approved as to form by the
city attorney, and posted with the city clerk. Any funds held in escrow shall
be deposited with an approved escrow agent. (See
Appendix 2,
3 and
4 for suggested language.)
SEC. 29-4115.   AMOUNT OF BOND OR DEPOSIT.
   The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal to the director of public
works' estimate of the costs of constructing the uncompleted portion of the
required improvements plus all required inspections fees. Any escrow deposit
may be in the form of:
   (1)   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the City of Moline the availability of the escrow
funds from time to time upon demand; or
   (2)   Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to
serve as an escrow agent.
SEC. 29-4116.   ELIGIBLE SURETIES.
   No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless such person has been
approved by the State of Illinois to act as a surety on public works
improvements.
SEC. 29-4117.   TERM OF ASSURANCE, EXTENSION.
   The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not
exceed two (2) years. If all the required improvements have not been completed
by the end of the two (2) year period, the director of public works, with the
advice and consent of the City Council may extend said bond/escrow agreement
for one (1) year only.
SEC. 29-4118.   RELEASE OF BOND/ESCROW DEPOSIT.
   (a)   The director of public works may release up to ninety percent (90%) of
the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written
authorization from the city engineer. The amount which the city engineer
authorizes to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements actually
completed in accordance with approved plans.
   (b)   The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall
not be released until:
   (1)   The director of public works has certified to the director of planning
and development in writing that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed; and
   (2)   Said improvements and corresponding right-of-way have been accepted by
and dedicated to the City of Moline or other appropriate entity.
SEC. 29-4119.   FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.
   If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the
two (2) year period (or three (3) year period, in the case of an extension),
the director of public works, with the assistance of the city attorney, may:
   (1)   Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the City of
Moline an equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements (as
estimated by the director of public works) or the amount of the bond not
theretofore released, whichever is less; or
   (2)   Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete
the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such funds to
the subdivider/developer.
SEC. 29-4120.   FINAL PLATS.
   The Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of
a subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Moline
until said final plat has been approved by the City Council. The City Council
shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that it is in compliance
with all pertinent requirements of this ordinance including those set forth in
the subsections below.
SEC. 29-4121.   FILING, TIME LIMITS.
   The subdivider of every subdivision, who desires final plat approval shall
file six (6) black or blue line prints of the final plat and supporting data
with the director of planning and development not later than one (1) year after
preliminary plat approval has been granted.
SEC. 29-4122.   INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor authorized to practice
land surveying in the State of Illinois on new linen tracing cloth - or
polyester - based film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than
one hundred (100) feet equals one (1) inch, provided that the resultant drawing
shall not be less than eight and one-half (8 ½) inches by fourteen (14) inches
and shall not exceed twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The final plat
and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following information.
   (1)   North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
   (2)   Name of subdivider and subdivision;
   (3)   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the
tract tied to section or one quarter (1/4) section corner;
   (4)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more
than one (1) foot in fifteen thousand (15,000) feet and provide a copy of the
closure calculations;
   (5)   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name,
plat book, and page number;
   (6)   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries
of the subdivision;
   (7)   Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements,
areas to be reserved, and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or
bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency,
central angles, and accompanying legal descriptions;
   (8)   Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
   (9)   Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
   (10)   Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot
areas;
   (11)   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
   (12)   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
   (13)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots;
   (14)   The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest,
whether recorded or not, in the property being subdivided, together with formal
irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government
uses, utilities, parks, and easements, signed by all parties of interest or
their authorized agents, in a form approved by the city attorney, if the plat
is proposed for final approval without improvements in place and accepted with
a deed of dedication to the public in fee simple absolute unless otherwise
called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title insurance
policy or title opinion from a licensed attorney showing that those signing the
plat are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to
signing the plat, a title policy for the local government in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be dedicated to the
public; and
   (15)   Monument identification.
SEC. 29-4123.   MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   If the final plat is under one (1) ownership and is no more than five (5)
lots, no formal commission approval is needed and the plats can go directly to
the City Council unless there are new streets, other public improvements, or
easements of egress or ingress.
SEC. 29-4124.   CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   The following certificates shall be executed on the final plat or shall
accompany it.
   (1)   Owner's Certificate:
   The following is an example of the owner's certificate:
   State of Illinois      )
   Rock Island County   ) SS.
   City of Moline      )
   Know all men by these presents, that we/I, (name(s) of owner, owner(s) and
proprietor(s) of the land shown on the accompanying plat and described in the
accompanying certificate of the surveyor) do hereby certify that I/we have
caused said survey be made and acknowledge the said plat as correct, and do
hereby adopt and accept the same and cause it to be known as (name of
subdivision).
   Easements are hereby dedicated for the use of the City of Moline, and public
facilities franchise to do business within the City of Moline, as indicated on
the plat and marked drainage and utility easement to install, lay, construct,
renew, operate and maintain drainage ways, drainage structures, gas, water,
sewer pipes, conduits, cable, poles and wires, overhead and underground, with
all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other appliances for the purpose of
serving the subdivision and other property with gas, water, sewer, electric and
telephone service and to overhang all lots with aerial service wires to serve
adjacent lots, together with the right to enter upon lots at all times to
install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain said gas, water and sewer
pipes, conduits, cables, poles, wires, braces, guys, anchors and other
appliances, and to trim and keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or saplings that
interfere or threaten to interfere with said public utility equipment, but same
may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other purposes that do not
interfere with the use of said easement for public utility purposes.
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions would
be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation of the
City plan commission or the Council; important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the
minimum habitable floor area.)
   Sidewalks shall be constructed at the time the structure is constructed or
at the direction of the board of local improvements recommended to the City
Council of the City of Moline.
   All streets, alleys, and public open spaces shown and not heretofore
dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public.
   Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between
which lines and the property lines of the streets there shall be erected or
maintained no building structure.
   The foregoing covenants (or restrictions), are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until (25
year period is suggested), at which time said covenants (or restrictions) shall
be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless by
vote of a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these
covenants (or restrictions), in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of
the foregoing covenants (or restrictions), by judgment or court order, shall in
no way affect any of the other covenants (or restrictions), which shall remain
in full force and effect.
   In witness whereof, we hereunto affix our hands and seals this ____ day of
____________________, A.D. 20_____.
                        _________________________________(Seal)
      _________________________________(Seal)
   (2)      Irrevocable Offers of Dedication Forms:
      a.   The following form shall be placed upon a final plat of a
subdivision whenever said plat is approved upon submission of a subdivider's
bond or escrow agreement as provided for in Sec.
29-4113:
   The owner, or owner's representative, hereby irrevocably offers for
dedication to the City of Moline, in fee simple absolute unless otherwise
called for on the plat all the streets, local government uses, easements,
parks, and required utilities shown within the subdivision plat and
construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated
_______________________ and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Rock Island County, Illinois.
   BY___________________________________
___________________________________
                         Date _______________________________
      b.   The following form shall accompany any final plat set forth in a.
above and shall be presented for recording simultaneously with any such plat,
but shall be recorded immediately prior to the recording of the plat.
   OFFER OF IRREVOCABLE DEDICATION
   Agreement made this day of________________20____ by and between
________________________________, _______________________________ having
____________________ office and place of business at __________________________
___________________________, hereinafter referred to as "Developer", and the
City of Moline, a municipal corporation having its principal office at 619 -
16th Street, hereinafter designated as "City;"
   WHEREAS, the City is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled
_______________________ dated __________________ and made by
_______________________; and
   WHEREAS, said plat and the construction plans associated therewith
designated certain property interests and public improvements consisting of
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
to be dedicated to the City free and clear of all encumbrances and liens,
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 29 of the Moline Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, the Developer, simultaneously with final plat approval or before,
shall post a subdivider's bond with the City for the construction and payment
therefor, maintenance, and dedication of said interests and improvements; and
   WHEREAS, the Developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said
improvements and interests in land to the City as more particularly described
in Schedule ________ attached hereto; and
   WHEREAS, the Developer has delivered deed of dedication to the City to be
held in trust by it for the said improvements and interests in land as
described herein;
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the City's approval of said subdivision
plat, it is mutually agreed as follows:
   (a)   The Developer herewith delivers to the City deed of dedication in fee
simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat for the premises and
improvements described in Schedule ____________________ attached hereto, said
delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City to be held by the City
in trust until the acceptance or rejection of such offer of dedication by the
City Council.
   (b)   The Developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is
irrevocable and can be accepted by the local government at any time.
   (c)   The Developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of
the land and improvements pursuant to the Subdivider's Bond and the provisions
of
Chapter 29 of the Moline Code of Ordinances and any conditions of approval of
said subdivision and upon acceptance by the City of the offer of dedication
shall furnish, within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City of
said acceptance of the offer of dedication, to the City a title insurance
policy issued by a licensed title insurance company authorized to do business
in the State of Illinois in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,0000.00),
certifying that the premises are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
and that fee simple title or other specific interest reposes in the City and
shall furnish to the City a check for all necessary fees and taxes to record
the deed(s) heretofore delivered.
   (d)   That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with the land and
shall be binding on all assigns, grantees, successors, or heirs of the
Developer.
   CITY OF MOLINE, ILLINOIS
(Seal)
________________________
   Mayor
   Attest:__________________
          City Clerk
   Approved as to Form:
_________________________
   City Attorney          DEVELOPER
      _________________________
_________________________
(Seal)
_________________________
   (3)   Notary Public's Certificate:
   State of Illinois    )
) SS
   County of Rock Island )
   I, ________________________, a Notary Public in and for the County
aforesaid, do hereby certify that ___________(owners)_____ are personally known
to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, and that they appear before me this day in person and acknowledge
that they signed and sealed the same as their free and voluntary act for the
uses and purposes therein set forth, including the release waiver of the right
of homestead.
   Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of
______________________, 20____.
______________________________
      Notary Public
   (4)   Surveyor's Certificate:
   The following Surveyor's Certificate shall accompany or be placed on the
final plat:
   State of Illinois      )
            ) SS.
   Rock Island County   )
   I, _______________________________________, an Illinois professional land
surveyor, hereby certify that the annexed plat is a true and correct
representation of a survey made by me or under my direction according to the
surveying laws of the State of Illinois and the City of Moline's Subdivision
Ordinance, or the following described property to wit:
   Monuments as shown on the plat are set or will be set within thirty (30)
days after the completion of the required improvements and their acceptance by
the City, and such monuments are or will be sufficient to enable the survey to
be retraced and will occupy the positions shown thereon.
   (1)   (No) part of the property covered by this plat of subdivision is
located within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   In witness I hereunto set my hand and seal this ____________
day of ________________________, A.D. 20_____.
______________________________________
                                 Illinois Professional Land Surveyor
   (5)   County Clerk's Certificate:
   I, _______________________, County Clerk of Rock Island County, Illinois, do
hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real
estate included within this plat.
__________________________________________
   County Clerk         
                       __________________________________________
   Date   
   (6)   Plan Commission Certificate:
   STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
   ROCK ISLAND COUNTY   ) SS
   CITY OF MOLINE      )
   We, the undersigned officers of the Plan Commission of the City of Moline,
Illinois, do certify that the accompanying plat of
______________________________________, an addition to the City of Moline,
Illinois, was recommended to the City Council of the City of Moline, Illinois,
at a meeting held on the _________ day of ________________________, A.D.
20______.
   MOLINE PLAN COMMISSION
_________________________________________
   Chairman
_________________________________________
   Secretary
   (7)   Certificate of City Council:
   I, ______________________________, Mayor of the City of Moline, do hereby
certify that the plat shown hereon was duly presented to the City Council and
approved at a meeting of same held on the ___day of_________________, A.D.
20_____.
_________________________________________
   Mayor
   Attest: _________________________________
City Clerk
   (8)   City Clerk's Certificate:
   The following form shall be used for certification by the City Clerk:
   I, ____________________, City Clerk in and for the said City of Moline, do
hereby certify that all due assessments have been paid upon the real estate
described on the accompanying plat.
   In witness whereof, I hereunto set my hand and official seal this ________
day of_____________________, A.D. 20___.
_____________________________________
   City Clerk
   (9)   Engineer's Certificate:
   The following form shall be used for certification by the City Engineer.
   The design of the accompanying plat has been examined and found to meet the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance.
__________________________________________
      Director of Public Works
   (10)   City Engineer’s Certificate:
   Certificate to approve subdivisions of five lots or less.
   The following form shall be used for the approval of subdivisions of five
(5) lots or less by the Director of Public Works and the Director of Planning
and Development in accordance with Sec.
29-4123.
   We, the undersigned Director of Public Works and Director of Planning and
Development, do hereby certify that the accompanying plat has been examined and
found to be in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance
and recommend approval of this plat by the City of Moline.
_________________________________________
   Director of Public Works
_________________________________________
   Director of Planning and Development
   (11)   Roadway Access and Sewage Disposal Systems
      a.   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where
roadway access is to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
Department of Transportation or another relevant local highway authority.
   This plat approved with respect to roadway access under provisions of 765
ILCS 205/2.
_________________________
   Agency
_________________________
   Title
_________________________
   Date
      b.   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat where
any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer system.
   This plat is approved with respect to sewage disposal systems under
provisions of Chapter 109, paragraph 2, Ill. Rev. Stat.
_________________________
   Agency
_________________________
   Title
_________________________
   Date
   (12)   Required Disclosures To Be On Face of Final Plat
   The following disclosures are to be placed on the face of the final plat:
      a.   Either of the following, depending upon which is the most
appropriate, shall be placed upon the face of the final plat by a registered
professional engineer and the owner or owner's duly authorized attorney:
   To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters both
within and around this subdivision will not be changed by the construction of
same or any part thereof.
   (seal)
_______________________________________________________
   Registered Professional Engineer
   Registration No._____________
_______________________________________________________
         Owner or Attorney
   To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters
either within or around this subdivision will be changed by the construction of
same or parts thereof but adequate provision has been made to collect and
divert said surface waters to public drains or private drains to which the
owner has legal access and said provisions are such that the capacity of no
natural or man-made drain will be exceeded and no damage to adjoining
properties will incur because of said provisions.
   (seal)
      _______________________________________________________
   Registered Professional Engineer
   Registration No.________________
_______________________________________________________
   Owner or Attorney
      b.   In addition to one of the above, the owner or subdivider shall
disclose on the face of said subdivision final plat the following if a bond or
escrow agreement is provided:
   I hereby disclose and give notice to all that this subdivision has been
approved by the City upon the condition that I post bond or enter into an
escrow agreement to secure installation of all improvements required by said
City. The terms of same allow me a period of two (2) years to install said
improvements or provide the City the right to install same to the extent of
funds provided by such security. City ordinances do not permit, however,
occupancy of any premises until adequate provision for access for water and
sanitary sewerage are made.
_______________________________________Owner or Subdivider
      c.   Also, any disclosure required by state or federal statute shall be
displayed upon said plat.
SEC. 29-4125.   ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall either approve or disapprove the application for
final plat approval by resolution within sixty (60) days from the date of said
application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless the City Council and the subdivider mutually
agree to extend this time limit. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.) The City Council shall
not approve any final plat unless:
   (1)   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat
if required; and
   (2)   The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and
improvements standards of this ordinance and the Official Map; and
   (3)   To the City Council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies
with all pertinent statutory requirements; and
   (4)   Either of the following has been met:
      a.   All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted,
and dedicated; or
      b.   The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of assurance
as stated in Sec.
29-4113.
   If the City Council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall
specify the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for
approval.
SEC. 29-4126.   MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the
subdivision for a period of one (1) year and provide a one (1) year maintenance
bond prior to acceptance and dedication to the City of Moline or other
appropriate entity. Said bond shall be in the amount determined by the director
of public works to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the
required improvements for a period of one (1) year from the date of their
acceptance and dedication. If at any time during the one (1) year period the
improvements are found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the
subdivider/developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such
costs within ninety (90) days after demand is made upon said subdivider/
developer by the director of public works, the City of Moline shall use the
maintenance bond to make the necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of
repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the subdivider/developer shall be
liable for the excess. At the end of the one (1) year period, the maintenance
bond shall be released.
ARTICLE V. OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
SEC. 29-5100.   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, DUTIES.
   The director of planning and development, referred to herein as the
administrator, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
SEC. 29-5101.   AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this ordinance may be proposed by any member of the City
Council, any plan commission member, or any party in interest. Every amendment
proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form in the director's office. The
director of planning and development shall promptly transmit each proposal,
together with any comments or recommendations said director may wish to make,
to the City plan commission for a public hearing.
SEC. 29-5102.   PUBLIC HEARING, NOTICE.
   The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on every amendment proposal
within a reasonable time after said proposal is submitted to them. At the
hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place
of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed amendment shall be given not
more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Moline.
SEC. 29-5103.   ADVISORY REPORT, ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the plan commission shall
submit an advisory report to the City Council. The City Council shall act on
the proposed amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting following submission of
this report. Without another public hearing, the City Council may either pass,
modify or reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the plan
commission for further consideration.
SEC. 29-5103.1.   FEES.
   Any submittal of a subdivision, minor or otherwise as defined within this
chapter, filed by or on behalf of, the owner or owners of the property
affected, shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in “The Development Review
Application Fee Schedule” as adopted by the City Council, from time to time, by
a separate resolution, which schedule shall be maintained in the office of the
City Clerk, and available for review and inspection by the public, during
normal business hours, Moline City Hall, second floor, at 619 - 16th Street,
Moline, Illinois.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-18; new Sec. 29-103.1 enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 29-5104.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 98-2-6; §29-5104 repealed; new §29-5104 enacted; 02/03/98)
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this ordinance.
SEC. 29-5105.   REPEAL.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the
extent of such conflict hereby repealed.
SEC. 29-5106.   SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted the article and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in this article
of any such invalid section, subsection, clause, phrase or word.
APPENDIX 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.png]
 
APPENDIX 2
LETTER OF CREDIT
(name of bank)         
(City bank’s location)   ,    (State)      
   Irrevocable Credit No. ____________      Date: ___________________, 20______
   City of ______________, Illinois         All drafts must be marked:
                      “Drawn under Credit No. __________,
   dated _______________, 20______”
   Gentlemen:
   We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of
________________________________________________ ($______________) in your
favor for the account of (Developer)               , the developer of       
(name of subdivision), a subdivision proposed for final plat in the City of
________________________, Illinois, or within its territorial jurisdiction, for
the benefit of the City of ______________________. Said money hereunder shall
be available by your drafts at sight drawn on us drawn in the name of the City
of ____________________, Illinois. All drafts must be marked “Drawn under
      (name of bank)      , Credit No. _____________ dated
_____________________, 20_____.”   
   Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the Director of
Engineering of the City of _____________________, Illinois, that the request is
for the installation or construction of improvements required pursuant to the
plans, specifications, and cost estimates dated __________________, 20______,
and approved by the City of _________________, Illinois, and on file with the
Director of Engineering. Further, all requests for disbursements under this
Letter of Credit made prior to    (must be 2 years after filing)   , 20______,
shall be submitted by Developer and accompanied by a certified estimate of
units and value of work completed with contractor’s sworn statement and waiver
of mechanics’ liens, all approved by the Developer’s engineer and the Director
of Engineering of the City of ______________________, Illinois. It is
understood as to all disbursements that the Director of Engineering shall
approve partial drawings only as long as there remains a sufficient balance to
the Credit to cover his then current estimate of costs for the required
improvements which at that time remain to be completed but in no case shall his
approval exceed ninety percent (90%) of the value of work completed.
   In the event that all of the work for the improvements is not completed to
the satisfaction of the City on or before    (1 day short of 2 years after
filing )   , 20______, the funds remaining under this Letter of Credit shall be
available to the City of __________________, Illinois upon presentation of
their draft at sight drawn on us in the name of the City of _______________,
Illinois. This draft so drawn must be marked “Drawn under    (name of bank)
Credit No. ___________, dated _______________________ 20______.” Further, such
draft shall be accompanied by a signed statement by the Director of Engineering
of the City of ______________, Illinois, do hereby certify that work on
required improvements in the subdivision named ____________________________ has
not been completed to the satisfaction of the City of
____________________________ on or before    (one day short of two years after
filing)   , 20______.
   This Credit shall expire on    (2 years after filing)   , 20______;
provided, however, the undersigned shall notify the Director of Engineering, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ninety (90) days prior to
expiration date that this Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided,
however, in no event shall this
   APPENDIX 2, Continued
   Credit expire except upon prior written notice, it being expressly agreed by
the undersigned that the above expiration date shall be extended as shall be
required to comply with this notice provision.
   The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force
and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be
made from time to time to the specifications, and agreements for the
subdivision, without notice from the City of the amendments or modifications.
   All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this
Irrevocable Letter of Credit have been completed.
   We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of
drafts, drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same
shall be honored upon presentation to the drawer. This Credit must accompany
any draft which exhausts the Credit and must be surrendered concurrently with
the presentation of such draft.
   We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this
Credit will be honored upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date
any demand made in conformity with this Credit is presented, we fail to honor
same, we agree to pay all attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses
incurred by the City of ____________________ in enforcing the terms of this
Credit.
   Dated: ______________________________, 20______.
         (name of bank)      
   ____________________________________
   By__________________________________
   (title)
   Attest:
_____________________________
(title)
APPENDIX 3
SUBDIVISION PERFORMANCE BOND
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that _____________________, as PRINCIPAL,
__________________, as SURETY, and _________________________, as ADDITIONAL
SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto the City of ___________________,
ILLINOIS, as OBLIGEE, in the sum of _____________________________________
______________($_____________________) lawful money of the United States, for
the payment whereof to the Obligee, the Principal and the Surety, and
Additional Surety bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators,
successors, and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly to these presents:
   SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED, THIS _______________ day of ____________________,
20______.
   WHEREAS, application was made to the Obligee for approval of a subdivision
shown on plat entitled “________________,” a subdivision to the City of
_______________, County of Rock Island, Illinois, filed with the Director of
Planning to the Planning Commission of the City of _______________, Illinois,
on __________, 20______, said final plat may be approved upon certain
conditions, one of which is that a performance bond in the amount of
_________________________($___________________), to be filed with the City
Clerk to guarantee certain improvements in said subdivision.
   NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that if the above
named Principal shall, within two (2) years from the date hereof, well and
truly make and perform the required improvements and construction of public
improvements in and adjacent to said subdivision in accordance with the
specifications of the City of ______________________ Engineering Department and
the Subdivision Regulations of the City of ________________, then this
obligation shall be void; otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
   It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that any required
improvements have not been installed as provided aforesaid within the term of
this Performance Bond, the Governing Body may thereupon declare this bond to be
in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder and upon receipt of
the proceeds thereof, the City of ___________________ shall install the extent
of building development that has taken place in said subdivision but not
exceeding the amount of such proceeds.
_________________________________ Principal
   By: _____________________________ Principal
_________________________________ Surety
By: _____________________________
Attorney in Fact
   Additional Surety
   Approved as to Form: __________________________________
   By________________________________ __________________________________
805-8
APPENDIX 4
ESCROW AGREEMENT
   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this ___________ day of
______________, 20_________, by and between
_______________________________________________________________________________
hereinafter called “DEVELOPER”; the CITY OF ____________________________,
ILLINOIS, hereinafter called “CITY”; and the
___________________________________________________________ hereinafter called
“ESCROW HOLDER.”
WITNESSETH:
   WHEREAS, Developer has submitted a proposed plat of a subdivision within the
City and said Developer is required by
Chapter 34, “Subdivision Regulations” of the Code of Ordinances of said City
either to make certain improvements in said subdivision, or to guarantee that
said improvements will be made within a period of two years from the date of
the filing of the plat of said subdivision, or to petition the Board of Local
Improvements for construction of said improvements, which requirements must be
met prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the City; and
   WHEREAS, under the terms of the subdivision regulations of the City,
Developer may deposit the estimated cost of the required improvements in escrow
with the City as one method of insuring to said City that the required
improvements will be completed and Developer has elected to do so.
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein
and the mutual benefits to be derived therefrom, it is hereby agreed and
understood by and between the parties hereto as follows:
   1.   Developer has this date deposited the sum of          ($      ) with
the Escrow Holder, which sum is composed of the following sums for the noted
improvements, to-wit the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, said sum
being the estimated cost of the required improvements for the development of
the proposed subdivision to be known
as_______________________________________________.
   2.   Whenever the Developer shall complete any required improvement and said
improvement shall be approved and accepted by the City of _______________within
a period of _________________________ from the recording of said subdivision
plat, then in such event the Escrow Holder shall return to Developer upon the
approval and acceptance of said improvement by the City of ___________________,
such portion of the sum of money deposited herewith as shall have been
deposited for the particular improvement completed, so that upon the completion
by Developer and approval by City of all required improvements, all the money
deposited shall be returned to Developer.
   3.   In the event Developer shall fail to complete any portion of the
required improvements within the period of ______________________from the
recording of said subdivision plat, then Escrow Holder is hereby expressly
authorized to disburse such portion of the money deposited herewith as shall be
required to complete the required improvements for said subdivision plat. In
the event Developer shall notify City of his inability to complete said
improvements within said _______________________ period, then in such event
Escrow Holder may also expend such sums as necessary to complete said
improvements. Upon the completion of all said required improvements, then
Escrow Holder shall return to Developer any unexpended balance of the sum
deposited herewith, less any other charges which may be outstanding against
Developer in connection with said subdivision.
   4.   In the event Escrow Holder shall use the sum deposited herewith for the
construction or completion of the construction of any or all of the required
improvements, the construction of said improvements may be done by the City of
_________________under the direction of its Engineering Department and at its
actual cost including a reasonable charge for engineering and supervision; or
may be done by contract between the City of _________________ and some
responsible contractor or contractors, after sufficient opportunity has been
given for
   APPENDIX 4, Continued
competitive bidding, in accordance with the normal practices of the City, and
in such event the cost of construction shall be based upon the actual contract
amount or amounts plus a reasonable charge for engineering and inspection by
the City of ____________________.
   5.   The deposit of said sum with the Escrow Holder is in an interest
bearing account, the interest from which shall be the property of the City. But
if no claim is made for non-performance hereunder within two (2) years from the
date hereof for the construction of said improvements, the escrow account shall
be released to the Developer and the interest from which shall revert to the
Developer upon the failure of said condition; neither the City nor the
Developer shall have the right to withdraw interest from said account during
the term thereof.
   6.   The City shall allow substitution of Escrow Holder and Developer, and
it shall allow this instrument to be substituted by a bond with adequate surety
which guarantees payment under the terms hereof. Said substitution shall be by
filing with the City an assignment, replacement instrument, or bond and upon
said filing the City Attorney shall execute the necessary release.
   7.   By execution of these presents and for valuable consideration paid to
it by Developer, the Escrow Holder consents and agrees to meet the obligations
imposed upon it hereby.
   8.   The parties hereto agree that should any litigation arise out of this
Escrow Agreement, the venue for such litigation shall be in the Circuit Court
of the Fourteenth Judicial Circuit, Rock Island County, Illinois, and the
parties hereto expressly waive all rights to venue inconsistent herewith.
   9.   This Agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns,
administrators, executors and successors of the parties hereto.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused these presents to be
executed in the date first above mentioned.
   ___________________________________________
   ___________________________________________
   “DEVELOPER”
   CITY OF _________________________, ILLINOIS
   BY _______________________________________
   MAYOR
   ATTEST:___________________________________
   CITY CLERK
   Approved as to Form:
   ___________________________________________
“CITY”
   __________________________________________
   ___________________________________________
   ATTEST:___________________________________
      “ESCROW HOLDER”
CHAPTER 30
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND CUSTOMER PROTECTION
   Art. I.    In General, §30-1100
   Art. II.   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee, §30-2100 - §30-2106
   Art. III.   Cable and Video Customer Protection, §30-3100 - §30-3104
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 30-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them:
   (a)   Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   (b)   Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
   (c)   Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature,
including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video
system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable
service or video service area within the City. Gross revenues shall also
include such other revenue sources from cable service or video service
delivered over the holder's system as may now exist or hereafter develop,
provided that such revenues, fees, receipts, or charges may be lawfully
included in the gross revenue base for purposes of computing the City's
permissible revenue under State or Federal law, as amended from time to time.
Gross Revenues shall include amounts collected from Subscribers for Franchise
Fees pursuant to City of Dallas, Texas v. F.C.C., 118 F.3d 393 (5th Cir. 1997),
and amounts collected from non-Subscriber revenues in accordance with the Court
of Appeals decisiion resolving the case commonly known as the “Pasadena
Decision,” City of Pasadena, California et. al., Petitions for Declaratory
Ruling on Franchise Fee Pass Through Issues, CSR 5282-R, Memorandum Opinion and
Order, 16 FCC Rcd. 18192 (2001), and In re: Texas Coalition of Cities for
Utility Issues v. F.C.C., 324 F.3d 802 (5th Cir. 2003).
   (d)   Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220
ILCS 5/21-401.
   (e)   Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to
subscribers.
   (f)   Service provider fee means the amount paid under this chapter and 220
ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a City for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   (g)   Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in
part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any
video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
(Ord. No. 3028-2018; Sec. 30-1100(e) and (f), “PEG” and “PEG access support
fee, respectively, repealed in their entirety; remaining subsections
consecutively renamed; 07/17/18)
ARTICLE II. CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SEC. 30-2100.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (a)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the City.
   (b)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder’s gross revenues.
   (c)    Notice to the City. The holder shall notify the City's department of
finance at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to
offer cable service or video service in the City. The notice shall include the
address to which all notices from the City should be mailed.
   (d)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the City. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
City.
   (e)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due to
the City's department of finance on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days
after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid
on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining
the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (f)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the City in which a fee is paid.
   (g)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under Sec.
30-2100(b).
SEC. 30-2101.   RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
(Ord. No. 3028-2018; Sec. 30-2101, “PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED,” repealed
in its entirety and section reserved for future use; 07/18/18)
SEC. 30-2102.   APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this Chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
SEC. 30-2103.   NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any generally applicable tax that is or may later be imposed by the City,
including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the
holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the City's simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the City's 911 or E911
fees, taxes or charges.
SEC. 30-2104.   AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   Audit requirement. A holder that has received State-issued authorization is
subject to an audit of its service provider fees derived from the provision of
cable or video services to subscribers within any part of the City which is
located in the holder’s service territory. Any such audit shall be conducted by
the local unit of government or its agent for the sole purpose of determining
any overpayment or underpayment of the holder’s service provider fee to the
local unit of government. Any audit conducted pursuant to this Section shall be
governed by Section 11-42-11.05 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
SEC. 30-2105.   LATE FEES AND PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights
Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
SEC. 30-2106.   SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
provision of this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, this determination shall not affect, impair,
or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance, but shall be confined in its
operation to the section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or phrase of this
ordinance in which such determination shall have been made.
ARTICLE III. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SEC. 30-3100.   CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION.
   (a)   Adoption. The regulations of the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501, are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the cable or video providers offering services within the City’s boundaries.
   (b)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the City’s boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action
by the City Council.
SEC. 30-3101.   ENFORCEMENT.
   The City does hereby declare its intent pursuant to law to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
City.
SEC. 30-3102.   PENALTIES.
    The City, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a
schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall be not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
and not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   (a)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (b)   The City shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach before exercising any available remedies.
   (c)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (b).
SEC. 30-3103.   CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The City hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501
(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing
cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
SEC. 30-3104.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this article, or the application of any provision of
this article, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence
shall not affect other provisions of this article, or their application, that
can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this article.
(Ord. No. 3012-2014; Chapter 30, formerly reserved for future use, amended by
enacting new Chapter 30; 05/20/14)
Ord. No. 3033-2023; repealed Chapter 30 in its entirety; new Chapter 30
enacted; 08/08/23)
(Art. III scrivener’s errors corrected 03/09/15 by correcting ILCS citations to
220 ILCS 5/22-501)
CHAPTER 31
TAXATION
   Art. I.   Hotel and Vacation Rental Taxes, §31-1100 - §31-1107
   Art. II.   Foreign Fire Insurance License Fees, §31-2100 - §31-2104
   Art. III.   Motor Fuel Tax, §31-3100 - §31-3106
   Art. IV.   Sales Tax, §31-4100 - §31-4102
   Art. V.   Amusement Tax, §31-5100 - §31-5108
   Art. VI.   Video Tax, §31-6100 - §31-6104
   Art. VII.   Prepared Food and Liquor Tax, §31-7100 - §31-7106
   Art. VIII.   Utility Tax, §31-8100 - §31-8111
   Art. IX.   Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax, §31-9100 - §31-9108
   Art X.   Municipal Gas Use Tax, §31-10100 - §31-10103
   Art. XI.   Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax, §31-11100 - 31-11101
   Art. XII.   Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights, § 31-12100 - § 31-12115
   Art. XIII.   Municipal Grocery Tax
ARTICLE I. HOTEL AND VACATION RENTAL TAXES
SEC. 31-1100.   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   (1)   Hotel. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, in which the
public may, for consideration, obtain living quarters or sleeping
accommodations, including but not limited to those booked through online travel
companies, businesses or websites, including Airbnb.com, VRBO.com,
Craigslist.org or similar websites. The term includes motels, short-term
rentals, inns, tourist homes, lodging houses, rooming houses, apartment houses
and residential homes.
   (2)   Online Travel Company shall be referenced as OTC throughout this
article, and means an organization that books, reserves, or rents hotel
accommodations and makes other travel arrangements for consumers via the
internet or other digital means.
   (3)   Operator. Operator means any person engaged in the business of selling
or reselling the right to occupy hotel or vacation rental accommodations to the
public, whether online, in person or otherwise.
   (4)   Person. Person means any natural person; trustee, court appointed
representative; syndicate; association; partnership; firm, club, company;
corporation; business trust; institution; agency; government corporation;
municipal corporation, district, or other political subdivision; contractor;
supplier, vendor; vendor operator; user or owner; or any officers, agents,
employees, or other representatives of any of the above, acting either for such
person or entity or for any other person in any capacity; or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine,
singular or plural is included in any circumstances.
   (5)   Renter. Renter means the user, lessee or tenant of a hotel room or
vacation rental unit.
   (6)   Room Rental Rate. The consideration received as a condition for
granting or reserving occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of
any kind or nature. This shall also include (a) the net rate paid to the hotel
by the OTC for room occupancy by the consumer, and (b) the amount retained by
the OTC for travel-related services it provides to the traveler (sometimes
referred to as a "facilitation fee"), and any additional amount retained by the
OTC as compensation for its travel services to the consumer for the individual
transaction, or in the instance of a direct rental of a room or rooms by the
consumer with the hotel, the room rental rate shall mean the amount charged by
the hotel directly to the consumer for the occupancy of the room. The room
rental rate excludes any generally applicable taxes actually remitted to a
government authority.
   (7)   Vacation Rental Unit. A dwelling unit or a habitable unit that is
offered for rent, lease, or hire that is rented, leased or hired for a fixed
period of less than thirty (30) days for which an owner or operator receives
consideration from a person and that person has the right to use, occupy or
possess the dwelling unit or habitable unit for said period.
SEC. 31-1101.   HOTEL AND VACATION RENTAL USE TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of seven percent (7%) of the
room rental rate charged for the privilege of renting and use of a hotel room
or vacation rental unit within the City of Moline for each twenty-four (24)
hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room charge is made.
   (b)   The ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the renter of a hotel room or vacation rental unit.
   (c)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, OTC and/or
operator of every hotel room and vacation rental unit to secure said tax from
the renter of the hotel room or vacation rental unit and to issue payment to
the director of finance of the City of Moline pursuant to said tax under
procedures prescribed by the director of finance or as otherwise provided in
this article.
   (d)   Every owner, operator and OTC shall be required to collect the tax
levied by this article and shall secure said tax from the renter at the time
said owner, operator and OTC collects the rental payment for the hotel room or
vacation rental unit. Should the payment of the tax by the renter subsequently
fail or otherwise not be able to be collected, the owner, operator and OTC
shall not be liable to the City for said tax.
   (e)   The amounts collected by this tax shall be deposited in the General
Fund of the City to be used for various purposes as determined by the City
Council.
(Ord. No. 3031-2020; Sec. 31-1100(d) amended; 10/13/20)
SEC. 31-1102.   SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. 7 HOTEL TAX.
   In addition to all other taxes levied in this chapter, there is hereby
levied and imposed upon all owners, operators and OTC engaged in the business
of renting, leasing or letting hotel rooms within Special Service Area No. 7 a
tax of two and one-tenth percent (2.1%) of the gross rental receipts from such
renting, leasing or letting. Special Service Area No. 7 is generally located as
follows: bounded on the West by 11th Street, bounded on the East by 14th
Street, bounded on the South by the alley parallel to 4th Avenue and bounded on
the North by the railroad tracks parallel to River Drive.
   (a)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner and OTC of every hotel
within Special Service Area No. 7 to pay over said tax to the director of
finance of the City of Moline under procedures prescribed by the director of
finance, or as otherwise provided in this article.
   (b)   Persons subject to any tax imposed by this Section may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax
as an additional charge.
   (c)   The amounts collected by this tax shall be expended solely for the
ongoing maintenance of public amenities and facilities located within the
boundaries of Special Service Area No. 7.
SEC. 31-1102A.   SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. 5 HOTEL TAX.
   (a)   In addition to all other taxes levied in this chapter, there is hereby
levied and imposed upon all owners, operators and OTC engaged in the business
of renting, leasing or letting hotel rooms within Special Service Area No. 5 a
tax of one percent (1%) of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing
or letting. The boundaries of Special Service Area No. 5, Base Street Landing,
are generally described as the Mississippi River on the north, River Drive on
the south, 19th Street on the east and the Arsenal Bridge on the west, with the
exception of property owned by the City of Moline.
   (b)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner and OTC of every hotel
within Special Service Area No. 5 to pay over said tax to the director of
finance of the City of Moline under procedures prescribed by the director of
finance, or as otherwise provided in this article.
   (c)   The amounts collected by this tax shall be expended solely for the
ongoing maintenance of public amenities and facilities located within the
boundaries of Special Service Area No. 5.
SEC. 31-1103.   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The director of finance or authorized designee may enter the premises of any
hotel or vacation rental unit or OTC for inspection and examination of records
in order to effectuate the proper administration of this article, and to assure
the enforcement of the collection of the taxes imposed. It shall be unlawful
for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the said director of
finance or designee in the discharge of said director's duties in the
performance of this article. It shall be the duty of every owner, operator and
OTC to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the director of
finance shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a
daily sheet showing (1) the number of hotel rooms or vacation rental units
rented during the twenty-four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of
the same hotel room or vacation rental units where such shall occur; and (2)
the actual hotel or vacation rental unit tax receipts collection for the date
in question.
SEC. 31-1104.   TAX AND REPORT
   (a)   The owner, operator and/or OTC which collects the room rental rate for
each hotel room or vacation rental unit within the City of Moline shall
transmit to the finance department of the City of Moline for receipt by said
department, no later than the last day of each calendar month, for the tax
owing for the previous month, a report upon forms supplied by said finance
department, indicating the gross receipts from room rental rates from the
facility along with payment to the City of all taxes imposed by this article
which are due and owning.
SEC. 31-1105.   COLLECTION.
   Whenever any owner, operator and/or OTC fails to remit any tax as herein
provided, the city attorney, upon the request of the director of finance, shall
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the remittance of said tax on
behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 31-1106.   PENALTIES.
   (a)   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and
interest applicable to the taxes described in this article.
   (b)   A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day upon which said person shall continue any violation of this article, or
permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof.
SEC. 31-1107.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this article, on the application thereof to any person
or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 3083-2004; Article I repealed; new Article I, "HOTEL-MOTEL TAXES,"
enacted; 10/12/04)
(Ord. No. 3011-2019; Article I repealed; new Article, I, "HOTEL AND VACATION
RENTAL TAXES," enacted; 04/09/19)
ARTICLE II. FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE LICENSE FEES
SEC. 31-2100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
Article II, Division 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1, et
seq.
SEC. 31-2101.   LICENSE FEE IMPOSED; PERSONS LIABLE; AMOUNT; DUE DATE.
   Any foreign fire insurance company shall pay to the City director of
finance, upon the fifteenth day of July of each year, a sum equal to two
percent (2%) of the gross receipts of premiums received by the corporation,
company or association, or their agency or agents, for business effected or
transacted for fire insurance within the City for the year ending the first day
of July preceding the due date. The amount imposed shall be a license fee upon
all such corporations, companies or associations transacting said business
within the City.
SEC. 31-2102.   LICENSE AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
   Each person acting as agent or otherwise, for or upon behalf of any such
corporation, company or association, shall on or before the fifteenth day of
July of each year, render the treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board a
full, true and just account verified by oath of all of the premiums which,
during the preceding year ending on the first day of July, shall have been
received by such person acting as agent or any other person for or upon behalf
of such person, and shall fully and specially set out in said report the
amounts received as premiums for fire insurance.
   The agent of a fire insurance company subject to this article shall also at
the time of making of the annual report required by this article, pay to the
treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board the sum of two percent (2%) upon
the gross receipts of the corporation, company or association, obtained as
premiums for effecting fire insurance in the City.
SEC. 31-2103.   FAILURE TO PAY FEE TO TERMINATERIGHT TO DO BUSINESS IN THE
CITY.
   If any account required by this article is not rendered on or before the due
date, or if the tax or license fee shall remain unpaid after that day, it shall
be unlawful for any such corporation, company or association, to transact any
business of fire insurance in the City until the requirements of this article
have been fully complied with; however, this section shall in no way affect the
validity of any risk that may be taken in violation hereof, between such
corporation, company or association, and the person so insured.
SEC. 31-2104.   DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
   All funds received under the provisions of this article shall form and
constitute a fund, separate and apart from all other funds of the City, for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Moline Fire Department. Said funds, when
received, shall be paid over by the treasurer of the foreign fire insurance
board and it shall be said treasurer’s duty to place all such funds in a fund
designated the "Foreign Fire Insurance Fee Revenue Fund," which fund shall be
under the care and supervision of the foreign fire insurance tax revenue
administrative board.
ARTICLE III. MOTOR FUEL TAX
SEC. 31-3100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   (1)   Biodiesel means a fuel composed of mono alkyl esters of long chain
fatty acids derived from vegetable oils or animal fats, designated B100, and
meeting the requirements of ASTM (American Society for Testing Materials)
D6751.
   (2)   Bulk user means any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in
bulk storage facilities located within the City of Moline, which facilities are
owned, leased or controlled by said person, for subsequent dispensing into the
supply tanks of internal combustion engines operated by said person.
   (3)   Compressed natural gas  (cng) means natural gas compressed to a
pressure at or above 200-248 bar (i.e., 2900-3600 pounds per square inch) and
stored in high-pressure containers. Compressed natural gas is subject to tax at
the rate established in Section
31-3101(a), below. However, because compressed natural gas cannot be measured
in gallons, it must be converted to gallons using a conversion factor. For
purposes of calculating tax under the Motor Fuel Tax Ordinance, a gallon of
compressed natural gas means a quantity of compressed natural gas equal to
126.67 cubic feet of natural gas at 60 degrees Fahrenheit and one atmosphere of
pressure. In the alternative, it means a quantity of compressed natural gas
that weighs 5.66 pounds.
   (4)   Gasohol means a fuel used chiefly in internal combustion engines which
is comprised chiefly of gasoline and ethyl alcohols in variable quantities.
   (5)   Gasoline or diesel fuel means a volatile, highly flammable or
combustible, liquid mixture of hydrocarbons produced by the fractional
distillation of petroleum and used chiefly as a fuel in internal combustion
engines, but shall not include mixtures commonly known as kerosene and aviation
fuel, or mixtures used in the heating of buildings.
   (6)   Motor fuel means "gasohol" and "gasoline and diesel fuel" as defined
in this section.
   (7)   Person means any natural person, trustee, court appointed
representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company,
corporation, business trust, institution, agency, contractor, supplier, vendor,
vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other
representative, acting either individually or for any other person in any
capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
   The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstances.
   (8)   Retail gasoline dealer means any person who engages in the business of
selling motor fuel in the City of Moline, to a purchaser for use or consumption
and not for resale in any form.
   (9)   Sale, resale, selling means any transfer of ownership or possession,
or both, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any
means whatsoever for a valuable consideration.
(Ord. No. 3036-2014; Article III repealed; new Article III enacted; 12/16/14)
SEC. 31-3101.   TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of
motor fuel, or fraction thereof, sold at retail within the corporate limits of
the City of Moline, irrespective of the unit of measure in which it is actually
sold, a tax at the rate of one cent ($0.010) per gallon. The tax herein levied
shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. (Ord. No.
3082-3101; Sec. 31-3101 (a) repealed; new Sec. 31-3101 enacted; 10/12/04)
   (b)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this article shall
be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of persons engaged in the
retail sale of motor fuel.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of every retail gasoline dealer to secure said
tax from the purchaser at the time said dealer collects the purchase price for
the motor fuel and to pay over said tax to the City of Moline, department of
finance, as provided in this article except in the case of a sale to a bulk
user, in which case the bulk user shall pay over said tax to the City of
Moline, department of finance, as provided in this article.
   (d)   A retail gasoline dealer may make tax free sales with respect to which
said dealer is otherwise required to collect the tax when the sale is made to
the Federal Government, the State of Illinois, any municipality or unit of
local government as those terms are defined by Section 1 of Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, 1970, or any school district.
SEC. 31-3102.   TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
   (a)   Every retail gasoline dealer shall transmit to the department of
finance of the City of Moline for receipt by said department, no later than the
last day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the amount of motor
fuel tax collected for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report
upon forms supplied by said department of finance, indicating the gross gallons
of motor fuel sold for the said preceding calendar month, and such other
information as the department of finance may require for enforcement of this
article.
   (b)   Every bulk user shall transmit to the department of finance of the
City of Moline for receipt by said department, no later than the last day of
each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing
for the preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report upon forms supplied
by said department of finance indicating the gross gallons of motor fuel
purchased for said preceding calendar month and such other information as the
department of finance may require for enforcement of this article.
SEC. 31-3103.   RECORDS, INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Every retail gasoline dealer shall keep complete and accurate records,
including a daily sheet showing the gross gallons of motor fuel sold for each
day, and the amount of motor fuel tax collected on each day.
   (b)   Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases
of motor fuel, including the dates of the purchases, the gross gallons
purchased on each of said dates, and the names and addresses of the retail
gasoline dealers from whom each of said purchases were made.
   (c)   For the purpose of administering and enforcing this article, the
department of finance shall have the right to inspect all books, records and
reports of retail gasoline dealers and bulk users during their normal business
hours.
SEC. 31-3104.   ACCOUNTING.
   The department of finance of the City of Moline shall deliver the proceeds
of the motor fuel tax imposed by this article to the City director of finance
for deposit to the general fund.
SEC. 31-3105.   PENALTY, INTEREST ON DELINQUENT TAXES, ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and
interest applicable to the taxes described in this Article.
   (b)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, or
otherwise violates any provision of this article, the city attorney shall bring
or cause to be brought an action on behalf of the City of Moline in any court
of competent jurisdiction to enforce this article and collect any delinquent
tax, interest and penalties.
SEC. 31-3106.   EFFECTIVE DATE, SEVERABILITY.
   (a)   The motor fuel tax shall be levied, imposed and collected from the
first day of the month after the effective date of this article.
   (b)   If any one or more provisions of this article, or any clause, sentence
or paragraph thereof, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application of such
provisions or clause, sentence or paragraph thereof as to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
ARTICLE IV. SALES TAX
SEC. 31-4100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act and/or the Service Occupation Tax Act.
SEC. 31-4101.   IMPOSED.
   (a)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government or
qualifying food or qualifying medical items, at retail in this municipality at
the rate of one and one-quarter percent (1.25%) of the gross receipts from such
sales made in the course of such business; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all
persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, at the rate of one and one-quarter percent (1.25%) of the selling
price of all tangible personal property transferred by such an incident to a
sale of service.
   (b)   The imposition of these the taxes herein described is in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the
"Illinois Municipal Code" (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5).
(Ord. No. 98-6-7; Sec. 31-4100 repealed; new Sec. 31-4100 enacted; 06/23/98;
Ord. No. 99-7-5; Sec. 31-4100 repealed; new Sec. 31-4100 enacted; 07/27/99;
Ord. No. 2003-09-08; Sec. 31-4000 repealed; new Sec. 31-4100 enacted; 09/29/03;
Ord. No. 3019-2009; Sec. 31-4100 amended; 09/08/09)
SEC. 31-4102.   ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue
of the State of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
ARTICLE V. AMUSEMENT TAX
SEC. 31-5100.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   Admission fee means the sum of money or other property charged by the
amusement for the privilege of permitting a person or persons to enter, to
witness, and/or to participate in such an amusement.
   (2)   Amusement means: (1) any exhibition, performance, presentation or show
for entertainment purposes, including, but not limited to, any theatrical,
dramatic, musical or spectacular performance, promotional show, motion picture
show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo, athletic
contest, sport, game or similar exhibition such as boxing, wrestling, skating,
dancing, swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball,
basketball, softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games,
bowling or billiard or pool games; (2) any entertainment or recreational
activity offered for public participation or on a membership or other basis
including, but not limited to, carnivals, amusement park rides and games,
bowling, billiards and pool games, dancing, tennis, racquetball, swimming,
weightlifting, bodybuilding or similar activities; or (3) any paid television
programming, whether transmitted by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio satellite or similar means. “Amusement” does not include
lawful gambling at a casino, as that term is defined in 230 ILCS 10/4.
   (3)   Owner means any person having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of an amusement so as to entitle such a person or its
organization to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
   (4)   Person means any natural person, trustee, court-appointed
representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company,
corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation,
municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor,
supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner; or any officers, agents,
employees or other representative, acting either individually or for any other
person in any capacity; or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties.
SEC. 31-5101.   LEVIED.
   (a)   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons exercising the
privilege of participating in or witnessing all amusements within the City of
Moline where such amusements are witnessed or participated in a facility of any
sort where the gross seating capacity of such facility is eight thousand
(8,000) or more; said tax shall be at the rate of ten percent (10%) of the
admission fee charged to such amusement exclusive of building charges, or other
state or federal taxes; provided, however, that such tax shall not apply to or
be imposed upon any consumer attending or participating in an amusement owned
by:
   (1)   Grammar, junior high and high schools located in the City.
   (b)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of such tax shall
be borne by the person who seeks participation or admission to any such
amusement, such person herein referred to as "consumer."
   c)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of
every amusement in the City to act as trustee for and on account of the City
and to secure such tax from the consumer and pay over to the director of
finance such tax under procedures prescribed by the director of finance or as
otherwise provided in this article.
   (d)   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall
secure such tax from the consumer at the time such person collects the
admission or participation fee charged for the amusement. Upon the invoice
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the
time of payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this article shall be
stated separately on such documents.
   (e)   The City commits 50% of the annual amusement tax proceeds to finance a
portion of the City’s Special Capital Projects Fund.
(Ord. No. 3022-2018; Sec. 31-5101 repealed; new Sec. 31-5101 enacted; 05/22/18)
SEC. 31-5102.   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The director of finance or said officer's designee may enter the premises of
the amusement at any reasonable time for inspection and examination of books
and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this article
and to ensure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall
therefore be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and
records sufficient to effectuate the purpose of this article.
SEC. 31-5103.   TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
   (a)   That on or before the last day of each calendar month succeeding the
end of the monthly taxing period, commencing after the effective date of this
Ordinance, the owner or owners of each amusement within the City which is
subject to this ordinance shall file a written report on forms prescribed by
the director of finance, which report shall state the total number of paid
admissions for the amusement as defined herein and the total tax collected for
each such reporting period.
   (b)   The taxing period for the purpose of this article shall commence on
the 1st day of each month, and the tax payments shall be due on or before the
last day of the following month. All tax payments shall be made to and
collected by the director of finance on the last day of each month for the
prior calendar month.
(Ord. No. 94-3-7; §31-5103(b) repealed; new subsection enacted; 03/22/94)
   (c)   In case any person who is required under this article to file a tax
report to the City fails to file a report when and as required under this
article, or fails to pay such tax when due or herein required, or refuses to
allow the inspection of books or records as herein required by this ordinance,
such person shall be fined in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00), exclusive of costs. If a person willfully and knowingly makes a
false report to the City, such person shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), each exclusive
of costs.
   (d)   Any officer or employee of any corporation who is an owner subject to
the provisions of this article who has the control, supervision or
responsibility of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and transmitting
collected tax proceeds of the tax imposed by this article and who willfully
fails to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to the
City shall be personally liable for any such amounts collected, including
interest thereon, if after proper proceedings for the collection of such
amount, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts to the City, and the
personal liability of such officer or employee as provided in this article
shall survive dissolution of the corporation. For purposes of this subsection,
a person willfully fails to act if such person takes any conscious and
voluntary action intending not to perform any of said person's obligations
hereunder including but not limited to the utilizing of tax proceeds collected
for the City to pay any other corporate obligations.
SEC. 31-5104.   COLLECTION.
   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as provided in this article,
the city attorney or said attorney's designee shall, upon the request of the
director of finance, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of such tax on behalf of the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
SEC. 31-5105.   PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article,
including penalties, shall be paid into the City and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general trust fund of the City. One half of the proceeds shall
be placed in the Capital Improvement Project Reserve Account (60%) and in an
Operations Reserve Account (40%) and returned to the downtown civic center to
be used to fund capital and operations costs for the civic center. The
remaining half of the tax proceeds shall be placed in the City’s Special
Capital Projects Fund.
(Ord. No. 3022-2018; Sec. 31-5101 repealed; new Sec. 31-5101 enacted; 05/22/18)
SEC. 31-5106.   SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   If the city administrator, after a hearing held by the administrator or for
the administrator, shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of
the tax imposed by this article, said administrator may suspend or revoke all
City licenses held by such tax evader, unless otherwise limited by state liquor
laws. The owner, manager, or operator of the amusement shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days
after notice of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to said
owner, manager or operator at the last known place of business of said owner,
manager or operator.
SEC. 31-5107.   PENALTIES.
   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and interest
applicable to the taxes described in this article.
(Ord. No. 98-2-6; §31-5107 repealed; new §31-5107 enacted; 02/03/98)
SEC. 31-5108.   PURPOSE OF PENALTIES.
   The purpose of imposing penalties for the violation of this article is to
insure the integrity of the collection process established pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. No. 94-2-2; New Article V enacted; 02/15/94)
ARTICLE VI. VIDEO TAX
SEC. 31-6100.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   Video means any digital video recording, video game or video equipment
generally offered for rental to customers.
   (2)   Gross receipts means the consideration received for the leasing of
videos, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credits, services and property of every kind and nature, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of videos, the labor of
service costs, or any other expenses whatsoever.
   (3)   Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, or political
subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
   (4)   Taxpayer means a person engaged in the business of leasing videos
within the corporate limits of the City of Moline.
SEC. 31-6101.   LEVIED TAX AND REPORT SUBMITTAL.
   (a)   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of leasing videos within the corporate limits of the City of Moline at
a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from the business.
   (b)   Each taxpayer shall file a return and pay the required tax to the
director of finance for the month on or before the last day of each month, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the director of finance for the prior calendar
month stating the following information:
   (1)   The taxpayer's name;
   (2)   The address of the taxpayer's principal place of business;
   (3)   The taxpayer's gross receipts from renting of videos;
   (4)   The amount of tax computed on the total of the gross receipts referred
to in Sec.
31-6101(b)(3) above; and
   (5)   Other reasonable information that the director of finance may require.
   (c)   In making the return, the taxpayer shall determine the value of actual
consideration other than money received by the taxpayer. This determination
shall be subject to review and revision by the director of finance as provided
in Sec.
31-6102 for correction of returns.
SEC. 31-6102.   RETURN CORRECTIONS.
   If the director of finance has reason to believe and does believe that any
return is incorrect, after notice to the taxpayer and an opportunity to be
heard, said director of finance shall make any and all corrections to the
return said officer deems necessary using said officer's best judgment and
information available. Any return so corrected by the director of finance shall
be prima facie correct. Any additional sums due as a result of corrections so
made shall become immediately due and payable.
SEC. 31-6103.   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The director of finance is authorized to make reasonable rules and
regulations relating to the administration and enforcement of this article as
said officer may deem expedient.
SEC. 31-6104.   FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN/MAKE PAYMENTS AS REQUIRED.
   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and interest
applicable to the taxes described in this Article.
ARTICLE VII. PREPARED FOOD AND LIQUOR TAX
SEC. 31-7100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them
this section:
   (1)   Liquor:   Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer as defined, set forth and
regulated by
Chapter 4 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, which is sold at retail either for
consumption on the premises where sold, or is sold in its original packages for
consumption off the premises.
   (2)   Prepared Foods: Any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and non-
alcoholic liquid), powder or other food substance used, or intended to be used,
for human consumption, and which has been prepared for immediate consumption on
and/or off the premises. With respect to food purchased for consumption off the
premises, “prepared food” or “prepared foods” shall not mean or include any
food, except liquor, which is sold in closed or sealed bottle, can, carton,
container or wrapper of the manufacturer or wholesaler.
   (3)   Purchase at Retail: To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any nature, and
not for resale.
   (4)   Retailer: Any person who sells or offers for sale, prepared food and/
or liquor for use and not for resale.
   (5)   Prepared food facility: Establishments subject to the licensing
requirements of
Chapter 14 of the Moline Code of Ordinances as a food establishment which sells
prepared food at retail for immediate consumption and which provides for on
and/or off premises consumption whether or not such facility is conducted along
with any other use(s) in a common premise or business establishment.
   A prepared food facility does not include food stores (except facilities
therein which sell prepared food and liquor), employee cafeterias, churches,
public or private schools, boarding houses, day care centers, nursing homes,
retirement centers or similar residential care facilities or programs for the
central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences
of invalids or the elderly, coin-operated automatic food item dispensing
machines, hospitals (except facilities wherein subject to the State of Illinois
Retailer Occupation Tax pertaining to food sales) and not-for-profit
associations or corporations.
   (6)   Liquor facility: Any establishment licensed under the provisions of
Chapter 4 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 31-7101.   TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed, a tax, in addition to any and all
other taxes, upon the purchase of prepared food and liquor, at retail from any
prepared food facility or liquor facility within the City of Moline, at the
rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the sales price of such prepared
food and liquor.
   (b)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the retail purchaser.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of every retail prepared food facility or liquor
facility within the City of Moline to secure said tax from the purchaser at the
time said facility collects the purchase price and pay over said tax to the
City of Moline, finance department, as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 3018-2009; Sec. 31-7101 amended; 09/08/09)
SEC. 31-7102.   TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
   (a)   The owner and operator of each prepared food facility or liquor
facility within the City of Moline shall transmit to the director of finance of
the City of Moline for receipt by said officer, no later than the last day of
each calendar month, for tax owing for the previous month, accompanied by a
report upon forms supplied by said finance department, indicating the gross
receipts from the facility along with payment to the City of all taxes imposed
by this article which are due and owing.
   (b)   The prepared food and liquor tax form shall be accompanied by a copy
of the ST- 1 form filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue for sales
within the City of Moline.
SEC. 31-7103.   RECORDS, INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Every prepared food facility and liquor facility shall keep complete
and accurate records, including a daily sheet showing receipts for each day and
the amount of prepared food and liquor tax collected.
   (b)   For the purpose of administering and enforcing this article, the
finance department shall have the right to inspect all books, records and
reports of gross receipts for the sale of prepared food and liquor, which shall
be made available to the City upon reasonable notice, during customary business
hours.
SEC. 31-7104.   TRANSMISSION OF EXCISE TAX COLLECTIONS.
   If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed
hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of the tax, or if a
person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax
imposed herein and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid
it before filing the return for the period in which it occurred, that person
shall account for and pay over those amounts to the City along with the tax
properly collected.
SEC. 31-7105.   PENALTY, INTEREST ON DELINQUENT TAX, ENFORCEMENT.
   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and interest
applicable to the taxes described in this article. The City may take all
actions allowed by law to enforce payment of said tax.
(Ord. No. 3001-2014; Sec. 31-7105 repealed; new Sec. 31-7105 enacted; 01/28/14)
SEC. 31-7106.   EFFECTIVE DATE, SEVERABILITY.
   (a)    The prepared food and liquor tax shall be levied, imposed and
collected as of the effective date of this article.
   (b)   If any one or more provisions of this article, or any clause, sentence
or paragraph thereof, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application of such
provisions or clause, sentence or paragraph thereof as to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. No. 3093-2004; new Article VII "PREPARED FOOD AND LIQUOR TAX" enacted;
11/16/04)
ARTICLE VIII. UTILITY TAX
SEC. 31-8100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   Gross receipts means the consideration received for the transmission
of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas and
electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and
for all service rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property
of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall
be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such
messages, or without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service
cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
   (2)   Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon
bills for utility service rendered to the municipality itself.
   (3)   Person Maintaining a Place of Business in this State means any person
having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by subsidiary
or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within the State of Illinois
under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative
is located in the State of Illinois state permanently or temporarily, or
whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to
do business in the State of Illinois.
   (4)   Purchase at Retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser
for the purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not
include the use of electricity by a public utility as defined in Section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the
generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   (5)   Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes within the corporate
limits of the City of Moline, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail,
other than from an exempt purchaser.
   (6)   Tax Collector means the person delivering electricity to the
purchaser.
   (7)   Transmitting Messages means, in addition to the usual and popular
meaning of person to person communication, the furnishing, for a consideration,
of services or facilities, (whether leased or owned) or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons or
to other persons, for the transmission of messages.
SEC. 31-8101.    IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (1)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City
of Moline and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts therefrom.
   (2)   Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code and any and
all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed
within the corporate limits of the City of Moline.
   The following tax rates calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser
shall be imposed beginning with the first bill issued to such customers on or
after January 1, 2012:
   a.   1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.6100 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.4000 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3600 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3500 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3400 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3200 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3150 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3100 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.3050 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.3000 cents per kilowatt-hour.
    (3)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the City of Moline, the State of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
   (4)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the state.
   (5)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the City, the state or any other political subdivision of the state.
SEC. 31-8102.   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
Sec.
31-8101 of this article shall keep accurate books and records of its business
or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under
this chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
SEC. 31-8103.    CERTAIN BUSINESS EXEMPT.
   No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which business may not, under
the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation
by this state or any political subdivision thereof. No tax is imposed by this
article upon the Moline Public School District #40.
SEC. 31-8104.   TAX ADDITIONAL TO FRANCHISE FEE.
   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for
the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
SEC. 31-8105.   COLLECTION OF THE TAX.
   (a)   Subject to the provision of Section
31-8102 of this article regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under this article shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers electricity to such purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and
in the same manner as the original charge for delivery the electricity.
   (b)   Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
   (c)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expenses and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying the data to the city upon request.
SEC. 31-8106.   PROCEEDS OF TAX AND FINES.
   (a)   The tax shall be imposed pursuant to Section
31-8101, "Imposed," upon all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the City of Moline and not for resale.
   (b)   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax, including
penalties, shall be paid into the City and shall be credited to and deposited
as follows:
   (1)   Twenty percent (20%) of the proceeds shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund and eighty percent (80%) of the proceeds shall be
credited and deposited in the capital improvement fund to be used for right-of-
way infrastructure projects.
(Ord. No. 3001-2017; Sec. 31-8106 repealed; new Sec. 31-8106 enacted; 01/17/17)
SEC. 31-8107.   TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.
   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return
to the City of Moline for the preceding month stating:
   (1)   name;
   (2)   principal place of business;
   (3)   gross receipts and kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon the basis
of which the tax is imposed;
   (4)   amount of the tax; and
   (5)   such other reasonable and related information as the City of Moline
may require.
   The taxpayer making the return herein provided shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the City of Moline, the amount of tax collected or required
to be collected under this section.
   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under Sec.
31-8103 of this article, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form
prescribed by the City and pay the tax directly to the City on or before the
last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used
or consumed.
SEC. 31-8108.   RESELLERS.
   (a)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the finance
office and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   (b)   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the finance
office for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is
not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity
and shall furnish such additional information as the finance office may
reasonably require.
   (c)   Upon approval of the application the finance office shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (d)   The finance office may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   1.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article
directly to the City pursuant to Sec.
31-8105 of this article on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or
consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to Sec.
31-8101 of this article and remit the tax pursuant to section Sec.
31-8107 of this article on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller
to a purchaser.
   2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the City the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the City may reasonably require.
SEC. 31-8109.   CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
(3) years prior to the filing of a claim thereof, shall be so credited.
SEC. 31-8110.   STATUTE OF LIMITATION.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
SEC. 31-8111.   PENALTIES.
   See the Taxpayer Bill of Rights Ordinance for all penalties and interest
applicable to the taxes described in this Article.
(Ord. No. 3010-2010; Art. VIII, "RESERVED," repealed; new Art. VIII, "UTILITY
TAX," enacted; 02/09/10)
ARTICLE IX. SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SEC. 31-9100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   (1)   Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address
within the City regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   (2)   Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue.
   (3)   Gross charge means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer
for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the City and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by
a telecommunications retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or
otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or
nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs
or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line
service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the City,
charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and
charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within
the City. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
      a.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this article, (ii) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the
Internal Revenue Code, (iv) 911 surcharges, or (v) charges added to purchasers’
bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public
Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to purchasers’ bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
      b.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
City.
      c.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement.
      d.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
      e.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs.
      f.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
      g.   Bad debts, meaning any portion of a debt that is related to a sale
at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable
that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable
federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made.
      h.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices.
      i.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
      j.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the City.
   (4)   Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside the State of Illinois.
   (5)   Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that
originate and terminate within the State of Illinois.
   (6)   Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the United States of America and State of Illinois
governments, including State universities created by statute, or any city,
town, county, or other political subdivision of the State of Illinois.
   (7)   Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   (8)   Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State , or any like
term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary or affiliate, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within the State of
Illinois under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary or affiliate
is licensed to do business in the State of Illinois.
   (9)   Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the United States of
America and the State of Illinois governments, and State universities created
by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption
and not for resale.
   (10)   Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment
from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may
not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and
maritime systems, “service address” means the customer's place of primary use
as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-
to-ground systems and the like, “service address” shall mean the location of
the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization
code, or location in the State of Illinois where bills are sent.
   (11)   Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his or her
agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in the City and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this article.
   (12)   Telecommunications , in addition to the meaning ordinarily and
popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications
service, specialized mobile radio services, stationary two-way radio service,
paging service, voice over IP, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way
or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information
by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in
this article, “private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service
for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use
of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of
"telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
“Telecommunications” shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right
of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-
taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not
be considered “telecommunications” subject to the tax imposed under this
article. For purposes of this article, “prepaid telephone calling arrangements”
means that term as defined in Section
2-27 of the Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act.
   (13)   Telecommunications retailer or retailer or carrier means and includes
every person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at
retail as defined in this section.
SEC. 31-9101.   TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   There is hereby imposed and levied a tax on the act or privilege of
originating in the City or receiving in the City intrastate telecommunications
by a person. However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege to the
extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States of America, be made the subject of taxation by the City.
   (b)   There is hereby imposed and levied a tax on the act or privilege of
originating in the City or receiving in the City interstate telecommunications
by a person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this article, any taxpayer, upon written
proof satisfactory to the director of finance that the taxpayer has paid a tax
in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this article to the extent of the amount
of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously
allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in the State of
Illinois. However, such tax is not imposed on the act or privilege to the
extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States of America, be made the subject of taxation by the City.
   (c)    The tax imposed and levied in this Section shall be at the rate of
six percent (6%) percent of the gross charge for telecommunications purchased
at retail.
SEC. 31-9102.   COLLECTION.
   (a)   The tax imposed and levied by this article shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the State of Illinois
and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois. Retailers shall collect the tax
from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax imposed and levied in this
article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid,
and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge
for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
   (b)    Retailers filing tax returns pursuant to the Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax Act shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the
Department the amount of the tax collected, less a discount of one percent (1%)
of the amount collected which is allowed to reimburse the retailer for the
expenses incurred in keeping records, billing the customer, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the City or the
Department upon request. No discount may be claimed by a retailer on returns
not timely filed and for taxes not timely remitted.
   (c)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Act shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
SEC. 31-9103.   RESELLERS.
   (a)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for taxes imposed and
levied by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such
additional information as the Department may reasonably require.
   (b)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applied because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   (c)   Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in the City shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department, and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
SEC. 31-9104.   RETURNS TO THE DEPARTMENT.
   Retailers shall file returns with and remit taxes collected to the
Department as set forth in applicable provisions of the Illinois Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act.
SEC. 31-9105.   WAIVER OF FRANCHISE FEES.
   (a)   Subject to subsection (b) of this Sec.
31-9105, the City hereby waives its right to receive all fees, charges and
other compensation that might accrue to it after the effective date of the
Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, under any franchise
agreement, license, or similar agreement, executed on or before January 1, 1998
with telecommunications retailers.
   (b)   This waiver shall be effective only during the time that either the
infrastructure maintenance fee or the simplified tax imposed and levied by this
article is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications
retailer, collected by the Department, and paid over to the City.
SEC. 31-9106.   PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Any retailer who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the general penalty provisions of the Moline City Code of
Ordinances as set forth in Sec.
1-1107 of said Code.
   (b)   Nothing is this article shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this article.
SEC. 31-9107.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
SEC. 31-9108.   CONFLICT.
   This article supersedes all articles or parts of articles adopted prior
hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. No. 2002-09-08; new Article X, “SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TAX,” enacted; 09/28/02)
ARTICLE X. MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the “Municipal Gas Use
Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of
Moline, the State of Illinois, or any other Municipal Corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
SEC. 31-10100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   (1)   Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a
receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of
any court.
   (2)    Public utility means a public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of
the Public Utilities Act.
   (3)    Public Utilities Act means the Public Utilities Act as amended, (220
ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).
   (4)    Retail purchaser means any person who purchases gas in a sale at
retail.
   (5)   Sale at retail means any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use
or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term “retailer” means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
SEC. 31-10101.   TAX.
   (a)    Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the City that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of five (5) cent(s) per therm.
   (b)    The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   (c)    The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to Section
31-10102 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public
utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the City director of
finance on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month
in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has
been designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section
31-10102 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
   (d)    Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business, or activity in which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
City.
   (e)    Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
business certified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity under Chapter 35 ILCS § 120/1f. The exemption applies to business
enterprises located within an area designated as an enterprise zone for as long
as the exemption certification is in effect with the Department of Commerce and
Economic Opportunity and if the certification term expires, the exemption will
extend for a period not to exceed thirty (30) years.
   (f)    A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the city director of finance on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   (g)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after March 01, 2017.
   (h)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the City by a retail
purchaser (see Article VII: Utility Tax) shall be exempt from the tax imposed
by this article if the gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to
the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of
such gas pursuant to the City's municipal utility tax, as amended from time to
time by citation to ordinance or code section authorized pursuant to Section 8-
11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
SEC. 31-10102.   COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY.
   The mayor, city director of finance, city administrator and director of
finance are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax
imposed by this article with any public utility providing gas delivery service
in the City. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
   (a)   the public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   (b)   the public utility will remit collected taxes to the City director of
finance no more often than once each month;
   (c)   the public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the City director of finance;
   (d)   the public utility shall not be responsible to the City for any tax
not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
   (e)   such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
SEC. 31-10103.   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under
this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
(Ord. No. 3024-2016; new Art. XI, "MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX," enacted; 12/13/16)
ARTICLE XI. CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SEC. 31-11100.   TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis at retail at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in
effect. This Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax shall not be
applicable to the sales of cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-23). Persons subject to any tax imposed under this ordinance
may reimburse themselves for their tax liability hereunder by separately
stating this tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination or in a single amount, with any state tax that such sellers are
required to collect.
SEC. 31-11101.   COLLECTION.
   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce this ordinance; to collect all taxes and penalties due
hereunder; to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in the manner
provided by law; and to determine all rights to credit memoranda arising on
account of the erroneous payment of a tax or penalty under this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 3008-2020; new Art. XII, "CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX,"
enacted; 03/17/20)
ARTICLE XII. TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS
SEC. 31-12100.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
   (1)    Act. Act means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act,"
found generally at 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
   (2)   Corporate Authorities. Corporate Authorities means the mayor and City
Council of the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (3)   Tax. Tax means each tax imposed by the City of Moline that is
collected or administered by the City, not an agency or department of the
State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the City other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   (4)   Local Tax Administrator. The City's director of finance is charged
with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including said officer's designee(s) when authorized to act in the local
tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority
to implement the terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance.
The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be
inconsistent with this ordinance and the Act.
   (5)   City. City means the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (6)   Notice. Notice means each audit notice, collection notice or other
similar notice or communication in connection with each of the City's locally
imposed and administered taxes.
   (7)   Tax Ordinance. Tax ordinance means each ordinance adopted by the City
of Moline that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
   (8)   Taxpayer. Taxpayer means any person required to pay any locally
imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the
legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes
includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed
and administered tax to the City of Moline.
SEC. 31-12101.   NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the person's last known address, or
   (2)   Personal service or delivery.
SEC. 31-12102.   LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
City of Moline pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is:
   (1)   Physically received by the City on or before the due date, or
   (2)    Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the City's director of finance, with adequate postage prepaid.
SEC. 31-12103.   PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (1)   First, to the tax due for the applicable period;
    (2)   Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (3)   Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.
SEC. 31-12104.   CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (a)   The City of Moline shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily
paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (b)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refunds shall be
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The City of Moline shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the City.
   (c)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
   (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
   a.   the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the
claim;
   b.   the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
   c.   the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled
check or receipt for the payment;
   d.   the taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax
return, in connection with the claim; and
   e.   a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim
to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the City.
   (2)   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
   a.   grant the claim; or
   b.    deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to
the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
   (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part,
a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit
shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year
of three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant
of a credit.
SEC. 31-12105.   AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
   (a)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
   (1)   the tax;
   (2)   the time period of the audit; and
   (3)   a brief description of the books and records to be made available for
the auditor.
   (b)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested in writing by the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
   (c)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days, nor more
than thirty (30) days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request in writing another date within the thirty (30) days, which
shall be approved in writing by the local tax administrator, that is convenient
to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (d)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise to or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
   (e)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (f)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the City's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (g)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the City incorrectly, the
local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing
such tax.
SEC. 31-12106.   APPEAL.
   (a)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
   (1)   the reason for the assessment;
   (2)   the amount of the tax liability proposed;
   (3)   the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
   (4)   the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (b)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (c)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (d)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty-five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (e)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the local contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall
the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five
(45) day period.
SEC. 31-12107.   HEARING.
   (a)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under Sec.
31-12106, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding
any appeal.
   (b)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.   
   (c)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (d)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
SEC. 31-12108.   INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty-five
(365) days and the number of days elapsed.
   (b)   Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A
late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance.
SEC. 31-12109.   ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
SEC. 31-12110.   INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer.
SEC. 31-12111.   STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (b)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (c)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
City, the tax paid was less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (d)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
SEC. 31-12112.   VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application, but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the party of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional
amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is
longer.
SEC. 31-12113.   PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city
clerk's office.
SEC. 31-12114.   INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (1)   timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
   (2)   correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (3)   correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
SEC. 31-12115.   APPLICATION.
   This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the City's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be
controlling.
(Ord. No. 2000-12-15; new Articles VII and VIII reserved; new Article IX,
"TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS," enacted; 12/27/00)
ARTICLE XIII. MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAX
SEC. 31-13100.   MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article
is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24).
SEC. 31-13101. MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section
31- 13100 above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24).
SEC. 31-13102. COLLECTION.
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 3012-2025; new Art. XIII, "MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAX," enacted; 3/4/25)
_________________________________________
Chapter Amendments / Reference Notes:
Chapter 31 repealed and enacted new:
   Ord. No. 3048-2023; repealed Chapter 31 in its entirety; new Chapter 31
enacted; 11/14/23
 
CHAPTER 32
VEGETATION
   Art. I.   In General, §32-1100
   Art. II.   Trees, §32-2100 - §32-2112
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SEC. 32-1100.   WEED ABATEMENT.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by preventing the spread of noxious weeds and other plants
releasing dangerous pollens into the atmosphere, by reducing the danger of
conflagration by fire or explosion, by reducing obstruction to vision of the
traveling public from weeds and grasses and shrubbery, and by preventing
blighting influences to neighborhoods that uncontrolled and unkempt weeds and
grasses and shrubbery present.
   (b)   Definitions. The terms and phrases as used in this section shall be
construed according to their commonly accepted meanings except that the
following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them herein:
   (1)   Agricultural or farm land shall mean the same as that assigned to
"farm" in Sec.
35-1102(b)(55) of the Moline Zoning Ordinance.
   (2)   Ground cover shall mean any plant whose horizontal dimension tends to
exceed its vertical dimension and which is easily propagated without the
benefit of windy or downy seeds or the release of harmful pollens into the
atmosphere and is generally used because grass is difficult to propagate at the
site.
   (3)   Noxious weed shall mean any plant declared by the State of Illinois to
be a noxious weed pursuant to 505 ILCS 100/1 et seq.
   (4)   Open space shall mean any land more than two (2) acres in area and
used actually and exclusively for maintaining or enhancing natural or scenic
resources, protects air or streams or water supplies, promotes conservation of
soil, wetlands, beaches, or marshes, including ground cover or planted
perennial grasses, trees and shrubs and other natural perennial growth trees
and shrubs, and including any body of water, whether man-made or natural,
conserves landscaped areas, such as public or private golf courses, enhances
the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife
preserves, nature reservations, sanctuaries, or other open spaces, or preserves
historic sites. Land is not used for open space purposes within the meaning of
this section if it is used primarily for residential purposes.
   (5)   Owner shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in Sec.
1-1101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances; however, when the area over which
ownership is alleged is public right-of-way which is unimproved or which is
commonly known as the boulevard or parkway, "owner" shall mean the owner of the
real property immediately adjacent or abutting thereto.
   (6)   Property shall mean all real property as defined in Section
1-1101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances and shall also include within its
definition the area of public right-of-way immediately adjacent to or abutting
said real property which right-of-way is unimproved or is commonly known as the
boulevard or parkway.
   (7)   Tenant or occupant shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in
Sec.
1-1101 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, however, when the area over which
tenancy or occupation is alleged is public right-of-way which is unimproved or
which is commonly known as the boulevard or parkway, "tenant" or "occupant"
shall mean the tenant or occupant of the real property immediately adjacent or
abutting thereto.
   (c)   Declaration of Nuisance. All noxious weeds are hereby declared a
public nuisance. In addition, all other weeds and grass allowed to grow to a
height of more than ten inches (10”) are hereby declared a nuisance, and all
shrubbery growing on or standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled on any
property so as to constitute an obstruction to the traveling public in the City
is hereby declared a public nuisance. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property within the City shall allow any such public nuisances to exist or grow
on said property or property controlled by such person(s).
(Ord. No. 2002-03-03; Sec. 32-1100 (c) repealed; new Sec. 32-1100 enacted; 03/
19/02)
   (d)   Exceptions. Subsection (c) above, except for the provision dealing
with noxious weeds, shall not apply to agricultural or farm land or open space;
shall not apply to ground cover; and shall not apply to areas such as ravines,
terraced slopes, and other areas with steep slopes on which sound erosion
control practices would require the propagation of dense vegetation.
   (e)   Notice to Abate.
   (1)   Once per week for two consecutive weeks in the month of April, and
once per week for two consecutive weeks in the month of May, of each year, the
City shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City, a public notice, published in advertising format in the following or a
substantially similar form:
“CITY OF MOLINE
PUBLIC NOTICE OF WEEDS, GRASS, SHRUBBERY and GARBAGE OR DEBRIS
NUISANCE VIOLATIONS AND ABATEMENT”
      The City of Moline asks that all property owners, tenants and occupants
please take notice of the following provisions set forth in Section
21-1100(22) and Section
32-1100 of the Moline Code of Ordinances governing garbage and debris, weed,
grass and shrubbery nuisances:
      1)   All noxious weeds are declared a nuisance;
      2)   All weeds and grass allowed to grow to a height of more than ten
(10) inches are declared a nuisance;
      3)   All shrubbery growing or standing uncut or otherwise uncontrolled on
property so as to constitute an obstruction to the traveling public is declared
a nuisance;
      4)   Refusal or neglect to remove garbage or debris from private property
is declared a nuisance.
      If the City observes such nuisances, it will send one (1) written notice
to the property owner, tenant or occupant describing the property and directing
the owner, tenant or occupant to remove the nuisance within seven (7) days from
the notice’s date. If the nuisance is not removed, the City will remove the
nuisance and assess a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative fine plus the
actual costs of removal against the owner, tenant or occupant, and additionally
the City may initiate an ordinance violation prosecution in Circuit Court or
before the Municipal Code Enforcement System (MUNICES). If a second violation
occurs within the same calendar year, the City will take action to abate the
nuisance without sending notice to the owner, tenant or occupant, and the same
costs, fines and penalties will be assessed.
   (2)   Any officer or employee of the City charged with the duty to inspect
public rights-of-way or private property or housing or dangerous buildings,
upon observing the existence of such a public nuisance or any plants located on
property so as to constitute an obstruction to the vision of the traveling
public, shall have the duty to issue to the owner, tenant or occupant of
property upon which such public nuisance exists or such plants are located a
written notice entitled, “Notice to Abate Public Nuisance.” The notice shall
describe the property upon which such public nuisance or obstruction exists and
shall describe the nature of the public nuisance or obstruction and shall
direct the owner, tenant, or occupant to abate the public nuisance or
obstruction within seven (7) days from the date of the notice, or as
hereinafter provided. In addition to the public notice set forth in subsection
(1) above, the first notice to the owner, tenant or occupant in a calendar year
shall be the only notice provided before the City takes action to spray, cut or
otherwise remove weeds, grass, shrubbery, and/or garbage or debris in violation
of this section. The notice shall contain the following or a substantially
similar warning:
      “In addition to the public notice published in the newspaper during April
and May of this year, this notice shall serve as the City’s sole notice to you
that if there are any additional occurrences of the accumulation of garbage or
debris, growth of weeds and grass in excess of ten (10) inches in height, or
any other public nuisance as defined under Sec.
32-1100(c), “Declaration of Public Nuisance,” or Sec.
21-1100(22), “Garbage and Debris,” such public nuisance or obstruction will be
cut, sprayed or otherwise removed at the direction of the Code Compliance
Division and the owner, tenant, or occupant will be assessed the cost of same
as provided in Sec.
32-1100(i) without any additional or further notice and without any further
waiting period after the complaint has been received by the Code Compliance
Division.
“PLEASE TAKE NOTICE AND GUIDE YOURSELF ACCORDINGLY””
   (3)   Upon the issuance of one (1) notice to abate to the property owner,
tenant or occupant in one (1) calendar year, the City has the option, but is
not required, to file suit in the Rock Island County Circuit Court, praying for
a judicial determination that upon subsequent violations of Sec.
32-1100 or Sec.
21-1100(22), no additional notices by the City are required prior to affecting
compliance by cutting, spraying, or otherwise removing, at the direction of the
Code Compliance Division, and the owner, tenant, or occupant will be assessed
the cost of same as provided in Section
32-1100(i).
   (f)   Service of Notice
   (1)   The notice of violation under this section shall be made in person to
the owner, if the property upon which a public nuisance/obstruction exists is
occupied, by such officer or employee during regular business hours of City
Hall, or by mailing, either by certified mail, postage prepaid, or by regular
postage, so long as if sent by regular mail the notice is not returned by the
post office, to the record owner, tenant or occupant at the address of the
property upon which said nuisance/obstruction exists.
      However, if the property upon which the public nuisance/obstruction
exists is vacant or unoccupied, such officer or employee shall serve said
notice upon the record owner or tenant by addressing and mailing said notice,
as provided above, to the record owner or tenant at said owner or tenant's last
known address, if such can be ascertained upon due diligence.
      If either the name or last known address of the owner or tenant of vacant
or unoccupied property upon which public nuisance exists cannot be ascertained
upon due diligence, service of said notice shall be made by posting the notice
on the property. Further, for any property, if regular or certified mail is
returned by the post office, then service of said notice shall be made by
posting the notice on the property.
   (2)   All notices of intention to pursue the matter under subsection (e)(3)
above shall be made in accordance with service as provided under the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, Chapter 735, Sections 5/201 through 5/213 or amendments
thereto. Upon failure of the property owner to appear at a hearing for judicial
determination, the City shall send a copy of said judicial determination to the
property owner at the last known address of said property owner.
   (g)   City abatement. Should said owner, tenant, or occupant fail to abate
the public nuisance within the seven (7) day period provided for in the notice,
the building official or his or her designee shall be authorized to enter upon
the property upon which said public nuisance exists to abate same and shall be
authorized to cut, spray, or otherwise remove the public nuisance and to
perform any clean-up, removal of junk, or any other thing preparatory thereto.
Should the public nuisance recur on the property within the same calendar year,
the building official or his or her designee shall be authorized to take the
action described herein without the necessity of additional notice to the
owner, tenant or occupant.
   (h)   Building Official authorized to contract for same. The building
official or designee may execute annual contracts in order to provide for City
abatement as provided for in subsection (g) above; provided the fees charged
shall be based upon an easily recognizable unit such as per hour or per square
foot and the special charges for extra work are clearly identified. A minimum
charge shall be permitted, however.
   (i)   Liability for costs incurred by abatement. The owner, tenant, and
occupant shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the actual costs
(including without limitation the contract fee plus any fees for record
searches) incurred by it in abating the nuisance and shall also be liable for
an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition to these
fees, they shall be jointly and severally liable for a late payment fee of
three dollars ($3.00) for each month said amounts remain unpaid, if not paid
within thirty (30) days from the first billing.
   (j)   Violation and penalty. Any owner, tenant, or occupant of property
within the City who fails to abate any nuisance described in the notice to
abate public nuisance within the time prescribed therein shall be guilty of an
offense which shall be punishable as set forth in Sec.
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances or by referral to the Rock Island
County Code Enforcement System pursuant to Article VI of
Chapter 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 2001-06-03; Sec. 32-1100(e), (f), (g), (h), (i), and (j) repealed;
new Sec. 32-1100(e), (f), (g), (h), (i), and (j) enacted; 06/05/01)
(Ord. No. 3052-2017; Sec. 32-1100(e) and (f)(1) repealed; new Sec. 32-1100(e)
and (f)(1) enacted; 12/19/17)
ARTICLE II. TREES
SEC. 32-2100.   PURPOSE.
   This Section of the Code is structured to preserve, protect and enhance
critical infrastructure – the portion of the urban forest that is located on
public land. The complete urban forest is comprised of trees across all land
uses and ownership on public and private land. This Section will regulate
public property trees but recognizes that trees on private property are part of
the collective community resource.
   The purpose of this Section is to recognize the services and function that
trees provide as a collective asset to the entire community and to state the
goals of Moline with respect to the protection, preservation, care and planting
of trees on public lands.
   Specific goals of this section are to:
   (a)   Protect, preserve and enhance the quality of life and general welfare
of Moline, its residents and its property owners; and conserve and enhance
Moline’s natural, physical and aesthetic environment.
   (b)   Preserve, protect and enhance the urban forest to ensure that trees
are properly planted and maintained within Moline so that trees can protect,
enhance and preserve the quality of life for residents and visitors.
   (c)   Recognize that trees are an integral part of the infrastructure of
Moline, and as such should be preserved, protected and cared for as other
critical infrastructure.
      (1)   Trees absorb pollution from the air;
      (2)   Trees absorb and sequester carbon dioxide;
      (3)   Trees absorb and filter pollution from stormwater run-off;
      (4)   Trees produce oxygen;
      (5)   Trees reduce flooding;
      (6)   Trees stabilize soils and reduce erosion;
      (7)   Trees cool the surrounding area helping to reduce impacts due to
heat islands;
      (8)   Trees reduce energy consumption by shielding structures from the
elements;
      (9)   Trees provide a buffer and screen against noise, light and
pollution;
      (10)   Trees improve property values;
      (11)   Trees improve commercial district buyer traffic and purchasing;
      (12)   Areas with trees have lower crime rates;
      (13)   Areas with trees have higher levels of community interaction;
      (14)   Trees provide important habitat for birds and other wildlife; and
      (15)   Trees protect and enhance our quality of life.
   (d)   Trees provide Moline collective benefits that extend beyond property
boundaries throughout the entire community.
   (e)   Recognize that larger trees provide larger benefits. When a large tree
is removed and replaced with a smaller tree, the benefits and services are
reduced.
   (f)   Recognize that some trees may have a condition that constitutes a
threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property within Moline, or may be
dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in Moline.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; new Sec. 32-2100 enacted and the remaining sections
consecutively renumbered; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2101.   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   (1)   Urban Forestry Management Plan. The long term, adaptively managed plan
which the City created for the purposes of managing the Urban Forest resource
over the long term, pursuant to the ordinance.
   (2)   Park and Recreation Board. The City of Moline Park and Recreation
Board or its assigned representatives.
   (3)   City-owned property. Property within the City limits of Moline,
Illinois, and:
      a.   owned by the City in fee simple absolute; or
      b.   implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future
use for purposes of vehicular pedestrian traffic, or for public easements; or
      c.   any street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public right-of-way.
   (4)   Premises. Any lot or tract of land within the City of Moline now owned
by said City or dedicated for public use.
   (5)   Property owner. The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel
of land.
   (6)   Trees. Woody perennials usually having one dominant trunk and a mature
height greater than sixteen (16) feet.
   (7)   Shrubs. A woody plant, generally smaller than a tree, typically with
multiple stems branching from or near the ground.
   (8)   License. Authorization from the City for a person, association or
company engaged in the business of cutting or pruning of trees, to complete
tree work within the City.
   (9)   High Risk Tree/Tree Part. A tree or tree part which has been
determined by the City Forester, their Agent, a Certified Arborist working
under contract for the City, or other such qualified professional to possess
defects or other conditions to be considered at elevated likelihood of causing
damage or injury, and of likely or imminent probability of failure per the
ISA’s Tree Risk Assessment Qualification (TRAQ) standards, and ANSI A300
Standards.
   (10)   Licensing procedures. A document prepared by the Park Board outlining
the rules, regulations and application requirements in the issuance of a tree
license to a person, association or company.
   (11)   Public Nuisance and Abatement Declaration. A document prepared by the
Park and Recreation Board outlining those instances where public nuisances may
be declared and prescribing the means for the abatement of those nuisances.
(Ord. No. 3018-2008; Sec. 32-2100(11), "Permitting Process," repealed and
subsection (12) renumbered to subsection (11); 03/04/08; Ord. No. 3013-2024;
amends and replaces multiple subsections; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2102.   PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   The Park and Recreation Board or its designee, among its duties as required
elsewhere, shall:
   (1)   Supervise the Park and Recreation Department in the care of all trees
and all other woody plants growing on City-owned property.
   (2)   Provide for such care through the park and recreation department and
its representatives.
   (3)   Develop, and each subsequent year, update the Urban Forestry
Management Plan.
   (4)   Cause the Urban Forestry Management Plan and all amendments and
revisions to it, to be published and made available for public inspection in
the office of the city clerk, as well as the city website. Notice that such
information is available for public inspection shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in Moline.
   (5)   Administer the Urban Forestry Management Plan, this chapter, and the
provisions therein.
   (6)   Perform whatever acts are necessary and deemed prudent and in keeping
with national Arboricultural standards, to include the planting and maintenance
of trees; the removal of undesirable trees, shrubs and other plants located on
City property; and shall ensure that all trees, shrubs and other plants located
on such property conform with the Urban Forestry Management Plan, the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual and this chapter. Pursuant to this duty,
the Park and Recreation Board's designee, in accordance with normal City
procedures regarding contracts, may arrange contractual agreements.
   (7)   Establish a program of public information and education that will
encourage the planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants on private property in the furtherance of the goals of the Urban
Forestry Plan.
   (8)   Not allow any work to be performed on any woody plant on City-owned
property by members of the public, without its prior written permission.
   (9)   Upon the request of any person who disagrees with the decision of the
park and recreation department regarding City forestry work, shall hear all
issues of disputes which arise between the City and any person whenever those
issues involve matters or the interpretation or enforcement of this chapter or
the Urban Forestry Management Plan. The decision of the majority of the
appointed members of the park and recreation board with regard to such dispute
shall be binding upon the City. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
limit the jurisdiction of any court of law with respect to such dispute.
   (10)   Develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the
Licensing Procedures Document, the Permitting Process Document and the Public
Nuisance and Abatement Declaration Document.
(Ord. No. 3018-2008; Sec. 32-2101(8) re: permits repealed and the remaining
subsections consecutively renumbered; 03/04/08; Ord. No. 3013-2024; amends and
replaces multiple subsections; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2103.   LICENSES.
   (a)   No person/association/company engaged in the business of cutting or
pruning of trees, shall remove, cut or prune any tree or shrub standing in any
street, alley, parkway, boulevard or other public place or on private property,
whether commercial or residential, in the City without first obtaining a
license therefor from the Finance Department. Persons doing pruning on their
own property shall be exempt from this license.
   (b)   All licenses required shall have an annual fee of fifty dollars
($50.00.)
   (c)   All license applications shall conform to the Licensing Procedures and
Guidelines document and shall conform to all standards identified in the Urban
Forestry Management Plan.
   (d)   No license shall be issued without evidence that applicant has in
effect insurance by a reputable insurance company (requires an A- or Better
Best rating for writing insurance) authorized to do business in the State of
Illinois, covering public liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000)
each occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000) total annual aggregate
limit with coverage to include bodily injury, property damage, personal injury,
and advertising injury. In addition, thereto, said applicant shall show
sufficient evidence of insurance coverage for worker's compensation claims.
Said insurance coverage shall be kept in effect at all times while said
licensee is engaged in the business as aforesaid within the City.
   (e)    The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)    The United States of America, the State of Illinois, Rock Island
County, or the City of Moline or any public department, bureau or agency of any
of the foregoing.
      (2)    Any person who engages in pruning exclusively on his own premises.
      (3)    Any public utility, including its authorized employees and agents,
when engaged in tree pruning for the purpose of utility line clearance and in
order to ensure the continuity of utility service to the public.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-19; Sec. 31-2102 repealed; new Sec. 31-2102 enacted; 06/25/
02; Ord. No. 3013-2024; amends and replaces multiple subsections; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2104.   APPROVED AND UNAPPROVED SPECIES.
   (a)   Individual species of tree will be approved or unapproved based on the
list supplied in the Urban Forest Management Plan. This list may change
periodically, may be changed at the discretion of the City Forester, and is not
comprehensive.
   (b)   When confronted with a species not on the existing list, the City
Forester or their designee, acting at the direction of the Park and Recreation
Board, can make a decision as to whether the species is approved or unapproved.
   (c)   Approved species, broadly speaking, are those which are native to the
upper Midwest region, shown to this far be non-invasive and non-aggressive, and
with characteristics which make them suited to urban tree plantings.
   (d)   Unapproved species, broadly speaking, are those which are not native
to the region and either invasive or aggressive, those which produce weak wood
and are prone to failure, or trees which produce excessive amounts of foul
smelling or physically undesirable fruits.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-19; Sec. 32-2103 (a) repealed; new Sec. 32-2103 (a) enacted;
06/25/02; Ord. No. 3018-2008; Sec. 32-2103 repealed in its entirety and section
reserved for future use; 03/04/08; Ord. No. 3013-2024; renumbers and enacts new
Sec. 32-2104; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2105.   OBSTRUCTIONS TO TREES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to
any tree in any street, parkway or other public place.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope or other foreign
object to any tree without permission of the park and recreation board or its
designee.
   (c)   Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and wires in
the streets, alleys or other public places in the City shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees in such places so far as may be possible, and
shall keep all such trees properly pruned according to Arboricultural and
Utility Best Management Practices, and subject to the supervision of the park
and recreation board or its designee, so that no injury shall be done to the
poles or wires and trees by contact.
   (d)   Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe or any other similar
subterranean utility service in the City shall, in the absence of provision in
the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes or other such physical
corridors and conveyances from leaks.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; amends subsections (c) and (d); 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2106.   EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   In making excavations in streets or other public places, no digging
will be allowed within five (5) feet (5') of any tree, unless specific
permission is granted otherwise by the park and recreation board or its
designee. In all such excavations, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury
to the roots of any tree, wherever possible.
   (b)   If utility work is required within the five-foot buffer established in
part (a) above, other methods such as directional boring may be considered, but
shall only be approved at the discretion of the City Forester and Park Board.
   (c)   During any type of construction work of building, structure, or street
work, the applicant shall place guards of substantial fence, frame or box not
less than four (4) feet high around all nearby trees to prevent injury to such
trees, especially injury that may occur to oak trees because of disturbances
within the drip-lined dripline. All building material, dirt or other debris
shall be kept outside the barrier.
   (d)   Whenever it is necessary to remove a tree(s) from a parkway on City-
owned property in connection with the paving of a sidewalk, or the paving or
widening of the portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the
person so removing shall replant such tree(s) or replace them. Provided the
conditions prevent planting on parkways, this requirement will be satisfied if
any equivalent number of trees of the same size and species as provided for in
the Urban Forestry Management Plan are planted in an attractive manner on the
adjoining property.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; adds subsection (b) and reletters subsequent subsections;
3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2107.   INSPECTION.
   The park and recreation board or its designee is hereby authorized and
directed to enter on and upon private property wherein there are located any
species of tree having the appearance of, or suspected of, being diseased with
or infested by any insect pest, biological pathogen, or other such malady found
to be severely deleterious to trees, for the purpose of determining if such
trees require removal, treatment, or other such mitigation measures in the
interest of the public good, to prevent such diseases, insects, or pathogens
from spreading to other trees, and to prevent damage or injury by existing
trees.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; amends section; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2108.   PUBLIC NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT.
   The park and recreation board or its designee shall identify those
circumstances under which a public nuisance may be declared and shall direct
any owner, occupant or agency to abate such nuisance, or may itself abate in
its entirety said nuisance as identified in the Public Nuisances and Abatement
Document.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; renumbers section; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2109.   ABUSE/MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES.
   Unless specifically authorized by the park and recreation board or its
designee, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or
remove any public tree, attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or
other contrivance to any public tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid
substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with any public
tree, or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof
will injure any portion of any public tree. Such violations shall be subject to
the penalties listed in Sec.
32-2111.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; amends section; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2110.   INTERFERENCE WITH CITY FORESTRY OPERATIONS.
   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the park and
recreation board or its agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of
this chapter provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an
attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
any property within the City.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; renumbers section; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2110.1   WOOD WASTE REMOVED BY LICENSEE
   The licensee shall remove or cause to be removed all trimmings and debris;
and no such trimmings or debris shall be left to be picked up by the City.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-19; new Sec. 32-2109.1, “TREE TRIMMINGS REMOVED BY LICENSEE,”
enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 32-2111.   VIOLATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to
comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon
being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per diameter inch of the tree damaged, up to a maximum
fine of twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00). If, as the result of the violation
of any provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation or death of a tree,
shrub or other plant located on City-owned property is caused, the cost of
repair or replacement of such tree, shrub or other plant shall be borne by the
party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be
determined by multiplying the diameter inches of the subject tree which was
damaged by one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). For trees larger in stature, or
of historical significance, the City Forester or Forestry Consultant may
perform a field appraisal according to the latest Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraiser Guide, using the Trunk Formula Technique.
   (b)   Assessment of the condition of the tree impacted, percentage of fine
to be assessed (in the case of partial damage), and communication of fines to
the guilty party shall be the responsibility of the City Forester or his/her
designee. Trees should only be assessed for purposes of enforcement by a
qualified staff member who is a Certified Arborist, and has specialized
knowledge through training, education, or practical experience in assessing
trees for financial purposes.
(Ord. No. 98-10-1; §32-2100 repealed; new §32-2110 enacted; 10/06/98; Ord. No.
3013-2024; amends section and title; 3/26/24)
SEC. 32-2112.   SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid by any court, other provisions or applications of
the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision of
application shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. No. 3013-2024; renumbers section; 3/26/24)
CHAPTER 33
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 34
WATER AND SEWERS
   Art. I.    Procedure for Termination of Water Supply and Sewerage Services,
§34-1100 - §34-1106
   Art. II.   City Water System
      Div. 1.   Water Service, §34-2100- §34-2148
      Div. 2.   Cross-Connection Control, §34-2200- §34-2210
   Art. III.   City Water Pollution Control System
      Div. 1.   In General, §34-3100 - §34-3110
      Div. 2.   Rates, Billings and Collections, §34-3200 - §34-3208
      Div. 3.   Connections, §34-3300 - §34-3310
      Div. 4.   Use of Public Sewers, §34-3400 - §34-3416
      Div. 5.   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters, §34-3500 - §34-3514
   Art. IV.    Stormwater Utility Service, §34-4100 - §34-4503
   Appendix 1.   Sample Letter of Credit; Sample Performance Bond
   Appendix 2.   Covenant
ARTICLE I. PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SERVICES
SEC. 34-1100.   GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION.
   Wherever in
Chapter 34 of the Code of Ordinances involuntary termination of services is
provided for, the procedures of Article I shall apply.
   (1)   All city utility bills shall be payable within fifteen (15) days after
date of statement and all such bills not paid on or before the due date shown
thereon, shall have a penalty charge of five percent (5%) added thereto;
provided that, when said due date shall be a Sunday or legal holiday, such
bills shall be paid on or before the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday
or legal holiday without penalty. Utility billing will transition from
quarterly to monthly in 2024. Penalties for late payment shall not be applied
to accounts billed between January 1, 2024 and March 31, 2024. If payment is
not made on the required day, the department of utilities may terminate water
and sewerage service, except as hereinafter provided. A forty-eight (48)-hour
turn off notice is posted on delinquent utility accounts. An administrative fee
of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for staff time preparing and
posting this notice. When service is terminated under this section, a fifty-
five dollar ($55.00) charge will be made for turning off water service. When
service is reinstituted, a forty dollar ($40.00) charge will be made for
turning water service back on. Bills due for water, sewerage, solid waste/
recycling, and stormwater drainage shall be cumulative and may not be parsed or
separated out in any manner. Failure to pay any portion thereof shall be
treated as failure to pay under this chapter.
   (2)   The City utility billing statement shall enumerate the administrative
procedure for hearing in the event the amount of the bill is disputed.
   (3)   If the amount of the bill is disputed, the customer shall state the
dispute in writing and shall submit said statement and payment of any
undisputed portion of the bill prior to the due date shown thereon.
   (4)   The administrative hearing procedure shall occur prior to termination
except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-1100(1) repealed; new Sec. 34-1100(1) enacted; 04/
04/06)
(Ord. No. 3023-2017; Sec. 34-1100(1) repealed; new Sec. 34-1100(1) enacted; 10/
10/17)
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-1100 amended; 9/20/22)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-1100 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-1100 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 34-1101.   NOTICE NOT REQUIRED IN AN EMERGENCY.
   This article shall in no way be construed as requiring notice in the event
of an emergency; however, a hearing on justification for and reasonableness of
charges for emergency repair shall be held upon written request, after
emergency repairs have been made, pursuant to Subsection 34-1100(3).
SEC. 34-1102.   "EMERGENCY" DEFINED.
   An "emergency" is defined as an immediate threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public and/or as an immediate threat to public property or
equivalent. "Emergency" shall include especially, without limitation of the
term, water service leaks creating pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic dangers,
water service leaks creating serious erosion or structural damage, and cross-
connections; and shall especially include, without limitation of the term,
sewerage service when raw sewage is exposed to the surface or is being dumped
untreated into any natural or manmade watercourse or where a leak is causing
serious erosion or structural damage.
SEC. 34-1103.   HEARING OFFICER.
   The city administrator shall be the hearing officer and shall be charged
with the fair and impartial disposition of all disputes brought before for
hearing.
SEC. 34-1104.   HEARING PROCEDURE; DISPUTES.
   (a)   In the event the customer disputed the amount of the water, sewerage
and stormwater drainage bill, the necessity of a repair, or the reasonableness
of cost of a repair, an informal hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) days
of receipt of a written request for hearing and shall be held before a
designated employee within the department of utilities, upon application
pursuant to Subsection 34-1100(3). Said employee shall enter written findings
of fact, conclusions of law and give service of same to the appellant by
certified mail.
   (b)   The customer shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision upon
written request within ten (10) days of the date of the order, a formal hearing
shall then be conducted by the hearing officer within thirty (30) days of
receipt of request. A record of the proceedings shall be made on a mechanical
recording device. Said hearing officer shall enter a written finding of fact,
conclusion of law, and order, and give service of same to the appellant by
certified mail.
   (c)   The customer shall have the optional right to appeal an adverse
decision of the hearing officer to the City Council or request from the City
Council a variance from the operation of ordinance by requesting same in
writing ten (10) days from the date of the hearing officer's order. On appeal
the City Council or its appropriate committee may hear the appeal de novo or
restrict its review to the record at its discretion. On request for variance
the request shall be heard de novo and a variance shall not be granted without
a showing of unnecessary and undue hardship.
   The City Council shall enter a written finding of fact, conclusion of law,
and order, and shall give service of same to the customer by certified mail. A
record of any de novo hearing shall be made on a mechanical recording device.
   The right to appeal to the City Council is an optional right. The order of
the hearing officer is a final order unless a timely appeal to the City Council
is made. In the event that such an appeal is made, the order of the City
Council becomes the final order.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-1104 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-1105.   APPEALS.
   (a)   Appeals from the order of the hearing officer or City Council must be
filed within ten (10) days from the date of the order in a court of competent
jurisdiction according to state law.
   (b)   An order of the hearing officer or City Council shall not be
automatically stayed by the filing of an appeal, but may be stayed by order of
the hearing officer, by order of the City Council, or by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
SEC. 34-1106.   SEASONAL TERMINATION.
   Between October 1st and March 31st, if the director of finance determines
upon written proof by the customer that failure to pay is the result of an
inability to pay, an additional thirty (30) day delay will be allowed in order
to seek alternative sources of payment. Inability to pay shall be measured by
administrative standards promulgated by the Committee-of-the-Whole of the City
Council.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing Committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-1106 amended; 10/4/22)
ARTICLE II: CITY WATER SYSTEM
DIVISION 1. WATER SERVICE
SEC. 34-2100.   PROVISIONS OF THIS DIVISION APPLICABLE TO CONTRACTS WITH
CONSUMERS.
   The provisions of this division shall be considered a part of the contract
for the purchase of City water and with every purchaser of City water. Said
purchaser of City water shall be governed by and be subject to all sections of
this division. It is hereby made the duty of the director of utilities to
enforce the same.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2100 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2101.   APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Any person owning property which has an existing public water main adjacent
to the property frontage, may be required to pay a tap-on assessment fee per
applicable provision:
   (1)   Application for water service connections shall be made to the
director of finance by the owner, or owner's agent, of the property to be
served. Upon receipt of any applicable tap-on assessment fee and compliance
with all other applicable Code provisions, the director of engineering shall
issue an official house number and approve the application. Upon approval of
the size of the service connection and service line by the director of
utilities, the plumbing inspector may then issue any required plumbing permits.
   (2)   In the event that no such public water main is adjacent to the
property frontage, an applicant shall not be required to pay a tap-on fee. Said
applicant shall extend a public water main and the property for which
application for connection is made shall connect to the portion of the public
main so extended.
   (3)   Whenever a water main is extended or installed, it shall be extended
or installed across the entire frontage or frontages of the property to be
improved by the installation or extension unless the City has determined
because of land contours or other mains that no other property can be
economically served by such installation or extension.
   (4)   Any plan for installation or extension of water main must be approved
by the director of utilities and the director of engineering in accordance with
the comprehensive plan, capital improvement program, master plan and standard
specifications of the City, and no installation or extension shall be approved
when such installation or extension is not needed to serve existing or future
development or when said installation or extension is solely for the purpose of
avoiding payment of a tap-on fee.
   (5)   All fees collected in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be paid to the director of finance and deposited in the water fund.
(Ord. No. 3001-2019; Sec. 34-2101(1) repealed; new Sec. 34-2101(1) enacted; and
Sec. 34-2101(2) repealed in its entirety and the remaining subsections of Sec.
34-2102 consecutively renumbered; 01/15/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2101 amended; 10-4-22)
SEC. 34-2102.   SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   The installation of all new service connections and placing of pipes,
setting of water service fixtures in public rights-of-way, public grounds and
in premises to be served by City water shall be made at the expense of the
owner thereof. Said work to be performed by duly licensed plumbers under the
supervision of the plumbing inspector, in complete accordance with all
applicable sections of this article and the plumbing Code of the City. All
repairs or replacement of that portion of the service up to and including the
curb stop box or service control valve or the property line, whichever occurs
first, shall become the responsibility of the department of utilities and any
and all leaks or other defects in same not attributable to the property owner
shall be promptly repaired at the expense of the department of utilities. All
repairs of the remaining portions of services, shall become and are the
responsibility of the property owner(s) of the property served. In cases where
multiple properties are served by a common service, the City shall be
responsible for all repairs or replacements up to the individual curb stop
boxes or service control valves for each property served or the property line,
whichever occurs first. Repairs and replacement of services and water service
fixtures whose defects are attributable to the property owner shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Replacement of services and water service
fixtures whose defects are attributable to lead service line drinking water
standard compliance shall be the responsibility of the City.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2102 amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3021-2024; Sec.
34-2102 amended; 6/11/24)
SEC. 34-2103.   SERVICE TAPS.
   (a)   No tap smaller than one (1) inch size shall be allowed or permitted.
   (b)   In the event that a property owner requests that the City install a
small diameter service tap that is two (2) inches or smaller in size, the
property owner shall pay a fee of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for City
labor and equipment. The property owner is responsible for all other costs
associated with the tap, such as but not limited to, materials, excavation,
backfill and paving restoration.   
   (c)   In the event that a property owner requests that the City install a
large diameter service tap that is greater than two (2) inches but sixteen (16)
or less inches in size, the property owner shall pay a fee of three hundred
sixty dollars ($360.00) for City labor and equipment. The property owner is
responsible for all other costs associated with the tap, such as but not
limited to, materials, excavation, backfill and paving restoration.
(Ord. No. 3027-2008; Sec. 34-2103 repealed; new Sec. 34-2103 enacted; 03/25/08;
Ord. No. 3020-2010; Sec. 34-2103(c) repealed; new Sec. 34-2103(c ) enacted; 04/
13/10; Ord. No. 3021- 2022; Sec. 34-2103 amended; 9/20/22; Ord. No. 3029-2022;
Sec. 34-2103 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2104.   SPECIAL SERVICE.
   (a)   Persons desiring water service outside of the City must make
applications therefor at the office of the director of engineering on forms
supplied by the department of utilities. Upon receipt of such application, the
director of engineering shall refer same to the department of utilities for
review and approval. The department of utilities shall supply its comments in
writing within fifteen (15) days to the director of engineering.
   (b)   All applicants requesting water service to properties outside of the
City limits may be granted the privilege of connecting to the City water system
under one or more of the following conditions and such other conditions as may
be prescribed by the City Council from time to time; special services to those
outside the City shall be available only to:
   (1)   A person whose property fronts upon a City main;
   (2)   A person who shall have paid his proportionate share of the main, as
determined by the department of utilities;
   (3)   A person who shall agree that any construction to be undertaken upon
his property shall be performed only after submission and approval of civil
engineering plans therefore by the City Council; and
   (4)   A person who shall agree that work to be performed shall be performed
in complete accordance with the requirements of all governing City ordinances.
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, and as a condition to connection
to the City’s water system for any property currently located outside the City
limits, the property owner must file a voluntary petition for annexation and an
annexation agreement, without any objection whatsoever, for their property with
the City Clerk’s Office prior to connecting to the City service. If the
property is not contiguous to the City, prior to initiating any connection, the
property owner must file a voluntary petition for annexation and a pre-
annexation agreement, without any objection whatsoever. The pre-annexation
agreement will stipulate that when property owner’s property becomes contiguous
to the City the property will be automatically annexed to the City pursuant to
the terms of the voluntary petition for annexation and the pre-annexation
agreement. The petition to annex and the pre-annexation agreement will be
binding on the property owner, and their successors and assigns. In the event
that the statutory period for annexation has lapsed, it will immediately be
renewed for a full statutory term, and further renewed until the date upon
which the property becomes contiguous to the City limits.
   (c)   The director of utilities and the director of community and economic
development shall cooperate in order to determine whether out-of-City water
customers are capable of annexing to the City of Moline. The director of
utilities is hereby authorized to issue the notice provided for in subsection
(b) above to all out-of-City customers at the time of passage of this ordinance
(No. 89-4-4) who have executed an agreement to annex as a condition of
receiving water service and who are capable of annexing to the City of Moline.
The director of utilities shall also be required to report to the Committee-of-
the-Whole on or before October 1 of each year the names of the record owners,
location, and occupants for those out-of-city water customers who have not
agreed to annex but who are capable of annexing to the City of Moline. Upon the
concurrence of the Committee-of-the-Whole, the director of utilities is
authorized to issue the notice provided in subsection (b) above.
(Ord. No. 2003-05-05; references to standing committees changed to "City
Council" or "Committee-of-the-Whole" throughout the Code; 05/13/03)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2104 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3001-2024; Sec. 34-2104 amended; 2/13/24)
SEC. 34-2105.   NO ALTERATION OR ADDITIONS OF SERVICE PIPES WITHOUT PERMITS.
   (a)   After a service connection has been placed, no plumber or other person
shall make any attachment or connection to it to serve other premises so as to
connect the same with the City water system unless he shall procure a written
permit from the plumbing inspector, specifying the particular additions,
repairs, or alterations to be made, and shall perform such work in conformity
with such permit and ordinances of the City.
   (b)   No additions or alterations whatsoever in or about any conduit, pipe
or water cock shall be made or caused to be made by any person taking water
without notice thereof first given to, and permission had in writing from the
plumbing inspector.
SEC. 34-2106.   SPRINKLER AND FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE -PLANS TO BE APPROVED.
   Whenever an application is made to the City to do construction, alteration
or repair work upon any fire extinguishing apparatus involving the use of City
water as the primary source of supply, such application with plans shall be
first submitted to the director of department of utilities for approval and
then to the fire chief and the building inspector respectively. No permit will
be issued by the building inspector until said plans are so approved.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2106 amended; 10/4/22).
SEC. 34-2107.   SAME - TESTING.
   City water will not be turned into any sprinkler or fire protection service
unless all pipes in connection with such system are left exposed until pressure
testing and disinfection have been completed in accordance with the City of
Moline supplemental specifications. Any change in the number of sprinklers in
service shall be reported to the fire department.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2107 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2108.   SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   There shall be separate service pipes placed from the main to each building
wherever there is a water main in front, rear, or side of such building. Such
service pipes shall be placed on a straight line at right angles to the water
main and connections made within two lines drawn parallel to the sides of the
building to be served or within three (3) feet thereof. In all cases, each
building or unit thereof served by individual meters must have an independent
outside service control valve of the type set forth in this division, located
on City owned rights-of-way or easement.
(Ord. No. 3027-2018; Sec. 34-2108 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2108
enacted; 07/17/18)
SEC. 34-2109.   YARD HYDRANTS, SPRINKLING PLUGS AND SILL COCKS.
   Yard hydrants, sprinkling plugs, and sill cocks will not be allowed on water
service connections unless such yard hydrant, sprinkling plug or sill cock is
connected in such a manner that the water consumed through such yard hydrant,
sprinkling plug or sill cock shall first pass through a water meter on such
service and has complied with Article III of this
Chapter 34.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2109 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2110.   SERVICE CONTROL VALVES.
   (a)   A service control valve or curb stop box for controlling the supply of
water to customers shall be placed on every fire and potable service. When
connections are made in streets or avenues, the service control valve or stop
box shall be placed twelve (12) inches outside the sidewalk line on the street
side; and when made in alleys or in areas where no sidewalks exist, it shall be
placed six (6) inches outside the lot line. The cover of said service control
valve or stop box shall be maintained at the same height as the sidewalk or the
surrounding ground by the owner of the premises, unless the need for adjustment
is caused by changes in existing grade by the City. Where area way walls of
curb lines prevent the location of stop box and shut-off at the point
indicated, they shall be placed on public right-of-way or easement as directed
by the plumbing inspector. All service control valves must be set on a line
drawn at right angles to the main through the service corporation or connection
in the main.
   If a stop box is used, it shall be of a design approved by the director of
utilities and must have an unobstructed opening at least one (1) inch in
diameter and fitted with a substantial cover on which shall be marked the word
"Water" in raised letters.
   (b)   No one except an employee or person specially authorized by the
department of utilities shall open the cover of an outside shut-off or stop
box, or turn on or off water, provided, however, that licensed plumbers may
turn on or off water for testing plumbing or making repairs, but whenever so
used the shut-off must be left closed if found closed and open if found open by
the plumber who uses it.
   (c)   Service control valves located on property other than City rights-of-
way or easement shall remain the responsibility of the property owner. The
valves, curb box and shut-off must be kept in good condition and ready for use
at all times by the property owner. Should the property owner neglect to
maintain such valves, curb box and shut-off in proper condition to be used, and
if valve box is found to be filled up, or the stop box or service control valve
is found to be out of repair at any time, the department of utilities shall
have the right to clean or repair the same when needed without giving notice,
and charge the cost thereof to the owner and, if payment is refused, may turn
off the water in the service until the same is paid.
   (d)   The City will not be responsible for any damage due to the breaking of
a service or stop cock, done while setting, resetting or repairing a water
meter.
   (e)   Every service pipe must also have an operable locking stop valve
placed in the building within two (2) feet from where said pipe enters and
becomes exposed in the premises. Said stop must have a handle or wheel attached
to turn the same, and be kept in working order at all times. There shall also
be a gate or ball valve placed on the outlet side of the water meter not more
than three (3) feet from the meter, so that the meter can be taken out or
replaced without draining the pipe system in the building.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2110 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2111.   SERVICE PIPE. Changes were made and approved in March 2022.
   (a)   That portion of the water service pipe from the water main to the
shut-off, located in the boulevard, must be made of approved class ductile
iron, copper or other approved material. Said pipe shall be placed in such a
manner and of such surplus length as to prevent breakage or rupture by
settlement. The brass, bronze, ductile iron and copper pipe fittings used shall
be of such strength and thickness as to safely withstand a pressure of two
hundred (200) pounds per square inch.
   (b)   Copper pipe used in service connections shall be cold drawn seamless
tubing with a proper bending temper so that a full section shall withstand
being bent cold through one hundred eighty (180) degrees without cracking on
the outside of the bent portion around a pin the diameter of which is one and
one-half (1 1/2) times the inside diameter of the copper pipe. The purity of
the copper used shall be at least ninety-nine and nine-tenths per cent (99.9%)
and shall have a tensile strength of thirty thousand (30,000) pounds per square
inch with a minimum elongation one (1) inch in four (4) inches. The minimum
weights and thickness of copper service pipe per foot length shall be as
follows:
 
Diameter  Weight     Thickness
3/4 in.   0.640 lbs. 0.065 in.
1 in.     0.838 lbs. 0.065 in.
1 1/4 in. 1.040 lbs. 0.065 in.
1 1/2 in. 1.360 lbs. 0.072 in.
2 in.     2.062 lbs. 0.083 in.
2 1/2 in. 2.920 lbs. 0.095 in.
 
   The above copper pipe is known as Type "K".
   (c)   All joints in the copper service pipes to be of the kind termed
"flared union."
   (d)   No water service pipe or tap for any building shall be less than one
(1) inch in diameter and pipes supplying sill cocks or hydrants outside of
buildings shall not be less than one-half (1/2) inch copper or three-fourths
inch if of any other material.
   (e)   Plumbers installing water service pipes shall close the curb shut-off
and leave it closed upon completion of their work, and when pipes are placed to
the curb only, they shall close the end of the pipe or fitting with a tight
metal plug or cap.
   (f)   Service lines that are to be placed in acid soil or land fill created
by the deposition of ashes, cinders, rubbish or corrosive materials of any sort
shall be wrapped and coated with bituminous base materials to prevent contact
of the pipe with the soil or water in the trench. In severe cases, the plumbing
inspector may require that the pipeline also be covered with a minimum of four
(4) inches of crushed lime rock.
   (g)   That portion of the water service pipe from the stop box located in
the public right-of-way to the ultimate point of consumption shall be of one of
the following approved materials: Copper Type "K" underground and Type "L"
above ground copper, high density polyethylene, or ductile iron. Incompatible
metals in the line pipe and fittings will not be permitted.
   (h)   High density polyethylene (HDPE) shall be PE 4710 DR9 rated for a
minimum of one hundred sixty (160) psi and in accordance with AWWA C906-21
standard, HDPE pipe may be installed in lieu of copper only under unpaved
surfaces.
   (j)   HDPE piping must be installed without buried joints, using continuous
manufactured tubing from the stop box to the interior building piping. A twelve
(12) gauge insulated copper tracer wire must be installed whenever HDPE is
installed with accessibility for tracing.
   (k)   When using a HDPE water service material, inspection and rework of the
electrical grounding system needs to be performed to verify that it meets
current adopted NEC grounding specs.
   (l)   Any reworking of or corrections to the electrical grounding system
shall be performed by a registered electrical contractor and appropriate
permits obtained.
(Ord. No. 3001-2022; 3/29/22)
SEC. 34-2112.   NO CONNECTION BETWEEN DIFFERENT SERVICES.
   When there are two (2) or more services on the premises, the piping from
each service must be kept separate, and no connection made from one to the
other.
SEC. 34-2113.   DEPTH OF SERVICE PIPE.
   Service pipes must be placed at least five (5) feet below the surface of the
ground. When pipes are placed in streets or grounds subject to fixed grades,
where the surface of the ground is higher than the established grades, they
shall be so placed that they will be at least five (5) feet below the
established grade, except in sandy soil formation, the department of utilities
may require pipes to be placed to a depth of at least six (6) feet below the
established grade.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2113 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2114.   MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES.
   All newly installed service pipes and fixtures from the City water main to
the premises, including the tap valves or corporation cocks at the main shall
be installed at the expense of the property owner. All pipes and fixtures not
in City rights-of-way shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner
and any leaks or other defects in the same, not related to lead service line
replacement requirements, shall be promptly repaired by them, or if not
promptly repaired the water shall, under the procedures of Article I, be turned
off until such repairs have been made by a plumber engaged by the department of
utilities to do such work, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the
property owner, and must be paid before water shall be turned on again. In case
of a dispute as to the necessity for or reasonableness of cost of repairs, the
hearing procedure of Article I shall apply.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2114 amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3021-2024; Sec.
34-2114 amended; 6/11/24)
SEC. 34-2115.   BREAKS IN SERVICE OR FIXTURES.
   The department of utilities or its employees shall not be held responsible
by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, or for failure in
the supply of water.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2115 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2116.   ABANDONED SERVICE PIPES.
   (a)   All service pipes, now in place for the purpose of serving a property
or that may be in place within the limits of the property lines extended to the
City mains or that may become useless because of laying of larger or other new
services, or because water will no longer be used through them, must be
permanently closed off at the water main at the expense of the owner of the
premises, and so reported to the director of the department of utilities. No
plumber or owner of property shall disconnect or remove water supply fixtures
or piping from any premises served by City water or alter the same in such a
way as to make the service connection unnecessary for the premises, without
permanently closing off the connections at the water mains and reporting the
same to the director of the department of utilities, except where such
connection to be closed off may presently exist under a street or avenue that
has been improved by the paving thereof within the preceding four (4) years, in
which case the provisions of Division 2 of Chapter 28 (Section
28-2200 et seq.,) of this Code shall apply. In any event such services shall,
until properly closed off at the main, remain at the property of the premises
that it was originally installed to serve and the owner of said premises shall
remain responsible for its maintenance until such a time as it is permanently
closed off and disconnected.
   (b)   If a service pipe or connection, which is not being used, is found to
be leaking, the owner will be notified to promptly repair same. If said repair
is not promptly instituted, the department of utilities may then, upon notice
to the owner, engage a plumber to make the repair or turn off said service,
with the charge or expense thereof charged to the owner of the property for
which the repair was made.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2116 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2117.   RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER.
   (a)   The City may, when necessary, without notice, shut the water off in
its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other purposes
and no claims shall be made against the City for loss of service or for the
breakage of any service pipe or service cock, or from any other damage that may
result from shutting off water for repairing, laying or re-laying mains,
hydrants, or other connections. The department of utilities shall give notice
of shutting off water if conditions are such that it is reasonably possible to
do so.
   (b)   No one other than department of utilities employees shall operate any
of the water main isolation control valves on the distribution system.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2117 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2118.    PRIVATE ENTITY MAIN EXTENSION.
   In the event that a private citizen/entity extends the City main at their
own expense, an agreement may be made, upon receipt of a written request from
the private citizen/entity, with said citizen/entity for reimbursement, as
follows: If, in the future, a request is made to the department of utilities
for permission to connect on the public main laid by said citizen/entity, the
department of utilities shall, before granting such permission, require the
person to pay a just and equitable amount to the citizen/entity who laid the
main under the original permit. However, in no event shall said agreement
extend beyond ten (10) years from the date said extension is completed.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2118 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2119.   APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (a)   Form; record. Application for water, sewer, solid waste and recycling,
and stormwater drainage service, or for the installation of a water meter shall
be made at the department of finance. The department of finance shall at once
make a record of such application. Every application for water supply shall
express that the same is taken subject to all ordinances then in force or that
may thereafter be adopted for the governance of the water service.
   (b)   Owner to sign all applications. All applications for water, sewer,
solid waste and recycling, and stormwater drainage service shall be signed by
the owner of the premises served. Such application when accepted by the
department of finance shall constitute a contract between the applicant or
applicants and the City, and shall be subject to all applicable City ordinances
now in force or hereinafter adopted by the City. For the purposes of this
section, the word "owner" shall mean the party holding legal or equitable title
to the premises regardless of encumbrances thereon.
   (c)   Obligation of applicant to notify City of any changes. Any person or
party signing an application pursuant to the terms hereof, shall be obligated
to notify the department of finance of any termination or change in occupancy,
or other facts requiring a change in contract, a discontinuance, or an
interruption of water, sewer, solid waste and recycling, and stormwater
drainage services, and in the event any such person or party shall so fail to
notify the department of finance, they shall remain liable upon the account for
that premises for previous and subsequent service furnished at the premises
until the department of finance has written notice of such changes.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2119(b) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2119
(b) enacted; 04/04/06)
(Ord. No. 3043-2012; new Sec. 34-2119(c)(d)(e) enacted; 12/18/12)
(Ord. No. 3037-2017; Sec. 34-2119 repealed; new Sec. 34-2119 enacted; 10/17/17)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2119 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2120.   NO SERVICE AT NEW LOCATION UNTIL PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (a)   No persons, either owners or tenants, who in changing their residence
from one location to any other location served by the department of utilities,
shall be given water service until a contract is signed and any and all
delinquent city utility bills which are charged against them at a former place
of residence have been paid in full. No water at the new location shall be
turned on, and if turned on, it will, upon notice pursuant to Article I, be
turned off until settlement of such delinquent water and sewerage service
charges at the former location is made. A service charge determined in
accordance with Section
34-2121(e) will be made for turning on water and processing office records.
   (b)   If the customer disputes the amount of the water and sewerage service
bill at the former residence, service shall be permitted to the new residence
pending a decision pursuant to Article I. In the event the water is on at a
newly occupied premises, as a result of changes in occupancy of which the
department of finance may have no knowledge, the owner whether alone or in
conjunction with the tenant, shall be required to call the department of
finance and sign the necessary application forms.
(Ord. No. 3037-2017; Sec. 34-2120 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2120
enacted; 10/17/17)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2120 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2121.   CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS.
   (a)   Monthly charges for water supply by meter. The monthly charges for
water supply by meter shall be:
   (1)   The schedule of charges effective for all bills issued after January
1, 2026, until modified by Council, shall be:
      Base Rate - $2.28 per month/bill
      Commodity Rate - $5.34 per thousand gallons
      Capacity Charge -   $11.07 for 5/8-inch meters
               $16.60 for 3/4-inch meters
               $27.66 for 1-inch meters
               $55.32 for 1½-inch meters
               $88.50 for 2-inch meters
               $165.94 for 3-inch meters
               $276.56 for 4-inch meters
               $553.11 for 6-inch meters   
   The per meter rates for service outside the City limits, but connected to
the City-owned water system, shall be three hundred per cent (300%) of the
above schedule of charges; however, the percentage applied to out-of-city
service shall not apply to water service furnished to another governmental unit
pursuant to a contract or to those out-of-city properties who have petitioned
for and have received a lower rate, as approved by City Council by ordinance
duly adopted. Any such petition for a lower rate must be filed with the
director of utilities on forms provided by the department of utilities.
   The base charge shall be charged as long as the meter remains in service.
Upon a written request by the owner or authorized agent asking that the water
be shut off and the meter removed, the department shall proceed to comply with
such request and the minimum rate shall cease on the date when the meter is
removed. Charges as determined in accordance with subsection 34-2121(f) will be
made when the meter is removed and when the meter is again installed.
   Upon written request of an owner or owner's authorized agent, asking that
the department of utilities change meters from time to time because the owner's
seasonal demands for water fluctuate, the department shall comply with such
request, provided that the proper plumbing connections are in place and that a
fee, as determined in accordance with subsection
34-2121(f), is paid for each requested meter change.
   (b)   Landscape meters. Those meters designated for measuring water for
landscape or other outdoor use, which have been installed to avoid sewer
charges, shall be charged actual gallons used as rounded to the nearest one
thousand (1,000) gallons with the charge computed in accordance with Sec.
34-2121(a).
   (c)    Fire sprinkler service connections. All property owners using fire
sprinkler service connections to the City's public water supply system shall
pay an annual fee based on the size of the fire sprinkler service connection,
in accordance with the following fee schedule:
 Annual Fee
                          Annual Fee
Size & Type of Connection 2026, and until modified by City Council
2-inch or less Sprinkler  $159.58
3-inch Sprinkler          $226.07
4-inch sprinkler          $398.95
6-inch Sprinkler          $664.91
8-inch Sprinkler          $1,196.83
10-inch Sprinkler         $1,730.93
12-inch Sprinkler         $3,324.52
16-inch Sprinkler         $6,810.96
 
This fee shall be billed in twelve (12) equal monthly installments, in addition
to all other charges for water used elsewhere on the premises.
   (d)   Fire Hydrants on Private Property. All property owners who have or
shall cause to be placed a fire hydrant on their own property for the purpose
of fire protection thereof shall pay an annual fee for the same in accordance
with the following fee schedule:
 
                        Annual Fee
Private Hydrant Charges 2014    2026, and until modified by City Council
                        $609.22 $664.91
 
   This fee shall be billed in twelve (12) equal monthly installments, in
addition to all other charges for water supply and service to the premises.
   (e)   New Services. All new services shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per meter, plus the cost of the meter, with ownership of the meter
retained by the City, said charge to be paid upon any of the following, and
pursuant to the terms set forth herein:
   (1)   Original meter installation;
   (2)   Reinstallation of any meter;
   (3)   Placement of additional meters on any existing service to provide
individual metering in multi-family units or for separating water and sewer
charges;
   (4)   The setting fee may be waived for a general contractor; the property
owner would then pay the setting fee upon transfer of service from the general
contractor. Service may be shut off if terminated by the general contractor.
   (f)   Service Charge.
   (1)   For transfer of billing, when the service has not been terminated, the
charge will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); however, in the case where the
department of utilities or department of finance are aware that a new occupant
exists and the provisions of Section 34-2119 have not been met, an
administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for staff
time preparing and posting notice to property. A turn-on fee of forty dollars
($40.00) shall be assessed for turning on water during business hours for
existing customers. A fee of fifty-five dollars ($55.00) shall be assessed for
turning on water when a meter is also installed or reinstalled. A turn-off fee
with meter removal during business hours will be charged fifty-five dollars
($55.00). Overtime charges shall be charged to the customer and shall apply to
work performed in transferring the billing outside of regular business hours.
   (2)   Overtime for each occurrence shall be charged to turn on a water
service outside of the normal business hours of the department of finance.
   (3)   A service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged to
collect a meter reading and prepare an interim bill at a time that does not
coincide with the routine meter reading cycle.
   (4)   When routine readings are requested for meters which are not used for
City billing (sub-meters), the owner shall purchase and be responsible for each
meter. Meter repairs shall be performed by utilities staff. Actual repair costs
shall be billed to the owner's utility account. A $450.00 (four hundred fifty
dollar) one-time route set-up fee shall be charged to the owner at the time
meters are purchased. Recurring fees shall be billed as follows:
 
On-Cycle Readings
Reading Quantity Fee
<10 meters       $10.00
>10 meters       $20.00
   Off-Cycle Readings
<10 meters       $20.00
>10 meters       $30.00
 
   (g)   Coliform test charges. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be
charged for each coliform test that is performed by the City for construction
contractors, private individuals and other non-City entities.
   (h)   Collection of Service Charges.
   (1)    In the case only water or only sewer service is provided, to the fund
providing the service.
   (2)   When overtime charges are collected and if the water field
representative did the turn-on and installation of meter, then the percentages
of above apply; and otherwise, all to the water fund.
   (i)   Prorated Utility Billing. Whenever a utility bill is issued for a
period of time less than a full monthly billing cycle, the following fixed
utility bill charges shall be prorated based on the number of actual service
days: water capacity charge; sewer fixed charge; solid waste and recycling fee;
and monthly stormwater utility service charge.
   (j)   Use Charge Exemption for Red Water: For so long as a water customer is
affected by water discoloration due to iron concentration levels in excess of
the Illinois Primary Drinking Water Maximum Contaminant Level, said affected
customer shall be exempt from the City's commodity charge. Said customers shall
pay all other fees and charges for water service.
   (1)   The exemption shall apply to the commodity charge that would have
otherwise been due for the water consumed as measured by the water meter on the
premises.
   (2)   The determination of whether the iron concentration level is in excess
of the Illinois Primary Drinking Water Maximum Contaminant Level shall be made
as follows: department of utilities staff shall collect a sample of water at a
tap within the premises, and said sample shall be analyzed by certified staff
at the City's utilities facility to determine the iron concentration level.
   (3)   The exemption shall cease with the first billing issued after two (2)
consecutive tests, conducted no less than two (2) weeks apart, in which the
iron concentration level is at or below the Illinois Primary Drinking Water
Maximum Contaminant Level.
Sec. 34-2121 Amendments:
Sub (a):      Ord. No. 3079-2004; Sec. 34-2121(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(a)
enacted; 10/05/04; Ord. No. 3047-2006; Sec. 34-2121(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-
2121(a) enacted; 11/07/06; Ord. No. 3022-2008; Sec. 34-2121(a)(1) repealed; new
Sec. 34-2121(a)(1) enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No. 3035-2008; Sec. 34-2121(a)
repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(a) enacted; 05/27/08; Ord. 3047-2011; Sec. 34-2121
(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(a) enacted; 11/22/11; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec.
34-2121(a)(1), (a)(2) repealed; Sec. 34-2121(a)(3) renumbered and amended; 10/
4/22; Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec 34-2121(a) amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3001-2024;
Sec. 34-2121(a) amended; 2/13/24; Ord. No. 3047-2025; Sec. 34-2121(a) repealed;
new Sec. 34-2121(a) enacted; 10/14/25
Sub (b):      Ord. 3047-2011; Sec. 34-2121(b) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(b)
enacted; 11/22/11; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2121(b) amended; 10/4/22
Sub (c) or (d):   Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2121(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-
2121(d) enacted; 04/04/06; Ord. No. 3021-2008; Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d)
repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d) enacted; 03/18/08; Ord. 3047-2011; Sec.
34-2121(c)(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(c)(d) enacted; 11/22/11; Ord. No.
3033-2013; Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d)
enacted; 10/08/13; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d) amended; 10/4/
22; Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d) amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No.
3047-2025; Sec. 34- 2121(c) and (d) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(c) and (d)
enacted; 10/14/25
Sub (e):      Ord. No. 3024-2017; Sec. 34-2121(e) repealed in its entirety; new
Sec. 34-2121(e) enacted; 10/10/17; Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-2121(e) amended;
9/20/22
Sub (f):      Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2121(f) repealed in its entirety; new
Sec. 34-2121(f) enacted; 04/04/06; Ord. No. 3027-2008; Sec. 34-2121(f)(3), (4)
and (6) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(f)(3) and (4) enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No.
3045-2011; Sec. 34-2121(f)(1), (f)(2) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121(f1)(f2)
enacted; 11/22/11; Ord. No. 3032-2013; Sec. 34-2121(f)(1) repealed; new Sec.
34-2121(f)(1) enacted; 10/08/13; Ord. No. 3024-2017; Sec. 34-2121(f) repealed
in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2121(f) enacted; 10/10/17; Ord. No. 3021-2022;
Sec. 34- 2121(f)(1), (f)(2) amended; 9-20-22; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2121
(f)(1), (2), (4) amended; 10/4/22
Sub (g):      Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2119(g) repealed; new Sec. 34-2119
enacted; 04/04/06; Ord. No. 3021-22; Sec. 34-2121(g) amended; 9/20/22
Sub. (h):      Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2121(h)(2) repealed; Section 34-2121
(h)(3) renumbered; 10/4/22
Sub (i):      Ord. No. 3036-2015; Sec. 34-2121(i), "Delayed Billing," repealed
in entirety; new Sec. 34-2121(i) enacted; 10/06/15; Ord. No. 3036-2015, Sec.
34-2121(i) repealed; new Sec. 34-2121 enacted; 10/06/15; Ord. No. 3060-2023;
Sec. 34-2121(i) amended; 12/19/23
Sub (j):      Ord. No. 3042-2019; Sec. 34-2121(j) enacted; 12/10/19; Ord. No.
3029- 2022; Sec. 34-2121(j) amended; 10-4-22
Other:         Ord. No. 3072-2004; Sec. 34-2121(e through h) repealed; new Sec.
34-2121 (e through i) enacted; 09/14/04
         Ord. No. 3037-2024; Sec. 34-2121 repealed; new Sec. 34-2121 enacted;
10/22/24
SEC. 34-2122.   RESPONSIBILITY IN TURNING ON WATER.
   In turning on water, the City or the department of utilities shall not be
responsible for any damage whatsoever, whether occurring by reason of improper
fixtures, open or improper connections, or for any other reasons or by another
causes.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2122 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2123.   WATER METERS.
   (a)   All water supplied from the City water distribution system shall be
metered and no article, method or device of any substance or nature shall be
used to bypass a water meter or in any other manner to obtain unmetered water
from the City water supply. All meters shall be furnished and set by the
department of utilities but the owner of the premises upon which it is to be
set must provide a suitable location in the piping system for same. In certain
cases as determined by the department of utilities, the owner shall also
provide a suitable location for the remote reading device and connecting
wiring. The owner of a new building shall be responsible for the installation
of the wire from the water meter location to the remote reading device location
on the outside of the building. The property owner of an existing building
shall be responsible for the installation of the wire from the water meter
location to the remote reading device location on the outside of the building
when a meter is relocated or a second meter is requested. The wire used in such
installations shall be 22/3 AWG solid conductor outdoor communication cable
with the three (3) wires being black, green and red respectively in color.
Installation of wire shall be completed prior to pre-cover inspection by the
electrical inspector. Location of all remote reading devices shall be approved
by the department of utilities. The City will install the remote reading device
as required. Meters shall be placed on the service pipe not to exceed two (2)
feet from where the pipe enters and becomes exposed in the premises. There
shall be a suitable place provided for the meter so as to keep it dry, clean,
protected from freezing and readily accessible at all times to the meter reader
and inspectors of the department of utilities, who shall have every right
during reasonable working hours to access the premises where the meter is
located, for the purpose of installation, servicing, reading or removal
thereof. A valve shall be installed on each side of the meter. A locking valve
approved by the City shall be installed on the inlet side of the meter. All
valves and fittings necessary to comply with the requirements and to provide
connection to the meter, except a coupling or flange at each end of the meter,
shall be provided by the owner of the premises to be served.
   (b)   For services larger than two (2) inches in diameter, the department of
utilities reserves the right to install two (2) or more meters of smaller size
in parallel. Where meters are so placed each meter shall have a valve or shut-
off on both inlet and outlet pipe in addition to the basement shut-off.
   (c)   Where a service pipe larger than two (2) inches in diameter is used,
the plumber shall have a duty to contact the department of utilities for
instructions regarding the fittings required for locking by-pass and spacing to
be provided for the water meters.
   (d)   Multiplexes shall be served by a single meter in the name of the
owner, or metered separately with the owner responsible for unpaid charges as
provided in Section
34-2132. In case two (2) or more meters are desired for measuring water from
one (1) service connection, they shall be so placed that no one of them shall
measure water which has passed through the other one. Each meter shall have
individual locking control valves set as required by this division.
   (e)   On premises where the owner or in conjunction with a tenant determines
that certain quantities of water so used on the premise do not ever enter the
sanitary sewerage system or stormwater drainage system of the City and such
water supply piping can be so segregated, and as a result, desire that such
water be so metered so that no sewerage charge is made for such water, the
department of utilities, upon receipt of the cost of the meter and setting fee,
and, upon notification from the department of utilities to proceed with such
setting, will so place a meter in the place so prepared by the owner in
accordance with subsection (a), and the said meter shall thereafter be read and
billed with such charges as required.
   Where only the use of the sewerage service is desired and no City water or
only partial City water and partial supplementary source of water is used, the
supplementary source shall be metered as set forth in the paragraph above.
   (f)   Water meters shall be of the size and type necessary to insure
accurate registration of the water requirements of the premises. Size of meters
for large buildings, apartments or flats shall be designated by the department
of utilities, at time of application for water supply. The size of meters so
specified by said department being always subject to change, from time to time
thereafter, as the demand or other conditions may develop to be out of accord
with the provisions of this division. The department of utilities reserves the
right to require an increase in the size of meter in any case, where, in the
discretion of the department, the use of water in larger quantities places any
meter under undue or unusual strain. The size of meter which shall in either
event be required shall be determined by the department of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2123(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-2123 enacted; 04/04/
06; Ord. No. 3034-2008; Sec. 34-2123 repealed; new Sec. 34-2123 enacted; 05/27/
08; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2123 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2124.   OWNERS TO PROTECT METERS.
   (a)   The owner or occupant of premises where a meter is installed shall be
held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or hot water and
from other injury or interference from any person or persons. In case of any
injury to the meter, or in case of its stoppage or imperfect working, the owner
or occupant shall give immediate notice to the office of the department of
utilities. In all cases where meters are broken or damaged by negligence of
owners or occupants on premises, or by freezing, hot water, or other injuries
except ordinary wear and tear, the necessary repairs or replacement of the
meter shall be made by the City's department of utilities and the cost of such
repairs paid for by such owner or occupant at a minimum amount of forty-five
dollars ($45.00) plus the cost of the meter. Additional City labor may be
required to set large meters if a contractor is not involved. In all cases, the
customer will be charged the actual costs incurred by the City. The customer
may also be responsible for costs associated with the services of a plumbing
contractor, if required. In case payment thereof is neglected or refused, the
water supply shall be turned off and shall not be turned on until full payment
has been made, including all fees as outlined in Section
34-1100. Damaged meters may be repaired or replaced by the department of
utilities, at the director's discretion, and overtime charges shall be charged
to the customer and shall apply to work performed in meter repair or
replacement outside of regular business hours, without first giving notice
thereof to the owner of premises served by such meter.
   (b)   No one shall in any way interfere with the proper registration of a
water meter, and no one except an authorized employee of the department of
utilities shall break a seal of a meter; provided, however, that the director
may grant written permits to licensed plumbers in case of emergency to break
such seal for draining pipes or stopping water leaks.
   (c)   Whenever a water meter is in place on a water service in premises that
are to be remodeled, removed or destroyed, or where the service is discontinued
so that the water meter is no longer needed, the owner of such premises shall
give notice in writing to the director of department of utilities to remove
such meter, and free access to such meter must be provided with at least
twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice on regular work days after notice is
given so that the meter may be removed. The owner of the premises shall be held
responsible for the meter until such written notice is given, and if the meter
is covered with material and/or debris making the meter inaccessible or lost,
he shall be required to pay for the same at the actual value.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2124 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2124
enacted; 04/4/06)
(Ord. No. 3027-2008; Sec. 34-2124(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-2124 enacted; 03/25/
08)
(Ord. No. 3030-2009; Sec. 34-2124 repealed; new Sec. 34-2124 enacted; 10/20/09)
(Ord. No. 3038-2017; Sec. 34-2124(a) repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-2124
(a) enacted; 10/17/17)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2124 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2125.   ADJUSTMENT OF UTILITY BILL CHARGES.
   (a)   In case of a dispute over the amount of a utility bill as related to
the accuracy of a water meter, the department of utilities shall, at the
written request of the consumer, test the meter. If it is found upon such test
that the meter registers a greater amount of water than has actually passed
through said meter as determined pursuant to the standards published in the
current edition of the American Water Works Association M6 manual, the bill
will be adjusted to conform with the actual amount passing through the said
meter, and said test shall be made without charge. If however, the meter under
registers or registers correctly the amount of water passing through it, the
owner shall be required to bear the expense of such test.
   (b)   Should a City utility account be billed incorrectly for water, sewer,
stormwater, and/or garbage disposal and recycling charges due to errors in
measuring and/or calculating said charges, the City shall promptly correct the
charges to the account and reflect said corrections on the next utility bill.
Such account corrections shall encompass a period of no greater than the
preceding twelve (12) months, whether the correction is to the detriment or
advantage of the City or the consumer. In cases in which the account
corrections are to the detriment of the property owner, the City shall offer a
reasonable payment plan without interest for the amounts charged as a result of
the account corrections, as approved by the director of finance. The time limit
of twelve (12) months shall not apply to cases involving meter tampering, theft
of service, fraud or other similar illicit customer actions. In such cases, the
City shall correct charges to the account and issue a bill for all uncollected
charges.
(Ord. No. 3003-2015; Sec. 34-2125 repealed; new Sec. 34-2125 enacted; 02/10/15)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2125 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-2125 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 34-2126.   DEPOSIT FOR TEST OF METER.
   Before making a test of any meter the person requesting such test shall, at
the time of making application for test, make a deposit at the department of
finance of the amount charged for such test, subject to the conditions herein
stated, which charges are fixed as follows:
Meter Size Fee Structure
Meter Size Fee Structure
5/8"       $140.00
3/4"       $140.00
1"         $140.00
1-1/2"     $230.00
2"         $230.00
3"         $330.00
4"         $330.00
6"         $330.00
 
No meter shall be removed or in any way disturbed, nor the seal broken, except
in the presence of, or under the direction of, the director or said director's
authorized agent. If meter test is positive, the fee will be waived.
(Ord. No. 3072-2004; Sec. 34-3126 repealed; new Sec 34-3126 enacted; 09/14/04;
Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2126 repealed; new Sec. 34-2126 enacted; 04/04/06;
Ord. No. 3021-2022; Section 34-2126 amended; 9/20/22; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec.
34-2126 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2127.   REPAIRING METERS.
   The department of utilities reserves the right to access during reasonable
working hours to enter any premises supplied by City water and exchange any
meter, for repairs or other cause, as may be deemed necessary by said
department. In the event that access cannot be readily obtained, the holder of
the contract for water service shall be contacted and the necessity for access
set forth.
   (1)   Meters out of order. If any meter, at any time, fails to register the
quantity of water consumed, the same shall be determined and charges made based
on the average quantity registered during the last preceding year prior to the
date of failure.
   (2)   No allowance for leakage. No deduction shall be made on account of
leakage after the water has passed through and been registered by meter.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2127 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2128.   UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT.
   No person shall, in any manner, obstruct the access of any stopcock,
hydrant, water meter, dial or valve connected with any water pipes within the
City by means of any rubbish, refuse, building material, fuel, or any other
article, thing or hindrance, particularly the obstruction of meters that will
interfere with the ready access to any meter at any and all times. Neglecting
to comply with this provision, the consumer at once becomes liable and the City
water supply will be turned off at the curb valve in the boulevard, after a
five (5) days' notice has been given, and shall remain off until the said
obstruction shall be removed and the department of utilities notified.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2128 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2129.   READING ZONES; COLLECTING ZONES; PAYMENT DATES; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Every meter shall be read each month by a department of utilities
representative. In the event that the reading cannot be obtained, the bill
shall be estimated for that month as provided for in Subsection
34-2127 (1). In the case a bill is estimated for a month, a reading must be
obtained for the next succeeding month.
   (b)   Payment must be received by the department of finance on or before the
hour of closing on the date specified on the bill or a penalty for late payment
will be imposed; provided, that, when said date shall be a Sunday or legal
holiday, such bill shall be paid on or before the next succeeding day that is
not a Sunday or legal holiday without penalty.
   (c)   The penalty established in subsection (b) above shall be five percent
(5%) of the amount of water or sewage service charge remaining unpaid after the
due date.
   (d)   Failure to receive a bill will not entitle the owner or customer as
defined by the contract to avoid payment for water and sewage service.
   (e)   Written notice must be given by the owner or authorized agent if it is
desired that bills be forwarded to any address other than the premises supplied
with water, sewer, solid waste and recycling, and stormwater drainage service.
   (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) above, the
director of finance may put any water service on a monthly payment basis if in
said officer's judgment it would be to the best interests of the City, and in
such case such bills shall be due on the first of each month after such service
has been used.
   (g)   The City shall have the full power and authority to require the
payment in advance for use of water furnished by it to any building, place, or
premises, and in case prompt payment for the same shall not be made, it may
shut off the water from such building, place or premises, and shall not be
compelled again to supply said building, place or premises with water until any
arrears, with costs and expense of turning said water off and on shall be fully
paid. Such termination of service shall be conducted pursuant to Article I of
this chapter.
   (h)   All bills for installation of special water service, repairs, and for
installation and repair of meters, shall be payable to the department of
finance as soon as such work is completed and the bill is rendered; and if said
bill or bills are not promptly paid, the City water supply may be turned off by
the City pursuant to Article I of this chapter, until all of such bill or bills
have been paid.
   (i)   Water bills, sewage bills, solid waste/recycling bills, and stormwater
drainage service bills, as far as payment collections are concerned, are to be
considered as one, or a single bill, and any payment less than the total is to
be considered a partial payment, except on final billings covered by deposit.
Partial payment shall be credited in the following order:
      (1)   Past due water service charges, sewerage and treatment service
charges, stormwater drainage service charges, and miscellaneous charges,
bracketed by age of account in accordance with brackets of thirty (30) days,
according to age and prorated in accordance with the relative percentage each
bears to the total bill rendered within the same age bracket, until paid in
full;
      (2)   Current water service charges, sewerage and treatment service
charges, stormwater drainage service charges, and miscellaneous charges,
prorated in accordance with the relative percentage each bears to the total
bill rendered, until paid in full;
      (3)   For purposes of this section, "miscellaneous charges" means charges
for penalties, installation of special water and sewerage and treatment
service, stormwater drainage service charges, repairs, and or installation and
repair of meters.
   If charges for sewerage and treatment service, stormwater drainage service,
and water service are not paid when due, procedures of Article I of this
chapter shall be followed.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2129 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-2129 amended; 12/19/23)
(Ord. No. 3019-2024; Sec. 34-2129 amended; 5/7/24)
SEC. 34-2130.   WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL PURPOSES.
   When water is to be used in the construction of new buildings or for
repairing or remodeling of existing structures, or, for construction purposes
of any description, it can only be obtained in the following manner:
   (1)   Through a water meter installed for the purpose, in accordance with
the provisions of this division governing the installation, cost of
installation and removal of meters. All water consumed shall be billed to the
applicant and all water registered by said meter shall be paid for at the
regular meter rates.
   (2)   No meter larger than three (3) inches will be set for construction
purposes, and no hose or pipe connection of more than three (3) inches in
diameter will be permitted or allowed on said meter. The department of
utilities will determine the appropriate meter size. The applicant for such
meter shall pay the following charges/fees:
   (a)   $500.00 partially refundable deposit payable with application;
   (b)   $ 25.00 Meter Testing Fee, to be deducted from deposit;
   (c)   $ 2.00 per day per meter, to be deducted from deposit;
   (d)   $ 50.00 Meter Setting and Removal Fee, to be deducted from deposit;
   (e)   In addition to the fees of this subsection, the applicant shall be
responsible for the full amount of any damage to the meter after it is set, in
addition to any remaining balance of said deposit, and said deposit amount
shall not limit the City in recovering the full amount of such damage. In the
case that the dial is broken or meter fails to register the amount of water
consumed, water must be paid for at the minimum rates in accordance with Sec.
34-2121.
   (f)   A rental fee for a backflow prevention device (RPZ) will be charged as
follows: less than two (2) inches shall be $2.00/day; two (2) inches and larger
shall be $5.00/day.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; new Sec. 34-2130(2)(f) enacted; 04/04/06)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2130(2) amended; 10/4/22)
   (3)   Through an existing water meter on premises, or an adjoining property
after proper written permission for water supply in this manner has been
granted.
   (4)   Where water cannot be obtained from any other source, and the director
deems that it does not interfere with proper fire protection, a meter will be
attached to one of the openings of a fire hydrant, such supply to be controlled
by a small valve on the meter connection. In no case shall the fire hydrant
valve proper be opened or closed by anyone but a representative of the
department of utilities.
   (5)   Where water is to be used for paving and sewer construction, or where,
in the judgment of the director, it is not advisable to set a meter, a special
valve will be set on one of the openings of a fire hydrant for the control of
such supply. In no case shall the hydrant proper be opened or closed by anyone
but a representative of the department of utilities.
   (6)   Service connections in sufficient number to supply each potential
building site shall be made with the City water mains before the beginning of
any paving construction on any public street or alley so designated by the City
Council to be paved. All property owners abutting such street or alley
designated to be paved shall, upon notification of such improvement,
immediately establish such connection with the water main serving said street
or alley ordered paved; however, if such connection to water mains is not made
when requested, the City may at its discretion make such necessary connection
before paving said streets or alleys and charge the cost of same to the
abutting property owner.
(Ord. No. 3017-2006; Sec. 34-2130(7) repealed; 04/04/06)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2130(4), (5) amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2131.   WATER DIVISION REVENUE.
   (a)   The director of finance shall receive all such revenues from the water
system of the City, and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of
the system, as the same may be delivered to said director, and shall deposit
the funds in a separate fund designated as the "water fund" of the City. The
director of finance shall administer the fund in every respect in the manner
provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes as amended, and the provisions of
this Code and other ordinances of the City.
   (b)   The revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water system
shall be held by the director of finance separate and apart from any private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City; and all of said
sums without any deduction whatsoever shall be deposited in the water fund not
more than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of moneys, or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the City Council.
   (c)   Annual review and adjustment of water rates. The City will maintain
such records as necessary to permit an annual review of the water user charges
and water fund. The water user charges shall be adjusted annually to ensure
adequate revenue is provided for O, M & R costs, capital costs and debt
service.
   (d)   Agency access to records.  The Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the City of Moline which are applicable to the
City of Moline system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcription thereof to ensure compliance with the
terms of the State Loan Agreement and Rules, during normal business hours.
(Ord. No. 3067-2005; new Sec. 34-2131(c) and (d) enacted to Sec. 34-2131; 10/
18/05)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2131 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2132.   NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY; LIEN.
   Whenever a bill for water, sewer and stormwater drainage service remains
unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the director of finance or
director of utiities may file with the recorder of deeds of the county a
statement of lien claim, as provided by law. This statement shall contain the
legal description of the premises served, the amount of unpaid bill, and a
notice that the City claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
for water and/or sewerage and/or stormwater drainage services treatment
services subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   (1)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid water
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity, in
the name of the City.
   (2)   Corporation Counsel authorized to start proceedings to foreclose.
Corporation Counsel is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in
the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against
any property for which the bill for water and sewerage and treatment services
remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
   (3)   If the amount of the lien is paid in full, the lien will be released
after payment of the lien filing and release fees. The fee shall be based upon
current fees being charged by the county recorder of deeds office.
(Ord. No. 2000-07-01; Sec. 34-3132 repealed; new Sec. 34-3132 enacted; 07/05/
00; Ord. No. 3014-2011; Sec. 34-2132 repealed; new Sec. 34-2132 enacted; 03/22/
11; Ord. No. 3029-222; Sec. 34-2132 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2133.   RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
(Ord. No. 3072-2004; Sec. 34-2133 repealed and reserved for future use; 09/14/
04)
SEC. 34-2134.   DISCONTINUING WATER SERVICE AND RENDERING BILL.
   (a)   At any time any premises are to be vacated or property closed for any
period of time, application shall be made to the department of finance to have
the City water supply shut off, or discontinued, and the department of
utilities shall then shut off said water supply, and at the same time read the
water meter. The department of finance shall render a bill covering water and
sewerage service charges and stormwater drainage service charges then accrued.
The City water supply shall not again be turned on until all unpaid bill or
bills against the persons having the contract with the City have been paid.
   (b)   However, this section shall not be construed as holding new owners
liable for nonpayment by previous owners and shall not bar the department of
utilities from providing a water supply or sewerage and treatment service to
said new owners.
   (c)   Continuation of service to a property shall not constitute waiver of
lien or reduce the personal liability of the persons accruing water and/or
sewerage and treatment service and/or stormwater drainage service charges.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2134 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2135.   INTERFERENCE WITH OR USE OF STOP COCKS.
   In no case shall any person interfere with or use the stop cocks placed six
(6) feet more or less from the property line, except by permission from the
department of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2135 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2136.   MOLESTATION OR INJURY TO WATER MAINS AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   Any person who may be working in any street or streets of this City who may
molest or in any way damage the City water mains, or appurtenances thereto,
shall be responsible to the department of utilities for any and all such
damages and said person, or they, their heirs, representatives or assigns shall
take immediate action to repair such damage and shall bear all expense of such
replacement or repair made necessary thereby, and they shall also be
responsible for damage to surrounding properties, on account of said damage or
molestation of water mains.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2136 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2137.   FIRE HYDRANTS - IN GENERAL.
   All fire hydrants installed in the City are so placed for the purpose of
extinguishing fires in said City and no person other than the members of the
fire department of the City, for the uses and purposes of said department, and
those specially authorized by the department of utilities, shall open any of
the hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere
with or injure any of said fire hydrants. Maintenance, repairs and replacement
of fire hydrants placed on private property for the purpose of fire protection
thereof shall remain the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2137 amended; 10/4/22)  
SEC. 34-2138.   SAME - WRONGFUL USE.
   Any City employee or member of the fire department who shall let or suffer
to let out or permit any person to take the wrenches furnished them or the fire
department, to be used by them in the pursuit of their prescribed work for the
City in case of fire, or shall suffer or permit any of the wrenches furnished
them or the fire department, except as they accompany the engine or firemen on
occasion of fire or for the purpose connected with the fire department, shall
be subject to arrest, prosecution, and punishment as set out in Section
1-1107 of this Code.
SEC. 34-2139.   WASTE OF WATER.
   (a)   No person shall allow the water to run to waste through defective
pipes, faucets, or other fixtures; however, a reasonable time, not exceeding
forty-eight (48) hours, shall be allowed to repair the same. In case of neglect
or refusal by the person to cause said fixtures to be repaired, the department
of utilities shall be authorized to have the same repaired at the expense of
the owner or occupant, or to withhold the water supply thereto.
   (b)   Where a customer asserts that the measured usage is unusually high due
to a defect in pipes, faucets or other fixtures, the customer may request a
hearing before the city administrator in accordance with Section
34-1104 to request adjustment of the amount of the invoice. The customer shall
bear the burden to prove that a defect existed and that the failure to detect
and repair the defect was not the fault or within the reasonable control of the
customer. Upon proof of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the city
administrator, the city administrator shall adjust the bill as follows: a) the
city administrator shall determine the average usage volume from the three (3)
invoices immediately preceding the current invoice ("average volume"), and the
customer shall pay the full water charge for the average volume; b) the
customer shall pay a discounted rate of twenty percent (20%) of the full water
charge for the balance of the volume in the current invoice remaining after
deducting the average volume; the city administrator shall likewise adjust the
sewer charges such that the customer shall pay full sewer charge for the
average volume and shall pay a discounted rate of twenty percent (20%) for the
balance of the volume after deducting the average volume. In determining
whether the customer has demonstrated good cause, the city administrator shall
consider the timing and number of previous such requests by that customer and/
or the timing and number of such requests for the particular property involved.
(Ord. 3001-2020; Sec. 34-2139 repealed; new Sec. 34-2139 enacted; 1/7/20)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2139 amended; 10-4-22)
SEC. 34-2140.   LIMITATIONS TO THE USE OF WATER.
   (a)   The department of utilities reserves the right to prohibit the use of
water for yard sprinklers and large consumers of water when in the judgment of
the City it shall be necessary to do so.
   (b)   In case the air conditioning machine demand of water becomes too great
for the City distribution system and filtration plant, the City department of
utilities reserves the right to have connections between the City supply and
air conditioning machines disconnected. All supplies for air conditioning
machines may be required to be metered if supplied by City water. A special
permit from the director of utilities shall be granted before waste water is
connected to City sewer from air conditioning machines.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2140 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2141.   STOP COCK, VALVE AND SERVICES.
   The City shall not be responsible for any accidents caused by stop cocks or
valve boxes that stand above the surface of the ground, pavement or sidewalks.
The property owner thereof shall maintain all stop cocks or valve boxes that
are in any way related to the water service supplying their premises, flush
with the surface of the surrounding ground or rigid surface.
SEC. 34-2142.   NO WATER CONNECTIONS OR PREPARATIONS THEREFOR WITHOUT PERMIT;
PENALTY.
   Any person who shall place any water service, or introduce in or about any
building or any grounds any water pipes or any other plumbing work in or about
any building or on any grounds for the purpose of connecting such pipes or
plumbing work with the main pipes of the City water system, or preparing them
for connection with a view of having the premises supplied with water by the
City water system, or who shall make addition to, or alteration of any of the
pipes, bath, closets, stop cocks, or other fixtures or apparatus, for the
supply of any premises with water, without being first duly licensed to perform
such work by the City or for neglect of obtaining a permit to perform such work
from the City plumbing inspector or for failure of returning said permit within
forty-eight (48) hours after completing such work, shall be subject to a fine
of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to any other fines
and penalties elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances or the state statutes.
SEC. 34-2143.   PLUMBING INSPECTOR TO REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to report in writing to the
director of the department of utilities all premises inspected by said officer
where City water is used or about to be used, within forty-eight (48) hours
after such inspection. Such report to contain the name of the owner, the
official house number and the name or number of the street, the name of plumber
or plumbers performing the work, also any necessary data required as to
location of tap on main, curb cock, and similar information.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2143 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2144.   INSPECTION AND INSPECTORS.
   (a)   Inspectors, foremen, meter readers, or any other employee of the
department of utilities whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to
make inspections and examination of water meters, pipes, fixtures, or
appurtenances thereto, for any reason whatsoever in connection with the City
water supply, will be provided with a badge or other credentials to identify
them as authorized agents and representatives of the department of utilities.
   (b)   Any officer, inspector, foreman, meter reader or authorized agent, or
employee of the department of utilities, shall, upon presentation of his badge
or other credentials provided for in subsection (a), have free access at any
and all reasonable hours to any premises supplied by City water, for the
purpose of making any inspection thereof.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2144 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2145.   DEPARTMENT OF UTILITIES MAY INSPECT PREMISES.
   (a)   In case any authorized agent or employee of the said department of
utilities is refused admittance to any premises, or, being admitted shall be
hindered or prevented in making such examination, the department of utilities
may cause the City water supply to be turned off from said premises, after
giving twenty-four (24) hours notice to the owner or occupant of said premises.
   (b)   In the event the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises, building
or structure refuses a department of utilities employee access for the purposes
of installing, reading, servicing or removing a water meter or for the purpose
of an inspection thereof, the department of utilities shall have the power to
apply to the court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative search
warrant.
   (c)   No person not an authorized agent or employee of the department of
utilities shall have, wear or exhibit any badge or credential of the
department. It shall be the duty of each and every such officer, agent or
employee of said department, upon resignation or dismissal, to immediately
surrender and deliver to the director of the department of utilities all badges
and credentials of said department.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2145 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2146.   OTHER CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED TO AID.
   It shall be the duty of the employees of the police, fire, public works,
engineering, finance and planning departments to give vigilant aid to the
department of utilities in the enforcement of this article, and to this end,
they shall report all violations thereof which come to their knowledge, to the
office of the said department of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2146 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2147.   CONNECTIONS WITH OTHER SYSTEMS.
   No connection from the City water supply to another water supply shall be
permitted unless such other water supply is a publicly owned water supply
certified as such by the State of Illinois.
SEC. 34-2148.   INSTALLATION OF WATER MAINS.
   (a)   Water mains shall not be installed in the City except after first
making application for and obtaining a permit from the director.
   (b)   Water mains shall be installed under the standard specifications of
the department of utilities for laying water mains and under the supervision
and inspection of the department of utilities.
   (c)   Water mains shall be installed in the City under one of the following
methods:
      (1)   By the department of utilities under order from the City Council
and shall be paid for from funds of the department of utilities.
      (2)   By special assessment procedure as provided by state statute and/or
by City Code.
      (3)   By direct payment by the applicant or developer.
   (d)   In all cases the basic design of the proposed extension shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the department of utilities.
   (e)   Whenever a water main is extended, it shall be completed across the
frontage of the property to be improved by the extension.
   (f)   All water mains and service lines now in place or that may be placed
in public right-of-way or public utility easements, so dedicated, shall become
the donated property of the City. The responsibility, jurisdiction and
maintenance thereof shall thereafter be administered by the City department of
utilities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2148 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2149.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
   (1)   Base rate means a uniform charge levied on a per bill basis.
   (2)   Commodity rate means a charge levied on a per volume of water basis.
   (3)   O, M & R means operation, maintenance and replacement.
   (4)   Ordinance means this ordinance.
   (5)   Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances, which are necessary during the useful
life of the works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
replacement.
   (6)   State loan shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the
financing of the construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary
of State of The State of Illinois.
   (7)   Useful Life shall mean the estimated period during which the water
works will be operated.
   (8)   Clarification of word usage: “Shall” is mandatory; “May” is
permissible.
(Ord. No. 3067-2005; new Sec. 34-2149 enacted; 10/18/05)
DIVISION 2. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SEC. 34-2200.   GENERAL POLICY.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (1)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
   (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
   (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (b)   Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the City.
   (c)   Policy.  The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the director of utilities or his authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention devise is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the director of utilities shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install
such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in
Subsection 34-2204(d)(4) below for a period of at least five (5) years.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2200 amended; 10/4/22).
SEC. 34-2201.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of these regulations:
   (1)   Fixed proper air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through
the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim
of the receptacle.
   (2)   Agency means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (3)   Approved means backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   (4)   Auxiliary water system means any water source or system on or
available to the premises other than the public water supply system and
includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include
water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a
source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water.
These waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a
water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   (5)   Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any
source other than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   (6)   Backflow prevention device means any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the
Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (7)   Consumer or Customer means the owner, official custodian or person in
control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.
   (8)   Consumer's water system means any water system located on the
customer's premises and said consumer's water system begins at the connection
to the public main. A building plumbing system is considered to be customer's
water system.
   (9)   Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water by
entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   (10)   Cross-connection means any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and
the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.
      Direct cross-connection means a cross-connection formed when a water
system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      Indirect cross-connection means a cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
safe potable water system.
   (11)   Double check valve assembly means an assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double
check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of
the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve.
   (12)   Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a water
system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health
and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health
hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to
result in death, injury or significant reduction in the quality of life.
   (13)   Inspection means a plumbing inspection to examine carefully and
critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   (14)   Non-potable water means water not safe for drinking, personal, or
culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
   (15)   Plumbing means the actual installation, repair, maintenance,
alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes
all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for
all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the
street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping,
from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply
systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances
for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of
any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from
the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private
sewage disposal system five (5) feet beyond the foundation walls.
   (16)   Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its
quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   (17)   Potable water means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill.
Adm. Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   (18)   Potential Cross-Connection means a fixture or appurtenance with
threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would
facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination
point.
   (19)   Process fluid(s) means any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or
system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water
system. This includes but is not limited to:
      a.   polluted or contaminated waters;
      b.   process waters;
      c.   used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      d.   cooling waters;
      e.   questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
      f.   chemicals in solution or suspension;
      g.   oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes;
   (20)   Public water supply means all mains, pipes and structures through
which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs,
storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or
intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general
domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty-five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a "non-
community water supply."
   (21)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and
at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   (22)   Service connection means the opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   (23)   Survey means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection
and testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and
should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   (24)   System hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
   (25)   Used water means any water supplied by a public water supply system
to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   (26)   Water purveyor means the owner or official custodian of a public
water system.
SEC. 34-2202.   WATER SYSTEM.
   (a)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   (b)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the director of utilities up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   (c)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (d)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (e)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2202 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2203.   CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devises or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (b)   The following conditions or connections are unacceptable and shall
likewise be prohibited:
   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
   (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
SEC. 34-2204.   SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   (b)   On request by the director of utilities, or said director's authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the director of utilities for
the verification of information submitted by the consumer to the public water
supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3(1).
   (d)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
   (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
   (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions.
   (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   (4)   Testing and records.
      a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least
annually, or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
      b.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4
(e).
      c.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
      d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         1.   Date of each test;
         2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
         3.   Test results;
         4.   Repairs or servicing required;
         5.   Repairs and date completed; and
         6.   Services performed and date completed.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2204 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2205.   WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (a)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
director of utilities, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   (b)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving property where the following
conditions exist:
   (1)   Property which has an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the director of utilities and the
source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency unless all
piping has been removed from the auxiliary water supply to any building having
a connection to the public water supply and all water fixtures on the outside
of such building(s) have been removed.
   (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual
or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the director of utilities.
   (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the director of utilities and the Cross Connection Control Device Inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
   (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions
or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross-
connection survey.
   (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (c)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the director of utilities determines that
no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
   (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
   (2)   Laboratories.
   (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
   (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping
stations.
   (5)   Food or beverage processing plants.
   (6)   Chemical plants.
   (7)   Metal plating industries.
   (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
   (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
   (10)   Car washes.
   (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
   (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2205 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2206.   TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (a)   The type of protection required under Subsections
34-2205(b) (1), (2), and (3) of these regulations shall depend on the degree of
hazard which exists as follows:
   (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
   (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
   (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   (b)   The type of protection required under Subsection
34-2205(b)(4) of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention
device.
   (c)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers or other
approved device shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the
public water supply when:
   (1)   the fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals; or
   (2)   water is pumped into the system from another source; or
   (3)   water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
   (4)   there is a connection where by another source can be connected to the
sprinkler system.
SEC. 34-2207.   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (a)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (b)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California or applicable
industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the
device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available
on-site.
SEC. 34-2208.   INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
   (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a
proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
   (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time of
installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed
within fifteen (15) days.
   (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested
at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   (b)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
   (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
   (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
   (3)   Test results;
   (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
   (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
   (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (e)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (f)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
director of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2208 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2209.   BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (a)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the director
of utilities, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2209 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-2210.   VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   The director of utilities shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof (no notice shall be required in cases of
emergencies), the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention
device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and
repaired in a manner acceptable to the director of utilities, or if it is found
that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-
off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
   (b)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the director of utilities,
and the required reconnection fee is paid.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-2210 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 3. USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE SUPPLY; PROHIBITED.
SEC. 34-2300.   USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date of
this ordinance, the use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater
from within the corporate limits of the City of Moline by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at
points of withdrawal by the City of Moline.
(Ord. No. 3022-2010; Sec. 34-2300 repealed; new Sec. 34-2300 enacted; 04/20/10)
SEC. 34-2301.   PENALTIES.
   Any person violating the provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a
fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation.
SEC. 34-2302.   DEFINITIONS.
   Person is any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, officers, agents or assigns.
   Potable water is any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing food.
ARTICLE III. CITY WATER POLLUTION CONTROL SYSTEM
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 34-3100.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
   (1)   B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade,
expressed in parts per million by weight.
   (2)   Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary
sewer and a storm sewer or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
   (3)   Compatible pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, if the
treatment plant was designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does remove
such pollutants to a substantial degree.
   (4)   Department shall mean the department of utilities of the City.
   (5)   Domestic sewage shall mean wastes from toilets, baths, sink
lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions and
business buildings. Normal domestic sewage shall contain concentrations of two
hundred (200) mg/1 for BOD5 and two hundred fifty (250) mg/1 for suspended
solids.
   (6)   Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   (7)   Incompatible pollutant shall mean any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant as defined above.
   (8)   Industrial sewage shall be waste discharged into the City of Moline's
sewerage and treatment system by an industrial user.
   (9)   Industrial user shall mean any nongovernmental user of publicly owned
treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
      Division A. Agriculture, forestry and fishing.
      Division B. Mining.
      Division D. Manufacturing.
      Division E. Transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary
services.
      Division I. Services. A user in the divisions listed above may be
excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   (10)   Maintain shall mean to keep in operable condition by having such
things done as "rodding," "flushing," "jetting," etc.
   (11)   Major contributing industry shall mean one that has a flow of fifty
thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work day, has in its waste a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under Section
307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, and has a
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on a publicly owned treatment works or on the quality of effluent
from the treatment works.
   (12)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall
mean the national system for the issuing of permits under Section 402 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq., and
includes any state or interstate program which has been approved by the
regional administrator, in whole or in part, pursuant to Section 402 of said
act.
   (13)   pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
   (14)   Public sewer, City sewer, or sewer system shall mean a sewer which
the department of utilities has accepted and which has been laid according to
the specifications of said department, and for which maintenance has been duly
accepted.
   (15)   Regional Administrator shall mean the head of the U. S. Environmental
Protection Agency Region 5.
   (16)   Repair shall be to restore or replace a portion of broken sewer or
other such defect requiring the digging up of the sewer line.
   (17)   Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions.
   (18)   Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
   (19)   Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   (20)   Storm sewer shall mean a sewer intended to carry only stormwaters,
surface run-off, street wash waters and drainage.
   (21)   Director shall mean the director of the department of utilities of
the City, or any deputy, agent, or representative, when authorized by said
director.
   (22)   Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquid; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
   (23)   Water pollution control treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of
devices and structures used for treating sewage.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3100 (3), (12) and (13) repealed; new Sec. 34-3100
(3), (12), (13), and (15) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3100 amended; 10-4-22)
SEC. 34-3101.   APPLICATION FOR NEW SERVICE; TO CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT.
   All applications for sewerage and treatment service shall be signed by the
owner of the premises, and such application shall contain an agreement to pay
all bills. The application when accepted by the department, shall constitute a
contract between the applicants and the City. No new sewer connections will be
allowed without the approval of the director.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3101 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3102.   THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE ARE TO BE A PART OF
CONTRIBUTOR'S CONTRACT WITH THE CITY.
   The provisions of this article shall be considered a part of the contract
with every contributor to the City water pollution control system, and said
contributor shall be governed by and subject to the provisions of this article.
SEC. 34-3103.   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer.
SEC. 34-3104.   INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS FOR CERTAIN CONTRIBUTORS
PREREQUISITE TO A BUILDING PERMIT.
   Any new business or industrial contributor to the water pollution control
system shall submit plans of the proposed building or establishment to the
director for inspection, and said plans must be initialed by the director
before a building permit may be issued.
SEC. 34-3105.   RIGHT OF ACCESS OF CITY OFFICIALS FOR INSPECTIONS; CREDENTIALS.
   (a)   Upon the display of appropriate credentials, the director or the
director's duly authorized representative shall be entitled access to the
premises of any contributor for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing at any reasonable time to such extent as may
be necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this article. Such access
shall be extended to the plumbing inspector, who shall make a report to the
director if matters pertinent to the department are in evidence. It shall be
deemed a part of the agreements on the part of the contributor as a condition
to said contributor's permission to connect with the water pollution control
system that such access be granted. Any person interfering with the director or
the authorized representatives in the proper performance of their duties under
the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of an offense.
   (b)   No person, not an authorized agent or employee of the department,
shall have, wear, or exhibit any credential of the department. It shall be the
duty of each and every officer, agent or employee of the department, upon
resignation or dismissal, to immediately surrender and deliver to the director
all credentials of the department.
SEC. 34-3106.   TESTING AND ANALYSIS STANDARDS ADOPTED.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of sewage shall
conform with 40 CFR 136 "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedure for Analysis of
Pollutants Under the Clean Water Act."
SEC. 34-3107.   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   Persons desiring sewerage and treatment service outside of the City
must make applications therefor at the office of the director of engineering on
forms supplied by the department of utilities. Upon receipt of such
application, the director of engineering shall refer same to the department of
utilities for review and approval. The department of utilities shall supply its
comments in writing within fifteen (15) days to the director of engineering.
   (b)   All applicants requesting sewerage and treatment service for
properties outside of the City limits may be granted the privilege of
connecting to the City sewer system under one or more of the following
conditions and such other conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council
from time to time; special services to those outside the City shall be
available only to:
      (1)   A person whose property fronts upon a City main;
      (2)   A person who shall have paid his proportionate share of the main,
as determined by the department of utilities;
      (3)   A person who shall agree that any construction to be undertaken
upon his property shall be performed only after submission and approval of plot
plans and working plans therefore by the City Council; and
      (4)   A person who shall agree that work to be performed shall be
performed in complete accordance with the requirements of all governing City
ordinances.
      Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, and as a condition to
connection to the City’s sewer system for any property currently located
outside the City limits, the property owner must file a voluntary petition for
annexation and an annexation agreement, without any objection whatsoever, for
their property with the City Clerk’s Office prior to connecting to the City
service. If the property is not contiguous to the City, prior to initiating any
connection, the property owner must file a voluntary petition for annexation
and a pre-annexation agreement, without any objection whatsoever. The pre-
annexation agreement will stipulate that when property owner’s property becomes
contiguous to the City, the property will be automatically annexed to the City
pursuant to the terms of the voluntary petition for annexation and the pre-
annexation agreement. The petition to annex and the pre-annexation agreement
will be binding on the property owner, and their successors and assigns. In the
event that the statutory period for annexation has lapsed, it will immediately
be renewed for a full statutory term, and further renewed until the date upon
which the property becomes contiguous to the City limits.
   (c)   The director of utilities and the director of community and economic
development shall cooperate in order to determine whether out-of-City sewer
customers are capable of annexing to the City of Moline. The director of
utilities is hereby authorized to issue the notice provided for in subsection
(b) above to all out-of-City customers who have executed an agreement to annex
as a condition of receiving water service and who are capable of annexing to
the City of Moline. The director of utilities shall also be required to report
to the Committee-of-the-Whole on or before October 1 of each year the names of
the record owners, location, and occupants for those out-of-city sewer
customers who have not agreed to annex but who are capable of annexing to the
City of Moline. Upon the concurrence of the Committee-of-the-Whole, the
director of utilities is authorized to issue the notice provided in subsection
(b) above.
(Ord. No. 3001-2024; Sec. 34-3107 amended; 2/13/24)
SEC. 34-3108.   INTERDEPARTMENTAL COOPERATION.
   It shall be the duty of the employees of the police, fire, public works,
finance, and community and economic development departments of the City to give
vigilant aid to the department of utilities in the enforcement of this article,
and to this end, they shall report all violations thereof, which come to their
knowledge, to the office of the department of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3108 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3109.   CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DEFECTS IN THE SYSTEM.
   The City and, specifically, the department, shall not be held responsible
for damages to personal property caused by construction or repair to the City
sewer main, by water or sewage seepage, or for any other reason.
SEC. 34-3110.   DAMAGING SEWERS AND DRAINS.
   No person shall break or make any opening in, or in any manner injure or
interfere with any of the drains or sewers of the City.
DIVISION 2. RATES, BILLINGS AND COLLECTIONS
SEC. 34-3200.   SEWERAGE RATE SYSTEM.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall be defined as follows:
   (1)   Local capital financing charge: A charge levied on users of a
treatment works for the local capital financing costs of such works in
proportion to total treatment works loading.
   (2)   Local capital financing costs: Expenditures for debt service and
reserve funds on long-term financing of major capital improvements plus normal
capital requirements for minor extensions, but not replacement, to the
treatment works which are financed from current revenues.
   (3)   Operation and maintenance costs: Those costs associated with the
annual needs of operating and maintaining the treatment works and includes such
costs as supervision, operation and maintenance labor, supplies, utilities,
chemicals, billing and accounting, administrative and general expenses, and
replacement, as defined hereafter.
   (4)   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
   (5)   Treatment works: The water pollution control system of the City of
Moline consisting of interceptor and trunk sewers, pumping stations, pressure
pipe transmission mains, and wastewater treatment facilities.
   (6)   User charge: A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the
operation and maintenance costs of such works in proportion to total treatment
works loading.
   (7)   Use class: A group, or category, of users having similar flows and
wastewater content characteristics, such as similar levels of BOD and suspended
solids.
   (b)   Monthly unit rates for service will be assessed to the City of East
Moline, Village of Coal Valley, for waste water discharged to the Rock River
Valley Regional Sewerage System on the following basis:
   (1)   Reserved.
   (2)   User charges: (treatment plant and transportation sewers operation,
maintenance and depreciation).
      a.   The unit rate shall remain as follows, until modified by Council:
         1.   For discharges measured through December 31, 2025, the unit rate
shall be $3.45 per 1,000 gallons.
         2.   For discharges measured after January 1, 2026, the unit rate
shall be $3.66 per 1,000 gallons.
      b.   The fixed charge per bill shall be charged the following:
         1.   Fixed charges accrued through December 31, 2025: $17.73.
         2.   Fixed charges accrued after January 1, 2026: $18.80.
(Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 34-3200(2)(b) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(2)(b)
enacted; 10/05/04; Ord. No. 3030-2007; Sec. 34-3200(b) repealed; new Sec. 3200
(2)(b) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3024-2008; Sec. 34-3200(b) repealed; new
Sec. 34-3200(b) enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No. 3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(b)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(b) enacted; 10/27/09; Ord. No. 3061-2013; Sec. 34-
3200(b) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(b) enacted; 12/19/13; Ord. No. 3029- 2022;
Sec. 34-3200(b) amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3032-2022; Sec. 34-3200(b) amended;
10/18/22; Ord. No. 3042-2023; Sec. 34-3200(b) amended; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3060-
2023; Sec. 34-3200(b) amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3048-2025; Sec. 34-3200(b)
repealed; new Sec. 34- 3200(b) enacted; 10/14/25)
   (c)   Sewerage rates. The monthly sewerage rates for Moline contributors
shall be as follows:
   (1)   The schedule of charges for all bills shall be a fixed monthly bill
charge of $13.12 per connection with a unit rate of $8.09 per 1,000 gallons.
(Ord. No. 3080-2005; Sec. 34-3200 (c)(2)(a)(b)(c) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(c)
(2)(a)(b)(c) enacted; 12/20/05; Ord. No. 3031-2007; Sec. 34-3200(c) repealed;
new Sec. 34-3200(c) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(c)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3200 enacted; 10/27/09; Ord. No. 3061-2013; Sec. 34-3200
(c) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(c) enacted; 12/10/13; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec.
34-3200(c)(1) through (c)(4) repealed; Sec. 34-3200(c)(5) renumbered (c)(1) and
amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3042-2023; Sec. 34-3200(c)(1) amended; 10/10/23;
Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3200(c) amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3048-2025; Sec.
34-3200(c) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(c) enacted; 10/14/25)
   (d)   Wastewater Strength Surcharges. Moline contributors that contribute
wastewater that exceeds the strength of domestic water, in terms of total
suspended solids (TSS) and biological oxygen demand (BOD), shall pay surcharges
in accordance with the following schedule, in addition to the established fixed
and volume charges:
 
Surcharge Rate
TSS ($/lb) $0.23
BOD ($/lb) $0.79
 
   (1)   The following table establishes the strength class contributor
classification system. Each strength class contributor shall be charged the
assigned TSS and BOD strength values, as applied to the contributor's monthly
billable flow:
 
Strength Class Contributor BOD (mg/l) TSS (mg/L)
Bakery                     1,000      750
Creamery                   7,000      1,600
Grocery Store              1,000      350
Laundry Services           450        550
Restaurant                 1,000      550
 
   (2)   In the event that a contributor does not agree with the strength class
classification, the contributor may request that a point specific sampling
program be conducted at their expense. The ongoing sampling program shall be
conducted by the department of utilities, water pollution control division, and
all aspects of the sampling program must be approved by the director. The
laboratory methods used in analyzing samples of said wastewaters shall be in
accordance with federal law, regulations, or guidelines, if any; otherwise, by
generally accepted scientific procedures. If sampling results are still not
agreeable or the sites are not satisfactory to the director for reasons not
limited to but including non-representative sampling points located at the
contributing site in question, the two (2) parties shall agree on a qualified
third party arbitrator to conduct an independent analysis and to be bound by
the results obtained thereby. Cost of arbitration shall be borne by the
contributor. Such arbitrator shall be qualified in laboratory analysis. The
location and design of sampling sites must be approved by the director. Samples
shall be collected in such a manner as to be satisfactory to the director. The
laboratory methods used in analyzing samples of said wastewaters shall be in
accordance with federal law, regulations, or guideline, if any; otherwise, by
generally accepted scientific procedures.
   (3)   Other Moline contributors, which are not identified in the strength
class contributor classification system, shall be subject to the wastewater
strength surcharges should laboratory analysis reveal that the contributors’
wastewater strength exceed the strength of domestic wastewater.
(Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 34-3200 (d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200 (d) enacted;
10/05/04; Ord. No. 3065-2005; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d)
enacted; 10/04/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005, Sections 1-4; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed;
new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 5-8; Sec
34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3030-2007;
Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3024-
2008; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No.
3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 10/27/09;
Ord. No. 3061-2013; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(d) enacted; 12/
10/13; Ord. No. 3029- 2022; Sec. 34-3200(d) amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3042-
2023; Sec. 34-3200(d) amended; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3200(d)
amended; 12/19/23; Ord. No. 3048-2025; Sec. 34-3200(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-
3200(d) enacted; 10/14/25)
   (e)   Monthly unit rates for service will be assessed for wastewater
discharged to the sewerage system from the Moline Water Treatment Plant on the
following basis:
   (1)   The schedule of charges for all bills issued shall be:
      Fixed charge per monthly bill: $13.12 per connection
      Volume charge: $1.01 per 1,000 gallons
      TSS rate: $0.10 per lb
(Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 2-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 2-3200(e) enacted; 10/
05/04; Ord. No. 3065-2005; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(e)
enacted; 10/04/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 1-4; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed;
new Sec. 34-3200(e) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 5-8; Sec.
34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(e) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3030-2007;
Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(e) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3024-
2008; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200 enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No.
3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(e) enacted; 10/27/09;
Ord. No. 3061-2013; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(e) enacted; 12/
10/13; Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34- 3200(e)(1) through (4) repealed; Sec. 34-
3200(e)(5) renumbered (e)(1) and amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3042-2023; Sec. 34-
3200(e)(1) amended; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3200(e) amended; 12/
19/23; Ord. No. 3048-2025; Sec. 34-3200(e) repealed; new Sec. 34- 3200(e)
enacted; 10/14/25)
   (f)   In General.
   The per meter rates for service outside the City limits, but connected to
the City-owned water system, shall be three hundred percent (300%) of the above
schedule of charges; however, the percentage applied to out-of-city service
shall not apply to sewerage service furnished to another governmental unit
pursuant to a contract or to those out-of-City properties who have petitioned
for and have received a lower rate, as approved by City Council by ordinance
duly adopted. Any such petition for a lower rate must be filed with the
director of utilities on forms provided by the department of utilities.
   (1)   The monthly sewerage charges specified in paragraphs (c) and (d), but
not (b), hereof shall be increased by three hundred percent (300%) for all
contributors to the treatment works who are located outside of the corporate
limits of the City and who have been granted permission by the City to connect
to the treatment works, pursuant to Sec.
34-3107. These charges shall be in effect for all such contributors, except
when City Council adopts a pre-annexation agreement with superseding charges.
   (2)   Where, in the opinion of the City Council a contributor assumes a
substantial portion of the treatment works capacity, a contract may be required
between the City and the major user. Such a contract will be governed entirely
by the provisions of this section which are applicable, establish a maximum
contribution for each waste characteristic (i.e., volume, BOD, suspended
solids, etc.), provide for penalties when the maximum is exceeded, and indicate
the means of measuring and sampling the wastewater.
   (3)   The director shall make periodic determination of the concentration of
wastes as may be deemed necessary by the director. The location and design of
sampling sites must be approved by the director. Samples shall be collected in
such a manner as to be satisfactory to the director. In the event that results
of analysis of samples by the director do not substantially agree with the
analysis performed by the City of East Moline or the Village of Coal Valley,
the two (2) parties shall agree on a qualified third party expert to conduct an
independent analysis and to be bound by the results obtained thereby. Costs of
the independent analysis shall be borne by the party in error to the greatest
degree as determined by the third party expert. The laboratory methods used in
analyzing samples of said wastewaters shall be in accordance with federal law,
regulations, or guideline, if any; otherwise, by generally accepted scientific
procedures.
   (4)   The City will maintain such records as are necessary to permit an
annual review of the adequacy of the user charges to properly reflect the
actual operation, maintenance, replacement, depreciation, administrative, and
legal costs of the treatment plants and collection system.
Amendments to subsection (f):
(Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 10/
05/04; Ord. No. 3065-2005; Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f)
enacted; 10/04/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 1-4; Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed;
new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 5-8; 34-
3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3030-2007;
Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3032-
2009; Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 10/27/09; Ord. No.
3061-2013; Sec. 34-3200(f) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(f) enacted; 12/10/13;
Ord. No. 3029- 2022; Sec. 34-3200(f) amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3032-2022; Sec.
34-3200(f) amended; 10/18/22; Ord. No. 3001-2024; Sec. 34-3200(f) amended; 2/
13/24)
Amendments to subsection (g):
(Ord. No. 2002-22-02; Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(g)(3)
enacted; 11/12/02; Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) repealed; new Sec.
34-3200(g)(3) enacted; 10/05/04; Ord. No. 3065-2005; Sec. 34-3200(g) repealed;
new 34-3200(g) enacted; 10/04/05; Ord. No. 3076-2005: Sections 1-4; Sec. 34-
3200(g)(3) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3076-
2005, Sections 5-8; Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(g)(3)
enacted; 12/06/05; Ord. No. 3030-2007; Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) repealed; new Sec.
34-3200(g)(3) enacted; 10/02/07; Ord. No. 3024-2008; Sec. 34-3200(g)(3)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(g)(3) enacted; 03/25/08; Ord. No. 3032-2009; Sec.
34-3200(g) repealed in its entirety; 10/27/09)
Amendments to subsection (h):
(Ord. No. 2002-22-02; Sec. 34-3200(h) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200(h) enacted;
11/12/02; Ord. No. 3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(h) repealed in its entirety; 10/27/
09)
Amendments to subsection (i):
(Ord. No. 3080-2004; Sec. 34-3200 (i) repealed; new Sec. 34-3200 (i) enacted;
10/05/04; Ord. No. 3032-2009; Sec. 34-3200(i) and (j) repealed in their
entirety; 10/27/09)
Other:
(Ord. No. 3039-2024; Sec. 34-3200 repealed; new Sec. 34-3200 enacted; 10/22/24)
SEC. 34-3201.   METERING OF SEPARATE WATER SUPPLY.
   (a)   Where only sewerage use is desired and no City water is used, or where
partial City water and partial well water or water from other sources is used,
the supplementary or total source of water shall be metered by meter or meters
installed and maintained at the expense of the user. To assure availability of
repair or replacement parts and service, the meter or meters shall be purchased
from the City at the actual cost to the City. The water used shall be charged
for at the rates established in this division.
   (b)   The meter shall be located in a suitable place to prevent freezing or
other conditions that may cause damage to the meter, and accessible for
reading, repair or replacement.
   (c)   The user shall give immediate notice to the City in case of injury,
stoppage or imperfect working of any meter, and the City reserves the right to
enter the premises of any user to read, inspect, test, repair or replace any
meter that meters water furnished by the City or water that enters the water
pollution control system.
   (d)   No meter shall be removed or in any way disturbed, nor the seal broken
except in the presence of the director or an authorized agent or employee of
the City.
   (e)   Requests by the user or owner of any meter for tests shall be in
accordance to the provisions of the rules and regulations of the department of
utilities.
   (f)   If any meter fails to register the quantity of water entering the
sewer, the quantity and sewer service charges will be based on the average
quantity registered during the last preceding year prior to date of failure, or
if the meter has not been installed for a period of one (1) year, the sewer
service charges shall be in accordance to the schedule of minimum charges per
month based on the size of meter.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3201 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3201 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 34-3202.   SEPARATE METERING WHEN WATER NOT ENTIRELY DISCHARGED INTO
SYSTEM.
   In the case that a contributor to the water pollution control system
determines that surplus quantities of water consumed on the premises do not at
any time enter the water pollution control system or stormwater drainage system
of the City and find it possible to segregate the piping of such water supply,
the contributor may arrange that the water be so metered that no sewerage
charge is made for its use, providing the contributor complies with the proper
regulations. On receipt of the meter costs and setting fee, and after
notification from the department of finance to proceed with the setting, the
department of utilities will install a meter in a position prepared by the
owner according to the department of utilities rules and regulations. The meter
shall thereafter be read and billed accordingly.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3202 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3203.   BILLING.
   Rates and charges for water pollution control service shall be made monthly
based upon the amount of water consumed as shown by the reading of the water
meters. All bills for such service shall be rendered at the same time and in
the same manner as bills for water service are rendered, and payment of all
charges for sewerage service shall be made at the time of payment of bills
rendered for water service.
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3203 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 34-3204.   DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE TO COLLECT CHARGES.
   The department of finance, in conjunction with the department of utilities,
is to have charge of the billing and collection of water pollution control
service charges. Said office shall deposit these collections into the water
pollution control fund within twenty-four (24) hours from the date of receipt.
The cost of said collection and billing to be divided between the enterprise
funds benefitting from such billing and collection.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3204 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3205.   PARTIAL PAYMENTS.
   The water, sewer, solid waste and recycling, and stormwater drainage
charges, as far as payment and collections are concerned, shall be considered
as one single bill. Any payment less than the total bill shall be considered a
partial payment. Partial payment shall be credited in the order established in
Section
34-2129(i).
(Ord. No. 3037-2017; Sec. 34-3205 repealed in its entirety; new Sec. 34-3205
enacted; 10/17/17)
SEC. 34-3206.   DUE DATE; PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   All bills for sewerage service shall be payable within fifteen (15) days
after rendition thereof, and all such bills not paid on or before the due date
shown thereon, shall have a penalty charge of five percent (5%) added thereto;
provided that, when said date shall be a Sunday or legal holiday, such bills
shall be paid on or before the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or
legal holiday without penalty. Utility billing will transition from quarterly
to monthly in 2024. Penalties for late payment shall not be applied to accounts
billed between January 1, 2024 and March 31, 2024.
(Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-3206 amended; 12/19/23)
SEC. 34-3207.   TERMINATION OF SEWERAGE SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT.
   If the charges for sewerage and water service are not paid when due, the
procedures of Article I shall be applied.
SEC. 34-3208.   DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
   (a)   The director of finance shall receive all such revenues from the water
pollution control system of the City, and all other funds and moneys incident
to the operation of the system, as the same may be delivered to said director,
and deposit the funds in a separate fund designated as the "water pollution
control fund" of the City. The director of finance shall administer the fund in
every respect in the manner provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes as
amended, and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be held to preclude the use of the
City's Home Rule powers to alter or amend the intent, force, or effect of such
statutes within the City of Moline.
    (b)   The revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water
pollution control system shall be held by the director of finance separate and
apart from said director’s private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the City; and all of said sums without any deduction whatsoever shall
be deposited in the water pollution control fund not more than twenty-four (24)
hours after receipt of moneys, or at such more frequent intervals as may from
time to time be directed by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3208 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 3. CONNECTIONS
SEC. 34-3300.   WHEN REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, party, or parties; who are in
possession of any house, building, or structure of any other character required
to have sanitary facilities which is located on property, any point of which is
within three hundred (300) feet of an existing publicly owned sewer main or
other collection system, and who have the right to extend public sewer mains or
private sewer laterals from said property to said existing publicly owned sewer
main or other collection system either by way of street, alley, public way,
public easement, or private easement; to cause the house, building, or
structure of any other character required to have sanitary facilities to be
connected with said sewer main or other collection system within three (3)
years from the date that the main or other collection system became or becomes
available to said property.
   The Committee-of-the-Whole may grant variances to this section when
topography will not allow the property to be served by employment of customary
engineering methods and when the property may be served by a septic tank system
or other approved method of disposing of sanitary waste. For purposes of this
section, "customary engineering methods" shall not include installation of a
public pump station to serve only one single- family residence, but may include
installation of a public pump station for serving more than one single-family
residence or any multi-family residence.
   The director of utilities may grant extensions of time not to exceed one
additional period of six (6) years to owners, occupants, or parties who, at the
time a sewer main or other collection system became available, had a properly
functioning septic tank system or other approved method of disposing of
sanitary waste; provided, however, no person receiving such an extension may
replace or significantly repair such system, but must cause the connection to
be made in lieu thereof.
   Properties served with properly functioning private septic tank system or
other approved method of disposing of sanitary waste at the time of enactment
hereof shall be required to connect to the public connection system in
accordance with the time frames provided for herein as measured by date of
availability or date of enactment, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 3011-2006; Sec. 34-3300 repealed; new Sec. 34-3300 enacted; 04/04/06)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3300 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3301.   PERMISSION OF THE DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING REQUIRED; UNLAWFUL TO
CONNECT MORE THAN ONE PREMISE.
   The director of engineering is authorized to grant such permits as said
engineer may deem proper allowing persons to connect to the water pollution
control system consistent with such rules and regulations as shall be approved
by the City Council, and the fees for such connections shall be established by
the City Council and paid into the water pollution control fund, and any person
having the right to connect to the system who shall, by means of pipes or other
connections, drain the cellar, basement, vault, or other property of any person
except his own, shall be subject to the punishment prescribed in Section
1-1107 of this Code. It shall be unlawful to connect more than one building to
a single sewer service. Each building is required to have its own unique sewer
service.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3301 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3302.   SUPERVISION.
   The work of making any connection with or opening into the water pollution
control system shall be done under the supervision of the director of
engineering and in accordance with rules and regulations as established by the
City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3302 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3303.   TO BE MADE PRIOR TO STREET PAVING.
   All service connections with City sewer mains shall be made before the
beginning of any paving construction on any street or alley designated by the
City Council to be paved. All property owners abutting said street or alley
shall, upon notification of such improvement, immediately establish such
connections with the sewer mains serving the street or alley. If the connection
to the sewer mains is not made when requested, the City may, at its discretion,
make such necessary connection before paving said streets or alleys and charge
the cost of the connection to the abutting property owners served by said
mains.
SEC. 34-3304.   PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected, any
drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
or industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances,
to any stormwater drain in the City.
SEC. 34-3305.   LOCATION OF CONNECTION.
   Each connection to a sewer main shall be made at the "wye" designated for
that property. The only exception shall be where there are no designated "wyes"
for said property or where the designated "wye" is not located within three (3)
feet of the point of a measurement furnished by the director of utilities. Any
connection that is not made at the designated "wye" in the main sewer shall be
made under the direct supervision of the director of engineering or said
engineer's designated representative.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3305 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3306.   CONNECTIONS WHERE NO WYE IS AVAILABLE.
   (a)   A sewer pipe saddle shall be used where no riser or wye can be found
within the distance prescribed in Section
34-3305. The saddle used shall be compatible with and sized for the respective
sewer main and lateral and shall conform to minimum standards promulgated by
the plumbing board upon advice of the director of engineering and director of
utilities. Said standards shall consist, as a minimum, of the following:
   (1)   The saddle shall be made of high quality cast iron conforming to ASTM
Specification A-48, Class 35;
   (2)   The saddle shall be covered with a heavy coat of asphaltum type paint;
and
   (3)   The saddle shall be a correctly proportioned groove with a rubber O-
Ring gasket, meeting ASTM Specification D-1869-66, cemented in place with an
asphalt type mastic.
   At all times the department of utilities shall maintain a list of approved
brands of sewer pipe saddles meeting the standards so promulgated. Brands of
sewer pipe saddles not on such list of approved brands may be used only upon
the plumbing board's review of the manufacturer's specifications and finding
that said specifications meet the performance standards.
   (b)   The plumbing board shall also promulgate standards for installation of
approved saddles upon advice of the director of engineering and the director of
utilities. Such standards shall consist, as a minimum, of the following:
   (1)   Installation shall be such that the saddle is held firmly and
permanently on the pipe and shall use C304 stainless steel band assembled with
at least two (2) three-eighths inch silicon bronze T-bolts, washers, and hex
nuts; type 304 stainless steel bolts, washers, and hex nuts may be substituted;
   (2)   Installation shall be capable of holding a 20 psi air test, which may
be required by the plumbing inspector at the installer's expense; and
   (3)   Installation shall be supported prior to backfilling so as to prevent
any movement during backfilling or at any other time due to soil movement. Such
support shall be poured concrete under the saddle and shall be approved by the
plumbing inspector prior to backfilling.
   (c)   All installations shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector before
the lateral is connected and/or the sewer is backfilled.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3306 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3307.   INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE CONNECTION AND LATERAL.
   (a)   All service laterals shall be ductile iron pipe, or polyvinyl chloride
- SDR 45 and fittings of ductile iron.
   (b)   All service laterals and fixtures from the City sewer main to the
premises, including the service wye or connections to the main, shall be
installed and maintained at the expense of the property owner. All repairs of
that portion of the service lateral that lies on private property shall be
repaired or replaced at the expense of the property owner, and any leaks or
other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by the property owner; or,
if not, promptly repaired, the water shall, under the procedures of Article I,
be turned off until such repairs have been made by a plumber or contractor
engaged by the department of utilities to do such work; and, the expense
thereof shall be charged against the property owner, and must be paid before
water shall be turned on again. In case of dispute as to the necessity for or
reasonableness of cost of repairs, the hearing procedure of Article I shall
apply. All repairs of that portion of the service lateral that lies on City
owned right-of-way or easement, except for "private" sewers installed by a
private citizen/entity that are not dedicated and accepted as City mains or
services, shall be the responsibility of the department of utilities, and any
and all leaks or other defects in the non-private sewers, not attributable to
the property owner, shall be promptly repaired at the expense of the department
of utilities.
   (c)   All service laterals, now in place for the purpose of serving a
property or that may be in place within the limits of the property lines
extended to the City sewer mains that may become useless because the service
lateral will no longer be used to convey sewage from the property to the City
sewer main, must be closed off permanently at the sewer main at the expense of
the owner of the premises, and so reported to the director of the department of
utilities and plumbing inspector; and any and all required permits must be
obtained prior to the commencing of work. No plumber or owner of property shall
disconnect or remove waste fixtures or piping from any premises served by City
sewer or alter same in such a way as to make the service connection unnecessary
for the premises, without permanently closing off the connections at the sewer
mains and reporting same to the director of department of utilities and
plumbing inspector, except where such connection to be closed off may presently
exist under a street or avenue that has been improved by the paving thereof
within the preceding four (4) years, in which case the provisions of Division 2
of Chapter 283 (Section
28-2200 et seq.) of the Code shall apply. In any event such service lateral
shall remain until properly closed off at the City sewer main, the property of
the owner of the premises shall remain responsible for its maintenance until
such a time as it is permanently closed off and disconnected.
   (d)    The owner of the property may request that the existing service
lateral be reused for future development. The owner shall televise the existing
service and provide the televised tape with a request in writing to the
director of utilities. The Director shall evaluate the condition of the service
for reuse. If acceptable, the Director shall authorize that the service can be
reused if construction is completed within one year. If construction is not
completed within one year the owner shall permanently disconnect the service
per the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 2002-10-04; new Sec. 34-3307 (d) enacted; 10/08/02)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3307 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3308.   APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Any person owning property which has an existing public sewer main adjacent
to the property frontage may be required to pay a tap-on assessment fee per
applicable provision:
   (1)   Application for sewer service connections to City sewer mains must be
made at the finance office by the owner or agent of the property to be served.
Such application shall state the official house number or numbers of the
premises previously obtained from the director of engineering. The size of the
pipeline required shall be determined by the City plumbing inspector and the
department of utilities. Upon approval, the plumbing inspector may issue the
required permits.
   (2)   In the event that no such public sewer main is adjacent to the
property frontage, an applicant shall not be required to pay a tap-on fee. Said
applicant shall extend a public sanitary sewer main and the property for which
application for connection is made shall connect to the portion of the public
main so extended.
   (3)   Whenever a sanitary sewer main is extended or installed, it shall be
extended or installed across the entire frontage or frontages of the property
to be improved by the installation or extension unless the City has determined,
because of land contours or other mains, that no other property can be
economically served by such installation or extension.
   (4)   Any plan for installation or extension must be approved by the
director of utilities and the director of engineering in accordance with the
comprehensive plan, capital improvement program, master plan and standard
specifications of the City, and no installation or extension shall be approved
when such installation or extension is not needed to serve existing or future
development and when said installation or extension is solely for the purpose
of avoiding payment of a tap-on fee.
   (5)   All fees collected in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be paid to the director of finance and deposited in the water pollution
control fund.
(Ord. No. 3001-2019; Sec. 34-3308(1) repealed; new Sec. 34-3308(1) enacted; and
Sec. 34-3308(2) repealed in its entirety and remaining subsections of 34-3308
consecutively renumbered; 01/15/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3308 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3309.   SPECIFICATIONS, IN GENERAL.
   A sewer main shall be installed under the standard specifications of the
City for laying sewer main and under the supervision and specification of the
director of engineering or said engineer's authorized representative. The
initial installation of manholes shall be at a grade as established by the
department of engineering. Where the need for adjustment of the grade is caused
by landscaping, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to bring
said manhole to grade. Any inspection fees established within said standard
specifications, other than T.V. inspection fees, will be deposited in the
general fund of the City; and T.V. inspection or reinspection fees shall be
deposited, when collected, in the water pollution control fund of the City.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3309 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3310.   REIMBURSEMENT FOR USE OF PRIVATE SEWER EXTENSIONS.
   In the event that a private citizen/entity extends the City sewer at their
own expense, an agreement may be made, upon receipt of a written request from
the private citizen/entity, with said citizen/entity for reimbursement, as
follows: If, in the future, a request is made to the department of utilities
for permission to connect on the sanitary sewer main laid by said citizen, the
department of utilities shall, before granting such permission, require the
citizen/entity to pay a just and equitable amount to the person who laid the
main under the original permit. However, in no event shall said agreement
extend beyond ten (10) years from the date said extension is completed.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3310 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 4. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
SEC. 34-3400.   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Purpose and Policy. This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for
users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Moline and enables
the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The
objectives of this ordinance are:
   (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
   (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works;
   (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
   (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
   (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
   (6)   To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject.
   This ordinance shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of Individual Discharge Permits;
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
   (b)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of
utilities shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. These actions are defined within the Pretreatment Program. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of utilities may be
delegated by the director of utilities to other City personnel. It shall be the
duty of the director of utilities to require compliance with the Pretreatment
Program and to ensure it is updated annually.
   (c)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
ordinance, shall have the designated meanings:
      BMP   -   Best Management Practices
      BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      CIU   -   Categorical Industrial User
      CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
      COD   -   Chemical Oxygen Demand
      EMS   -   Enforcement Management System
      EPA   -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      ERG   -   Enforcement Response Guide
      ERW   -   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters
      gpd   -   gallons per day
      IEPA   -   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
      IU   -   Industrial User
      mg/l   -   milligrams per liter
      NPDES   -   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      ODI   -   Oxygen Demand Index
      POTW   -   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      SIU   -    Significant Industrial User
      SIC   -   Standard Industrial Classification
      SNC   -   Significant Noncompliance
      TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
      TTO   -   Total Toxic Organics
      U.S.C.   -   United States Code
   (d)   Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.
   (1)   Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   (2)   Approval Authority. United States EPA - Region 5, and Illinois EPA.
   (3)   Authorized Representative of the User.
      a.   If the user is a corporation:
         1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         2.   The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
      b.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      c.   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      d.   The individuals described in paragraphs (a.) through (c.), above,
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the City.
   (4)   Best Management Practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices (in
reference to pretreatment) to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5
(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   (5)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5) days at 20°centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   (6)   Categorical Industrial User (CIU). An Industrial User subject to
Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (7)   Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (8)   Control Authority. The City of Moline, which owns and operates the
POTW.
   (9)   Chemical Oxygen Demand. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   (10)   City. Means the City of Moline or designated representative thereof.
   (11)   Composite Sample. A sample of wastewater based on a flow proportional
or time proportional method.
   (12)   Cooling Water. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooking or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
   (13)   Daily Maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   (14)   Daily Maximum Limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course
of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the
pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   (15)   Enforcement Management System. The system used to provide guidance to
City staff in all phases of enforcement related to this ordinance and
pretreatment program.
   (16)   Enforcement Response Guide. A guide utilized to respond to violations
identified by the Enforcement Management System.
   (17)   Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Administrator, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
   (18)   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters. Contaminated wastewaters
generated from, but are not limited to: groundwater, leachate, surface run-off,
or other aqueous wastes that exist on-site, or process streams generated by
remedial activities. Examples of process waste streams include scrubber
effluent resulting from incineration of soil or solid waste; wastewater from
soil washing activities; and water used to decontaminate equipment after
remedial activities.
   (19)   Existing Source. Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the
Act.
   (20)   Grab Sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed
fifteen (15) minutes.
   (21)   Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or
(d) of the Act.
   (22)   Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   (23)   Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's NPDES permit(s) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   (24)   Local Limit. Where specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants or
pollutant parameters are developed by a POTW in accordance with 40 CFR 403.4
(c), such limits must be deemed Pretreatment Standards for the purposes of
Section 307(d) of the Act.
   (25)   Medical Waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   (26)   Monthly Average. The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that
month.
   (27)   Monthly Average Limit. The highest allowable average of "daily
discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily
discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily
discharges" measured during that month.
   (28)   New Source.
      a.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
         2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      b.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Paragraph a. 2. or 3. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
      c.   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program;
            (a)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (b)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   (29)   Non-contact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   (30)   Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the City's NPDES permit(s), including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
   (31)   Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   (32)   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.
   (33)   Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   (34)   Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
   (35)   Pretreatment Program. A formal plan created and updated annually by
the director of utilities. The plan defines the procedures intended to ensure
user compliance with the SUO and industrial pretreatment requirements.
   (36)   Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   (37)   Pretreatment Standards or Standards. Pretreatment standards shall
mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and
local limits.
   (38)   Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in Section 34-3401 of this ordinance.
   (39)   Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW. A "treatment works," as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the City.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
   (40)   Regional Administrator. The head of the U. S. Environmental
Protection Agency Region 5.
   (41)   Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   (42)   Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
   (43)   Significant Industrial User.
      a.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      b.   A user that:
         1.   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         2.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
         3.   Is designated as such by the City of the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      c.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Paragraph b. has
no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time,
on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
   (44)   Significant Noncompliance:
      a.   Chronic violations of wastewater Discharge limits, defined herein as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
      b.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein as those
in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
      c.   Any other discharge violation that the director of utilities
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
      d.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director of utilities’
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      e.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an Individual Discharge Permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      f.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
      g.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      h.   Any other violation(s) which the director of utilities determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program; or
      i.   Failure to perform or establish BMPs agreed to in the permit.
   (45)   Slug Load or Slug Discharge. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic
nature at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in Section 34-3401 (a-c) of this ordinance.
   (46)   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United
States Office of Management and Budget.
   (47)   Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow
melt.
   (48)   Director of Utilities Department. The person designated by the City
to supervise the operation of the POTWs, and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.
   (49)   Suspended Solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
   (50)   User or Industrial User. A source of indirect discharge.
   (51)   Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   (52)   Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant. That portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3400 repealed; new Sec. 34-3400 enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3400 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3401.   GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Prohibited Discharge Standards:
   (1)   Discharge of Storm and Unpolluted Waters . Stormwater and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director of
utilities. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the director of utilities and the IEPA, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
   (2)   General Prohibitions . No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (3)   Specific Prohibitions . No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      a.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      b.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 12.5, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
      c.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension;
      d.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      e.   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 104ºF (40ºC);
      f.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      g.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      h.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the director of utilities in accordance with pertinent sections of this
ordinance;
      i.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      j.   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the City NPDES permit;
      k.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      l.   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the director of utilities;
      m.   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      n.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director of
utilities in an Individual Discharge Permit;
      o.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      p.   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      q.   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;
      r.   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the
point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower
explosive limit of the meter;
      s.   Any discharge exceeding the standards established in 35 ILL. Adm.
Code 307;
      t.   Any slug discharge to the City of Moline POTWs;
      u.   Any water or wastes which contain more than ten (10) parts per
million by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide,
or nitrous oxide.
   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
   (b)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated. The USEPA will promulgate new categorical pretreatment
standards from time to time. Upon promulgation by USEPA, this division shall be
amended to include any new standards applicable to its POTWs.
   (1)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of
utilities shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   (2)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
      a.   The Control Authority may authorize the Industrial User subject to a
categorical Pretreatment Standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical Pretreatment Standard if the Industrial User has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the Discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the Industrial User. This Authorization is subject to the
conditions set forth in paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2).
      b.   In order to receive a waiver for sampling of pollutants not present
or expected to be present, an Industrial User must provide data from at least
one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment
present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all
processes. The data should be submitted to the Control Authority in the form of
a report.
   (3)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (4)   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this division.
   (c)   Local Limits. The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits:
      0.716      mg/l Arsenic
      750.0      ug/l Benzene, Ethylbenzene, Toluene, Xylene (BETX)
      50.0      ug/l Benzene
      1000.0      mg/l BOD5
      0.311      mg/l Cadmium
      2.233      mg/l Chromium
      0.333      mg/l Copper
      0.925      mg/l Cyanide
      0.523      mg/l Lead
      0.0005   mg/l Mercury
      9.477      mg/l Nickel
      1.935      mg/l Silver
      11.254   mg/l Total Phenols
      2000.0   mg/l Total Suspended Solids
      3.982      mg/l Zinc
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless
indicated otherwise. The director of utilities may impose mass limitations in
addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
   (d)   Streamlining Provisions. The City reserves the right to implement the
following Streamlining Provisions for eligible industrial users as stated in
USEPA regulations:
   (1)   Equivalent mass based limits in addition to, or in place of
concentration based limits, may be specified to facilitate adoption of water
saving technologies and meet requirements such as effective technology
operation, usage of a continuous flow monitoring device, record keeping of
production rates with notification of variances above twenty percent (20%), and
continuity of using comparable water conservation measures.
   (2)   Equivalent concentration based limits in addition to, or in place of
flow based mass limits for three (3) industrial categories such as Organic
Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers (OCPSF), Petroleum Refining, and
Pesticide Chemicals.
   (3)   Use best management practices (BMPs) as an alternative to numeric
limits.
   (e)   Right of Revision. The City reserves the right to establish, by
ordinance or in Individual Discharge Permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.
   (f)   Dilution.  No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
director of utilities may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3401 (a)(3)(n), (b), (d) and (e) repealed; new
Sec. 34-3401 (a)(3)(n), (b), (d), (e) and (f) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3401 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3402.   PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (a)   Pretreatment Facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in Section
34-3401 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the
state, or the director of utilities, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained
at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the director of utilities and the IEPA for
review, and shall be acceptable to the director of utilities and IEPA before
such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
City, and the state under the provisions of this ordinance.
   (b)   Additional Pretreatment Measures:
   (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the director of utilities may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   (2)   The director of utilities may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An
Individual Discharge Permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the director of utilities, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director of
utilities and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
   (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (c)   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. The City shall evaluate all
SIUs for the need of a slug control plan within a year of becoming an SIU. The
City shall also evaluate an industrial user's need for slug control plans on an
appropriate frequency and consider applicable and relevant control measures for
industrial user compliance. The director of utilities may require any user to
develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
director of utilities may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the water pollution control
division of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section
34-3406 (f) (1-3) of this ordinance; and
   (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (d)   Hauled Wastewater.
   (1)   General Requirements. Industrial, landfill leachate, thin stillage
corn syrup, septic tank, grease waste or any other wastewater hauled by truck
or trailer may be introduced into the POTW only at locations and at such times
as are established by the director of utilities ("director") or his designee.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to haul said waste to the City of
Moline Wastewater Treatment Plant shall obtain a Waste Hauler Permit by
registering annually with the director. Said director may prohibit or restrict,
and has the right to refuse, the disposal of any or all hauled wastes. No load
shall be discharged without prior consent of the director and samples may be
collected from each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
Said waste shall not violate Section
34-3401 of this ordinance or any other requirements or provisions established
by the City or the IEPA. Grease trap waste shall be exempt from the
requirements set forth in Sec.
34-3401(a)(3)(q). The Waste Hauler Permit does not act as a general control
mechanism, rather an additional permit that operates in conjunction with each
user's Individual Discharge Permit (described in Section
34-3405 of this ordinance).
   (2)   Permit Requirements.
      a.   Grease Trap and Septic Waste Haulers. A Waste Hauler Permit fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required annually for each type of waste
disposal and be valid for a one-year period commencing on January 1.
      b.   Industrial Waste, Landfill Leachate, Thin Stillage Corn Syrup Waste.
         Generators. The director shall require generators to obtain the
Individual Discharge Permit and submit a Supplemental (Baseline Monitoring)
Report. If the generator is also the hauler, the generator shall be required to
obtain a Waste Hauler Permit (fee exempt).
         Haulers. The director may require contract haulers (not generator
owned) to obtain an Individual Discharge Permit and submit a Supplemental
(Baseline Monitoring) Report, in addition to the required Waste Hauler Permit.
      c.   Permit Registration. Permit registration shall consist of providing
the legal business name of the person, firm or corporation; the address and
telephone number of the business; the names of representatives, officers, or
employees authorized to haul waste in the business name; vehicle
identification; disposal site; known or suspected waste constituents, and
whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
      d.   Insurance Requirements. Proof of liability insurance acceptable to
the office of the director in the type and amount listed below:
   Each applicant desiring to haul grease, septic tank, leachate, or thin
stillage corn syrup waste to a City of Moline Wastewater Treatment Plant shall
obtain and maintain for the duration of such permit registration, public
liability and property damage insurance in the minimum amount and form as
hereby specified: $100,000.00 for each occurrence of property damage; and
$300,000.00 for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such policy
shall provide that it cannot be cancelled except upon written notification to
the director at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of cancellation. Proof
shall be a certificate of insurance; and
   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers' compensation insurance or
that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers' compensation. Proof
shall be either the certificate of insurance from the insurance provider or the
certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued by the Illinois Industrial
Commission. If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or partnership and the
applicant has no employees, the applicant shall not be required to provide
proof of workers' compensation insurance. Such applicant's application shall
include a sworn statement that said applicant has no employees.
   (3)   Receiving Fees. Waste hauler receiving fees for grease trap, septic,
and industrial waste shall be based on the tank capacity of container per load.
See 34-3414 for fees.
   (4)   Administrative Penalties.
      a.   Multiple violations of the Waste Hauler Permit, as defined in this
section, may warrant administrative penalties, revocation of permit, and
termination of discharge privileges to a Moline Wastewater Treatment Plant.
      b.   When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance for a waste hauler permit, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may assess an
administrative penalty to such user in an amount of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Such penalties shall be assessed on a per violation, per
day basis.
      c.   A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
      d.   Users desiring to dispute such penalties must file a written request
to the director for reconsideration along with full payment of the fine amount
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the penalty. Where a request has
merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned to the user. The
director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions,
such as notices and orders, to the penalty.
      e.   Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 3054-2013; Sec. 34-3402(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3402(d) enacted; 11/
19/13)
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3402 (b)(2), (c), (d)(1), (d)(2)(b), and (d)(4)(b)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3402 (b)(2), (c), (d)(1), (d)(2)(b), and (d)(4)(b)
enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-3402 amended; 9/20/22)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3402 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3403.   ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION WASTEWATERS.
   (a)   City Requirements. Environmental Remediation Wastewaters (ERW), as
defined in this ordinance, that are conveyed to the City by truck, rail,
dedicated pipeline or sanitary sewer may be accepted by the City if all the
requirements set forth in the following provisions of this ordinance and all
applicable administrative procedures established by the director of utilities
are met.
   Discharges into the sanitary sewers of such ERW as defined in this ordinance
shall pay an ERW Discharge Fee of two and one-quarter cents ($0.0225) per
gallon for each gallon of such wastewaters delivered to the City under the
provisions of this ordinance. Such charge shall be in lieu of flow, BOD and TSS
charges as established by ordinance and rate ordinances in effect from time to
time. Except as specifically superseded or modified, all rates and charges
applicable to ERW, as defined in this ordinance, by reason of any City
ordinance or ordinances, shall continue to be due and payable.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3403(a) repealed; new Sec. 34-3403(a) enacted; 11/
19/13)
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-3403 amended; 9/20/22)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3403(a) amended; 10/4/22)
   (b)   Non-Hazardous Waste. In order for the City to receive any wastewater
for treatment, there must be assurances that the wastewater is non-hazardous as
defined in 40 CFR 261 and 35 Illinois Administrative Code 721. This means that
it must not be a listed hazardous waste and it must pass the four criteria as
found in 40 CFR 261 of Section 20, which are summarized as follows:
   (1)   It must not be a flammable waste, i.e., flashpoint must be >140 F.
   (2)   It has a pH not lower than 2.0 or higher than 12.5.
   (3)   Does not contain any 'reactive' chemicals such as cyanides, sulfides
capable of generating a toxic gas.
   (4)   Passes the Toxic Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP), which means
it complies with all the criteria. Copies of the analysis must be on file at
the City.
   (c)   Compliance with Sewer Use Ordinance. The ERW discharged must comply
with the requirements as found in this Sewer Use Ordinance, General
Pretreatment Requirements.
   (d)   ERW Discharge Permit:
   (1)   The user is required to complete an Individual Discharge Permit
Application in order to obtain an ERW Discharge Permit. The user would be
required to get an ERW Discharge Permit from the City before this particular
ERW could be discharged. If the user has an existing Individual Discharge
Permit, this permit would be amended to include these requirements.
   (2)   This ERW Discharge Permit would contain specific discharge limits and
special conditions for the user. Permit review will follow the same time
constraints as listed in Section 34-3404 of this ordinance. The potential user
may have to provide certain chemical analysis and/or representative sample(s)
to the City as necessary.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3403 (d)(1) and (d)(2) repealed; new Section 34-
3403 (d)(1) and (d)(2) enacted; 7/16/19)
   (e)   Permitted ERW Hauler. The aforementioned ERW that are hauled to the
City by truck and tanker must be hauled by a City permitted ERW hauler. This is
separate and different from IEPA special waste hauler permit, which is also
required. The potential user can have its own truck and tanker permitted by
filling out the appropriate City forms and paying the one hundred dollar
($100.00) permit fee. The permitted ERW hauler must comply with all City
requirements relative to discharging at the treatment plant(s).
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-3403(e) amended; 9/20/22)
   (f)   Letter from IEPA. Where deemed necessary by the director of utilities,
the City will require a letter from the IEPA stating that the ERW is not a
hazardous waste and shall determine that it is otherwise appropriate for the
City to receive such waste.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3403(f) amended; 10/4/22)
   (g)   ERW Discharge Costs and Monitoring Charges. The City will bill the
user for the ERW discharges into the sanitary sewers as per ordinance, which is
currently $0.0225 per gallon. The cost for City sampling and analysis are also
covered in the ordinance, and are separate charges from ERW Discharge Fee.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3403(g) repealed; new Sec. 34-3403(g) enacted; 11/
19/13)
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-3403(g) amended; 9/20/22)
   (h)   Flow Metering Requirements. ERW that is discharged to the sanitary
sewer from a facility must be measured volumetrically. This can be done either
by installing a wastewater flow meter or a water metering device. If the ERW is
trucked to the City's POTW for disposal, the volume discharged will be
determined by the volume of the container or containment device on the truck.
   (i)   Sampling Manhole. For ERW discharged to the sanitary sewer, the
potential user must provide a sampling point for the wastewater. In certain
situations, a separate sampling manhole may be required. If a separate manhole
is required, the sampling manhole must be constructed and approved according to
City standards.
   (j)   IEPA Requirements:
   (1)   IEPA Construction Permit - If the potential user is required to
install pretreatment equipment to control the pollutants in the ERW discharged,
then the potential user would have to contact the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control (IEPA DWPC) concerning
the need for a Construction Permit for the potential pretreatment system. The
IEPA DWPC permit section would make the determination as to whether an IEPA
Construction Permit would be necessary.
   (2)   IEPA Connection Permit - The potential users will have to obtain a
Connection Permit if: 1) the ERW will be hauled to the POTW(s), or 2) if the
user is not already connected to the sanitary sewer, or 3) is already connected
to the sanitary sewer, but the proposed ERW is substantially different than the
normal process wastewater discharged. To obtain an IEPA DWPC Connection Permit,
the potential user must fill out the appropriate IEPA DWPC forms.
   (3)   Operator Class K License - If a pretreatment system is constructed,
the IEPA may require a Certified Class K Operator for the pretreatment system.
The IEPA Operator Certification Unit can assist in determining if a particular
Class K Operator License is required for the personnel of a potential user to
operate the pretreatment system.
   (4)   IEPA Special Waste Stream Permit - If the ERW is to be hauled to the
City by truck, the user will have to obtain an IEPA Special Waste Stream
Permit. This application will be filled out by the user and sent to the City
for signature. The user will mail this to the IEPA DWPC with copies to the
City. If a special waste hauler permit is necessary, the hauler would be
required to manifest the waste. To obtain information on this kind of permit,
contact the IEPA Division of Land Pollution Control Permit Section.
   The above requirements are listed as guidance only. Other specific criteria
may vary and will be provided to any request or at the time of request for
discharge to the sanitary sewer as deemed appropriate to the director of
utilities or the IEPA DWPC.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3403(j) amended; 10/4/22)
   (k)   Surface Water Run-Off. If the ERW is surface water run-off from
stormwater associated with industrial activity as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)
(14), then it shall subject to ERW charge. However, if the source of ERW is
potable water from washing of manufacturing services such as loading platforms
and docks, then the industrial user shall not be subject to the ERW charge.
   (l)   Groundwater Monitoring Wells:
   (1)   Development Wastewater shall not be considered ERW and therefore shall
not be charged at the rate of $0.0175 per gallon, but shall be charged at the
domestic rate and must first be settled out to remove suspended solids before
discharging to sanitary sewer or at the treatment plant. For purposes of this
subsection, development wastewater shall be that water which contains sediment
and clay and is encountered when the wells must be drilled and "developed"
prior to groundwater pumping commencing at the site of contamination.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3403(l)(1) repealed; new Sec. 34-3403(l)(1)
enacted; 11/19/13)
   (2)   Purge Water, of volumes less than twenty (20) gallons may be discarded
to the sanitary sewer and not require permit so long as such purge waters
comply with the limits found in this ordinance. Said purge water will not be
subject to the ERW charges imposed elsewhere in this ordinance. For purposes of
this subsection, purge water shall be that water which is pumped out of several
well volumes throughout the life of the groundwater monitoring well in order to
take samples for analysis on an approximately quarterly basis.
   (m)   Groundwater Clean-Up. If the Industrial User (IU) is involved in a
groundwater clean-up which is generating ERW and wishes to use this ERW as a
substitute for potable water in the normal processes which generate wastewater,
then the IU shall not be charged the $0.0175 per gallon ERW Discharge Fee.
However, the IU must demonstrate and prove to the satisfaction of the City by
clear and convincing evidence that it is not using this as process wastewater
as a means of avoiding the $0.0175 per gallon ERW Discharge Fee. As part of
this test, the IU must prove that they have not increased the amount of normal
process wastewater to accommodate all of the ERW that is generated.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3403(m) repealed; new Sec. 34-3403(m) enacted; 11/
19/13)
   (n)   Underground Storage Tanks (UST) Wastewaters. Wastewaters found in UST,
which shall be removed as part of the UST Program are to be considered ERW.
Since the removal of UST can be considered a form of environmental remediation,
the wastewater generated from such a project, whether it be from the storage
tank itself or removal and recovery of contaminated groundwater directly
underneath the tank shall be considered ERW.
SEC. 34-3404.   INDIVIDUAL DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Wastewater Analysis. When requested by the director of utilities, a
user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within ninety (90) days of the request. The director of utilities is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information.
   (b)   Individual Discharge Permit, or Individual Permit Requirements:
   (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an Individual Permit from the director of
utilities, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section
34-3404 (c) of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
   (2)   The director of utilities may require other users to obtain Individual
Permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance. In accordance
with the Pretreatment Program details, factors considered in these cases shall
include but not be limited to pollutants being introduced, spill potential,
slug discharge potential, previous compliance history, potential for causing
the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, or potential for causing difficulties
with sludge use or disposal.
   (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an Individual Permit
shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the Individual
Permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections
34-3410 through
34-3412 of this ordinance. Obtaining an Individual Discharge Permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
   (c)   Individual Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections. Any user
required to obtain an Individual Discharge Permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who
wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90)
days after said date, apply to the director of utilities for an Individual
Discharge Permit in accordance with Section
34-3404 (e) of this ordinance, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this ordinance
except in accordance with an Individual Discharge Permit issued by the director
of utilities.
   (d)   Individual Discharge Permitting: New Connections. Any user required to
obtain an Individual Discharge Permit who proposes to begin or recommence
discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this Individual Discharge
Permit, in accordance with Section
34-3404 (e) of this ordinance, must be filed at least one hundred eighty (180)
days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
   (e)   Individual Discharge Permit Application Contents. All users required
to obtain an Individual Discharge Permit must submit a permit application. The
director of utilities may require all users to submit as part of an application
the following information:
   (1)   All information required by Section
34-3406 (a)(2) a-h of this ordinance;
   (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
   (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
   (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate
of production;
   (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
   (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to
show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
   (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and
   (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of
public works to evaluate the Individual Discharge Permit application.
   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
   (f)   Application Signatories and Certification. All Individual Discharge
Permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
      "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
   (g)   Individual Discharge Permit Decisions. The director of utilities will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
Within one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of a complete Individual
Discharge Permit application, the director of utilities will determine whether
or not to issue an Individual Discharge Permit. The director of utilities may
deny any application for an Individual Discharge Permit.
   (h)   Identifying and locating IUs. The City may provide information about
the Sewer Use Ordinance, Pretreatment Program, and permit application materials
to non-permitted dischargers found through IU surveys and information sources
such as phone directories, internet, direct building to building surveys, and
water billing records. Non-permitted dischargers are also subject to
administrative or legal enforcement action. Non-permitted dischargers may not
continue discharging except as allowed under
34-3404(b)(1) and they are also subject to administrative or legal enforcement
action.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3404 repealed; new Sec. 34-3404 enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3404 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3405.   INDIVIDUAL DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS.
   (a)   Individual Discharge Permit Duration. An Individual Discharge Permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from
the effective date of the permit. An Individual Discharge Permit may be issued
for a period of less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the director of
utilities. Each Individual Discharge Permit will indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire.
   (b)   Individual Discharge Permit Contents. An Individual Discharge Permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
director of utilities to prevent pass through or interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
   (1)   Individual Discharge Permits must contain:
      a.   A statement that indicates Individual Discharge Permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
      b.   A statement that the Individual Discharge Permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City in accordance with Section
34-3405(e) of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing Individual Discharge Permit;
      c.   Effluent limits, including BMPs, based on applicable pretreatment
standards, categorical standards, local limits, and State and local law;
      d.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored (including the process for seeking a waiver for a
pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the Discharge in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2), or a specific waived pollutant), sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and
local law;
      e.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state, or local law;
      f.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans, slug control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-
routine discharges;
      g.   Requirement to notify the City immediately of changes that occur at
the facility affecting potential for a slug discharge in order to conduct a
reevaluation of the need of a slug control plan or accidental discharge; and
      h.   BMP requirements for applicable SIUs.
   (2)   Individual Discharge Permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      a.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      b.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      c.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      d.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      e.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      f.   A statement that compliance with the Individual Discharge Permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the Individual Discharge Permit; and
      g.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director of utilities
to ensure compliance with this ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules,
and regulations.
   (c)   Individual Discharge Permit Appeals. The director of utilities shall
provide public notice of the issuance of an Individual Discharge Permit. Any
person, including the user, may petition the director of utilities to
reconsider the terms of an Individual Discharge Permit within thirty (30) days
of notice of its issuance.
   (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the Individual
Discharge Permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the Individual
Discharge Permit.
   (3)   The effectiveness of the Individual Discharge Permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (4)   If the director of utilities fails to act within thirty (30) days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider an Individual Discharge Permit, not to issue an Individual Discharge
Permit, or not to modify an Individual Discharge Permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
   (d)   Individual Discharge Permit Modification. The director of utilities
may modify an Individual Discharge Permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
   (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
   (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
Individual Discharge Permit issuance;
   (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
   (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the Individual Discharge
Permit;
   (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the Individual Discharge Permit application or in any required reporting;
   (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the Individual Discharge
Permit; or
   (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
   (e)   Individual Discharge Permit Transfer. Individual Discharge Permits may
be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least
one hundred eighty (180) days advance notice to the director of utilities, a
copy of the existing permit is provided to the new owner, and the director of
utilities approves the Individual Discharge Permit transfer. The notice to the
director of utilities must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:
   (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
   (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
   (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
Individual Discharge Permit.
   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the Individual
Discharge Permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
   (f)   Individual Discharge Permit Revocation. The director of utilities may
revoke an Individual Discharge Permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
   (1)   Failure to notify the director of utilities of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the director of utilities of
changed conditions pursuant to Section
34-3406 (e) of this ordinance;
   (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the Individual Discharge Permit application;
   (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
   (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   (6)   Refusing to allow the director of utilities or City pretreatment staff
timely access to the facility premises and records;
   (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   (8)   Failure to pay fines;
   (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the Individual Discharge
Permit application;
   (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
   (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the Individual Discharge Permit or this ordinance.
   Individual Discharge Permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations
or transfer of business ownership. All Individual Discharge Permits issued to a
particular user are void upon the issuance of a new Individual Discharge Permit
to that user.
   (g)   Individual Discharge Permit Reissuance. A user with an expiring
Individual Discharge Permit shall apply for Individual Discharge Permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with
Section
34-3404 (e) of this ordinance, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing Individual Discharge Permit.
   (h)   Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions:
   (1)   If another governmental entity, or user located within another
governmental entity, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the director of
utilities shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing
governmental entity.
   (2)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (1), above,
the director of utilities shall request the following information from the
contributing governmental entity:
      a.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing governmental entity;
      b.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
governmental entity that are discharging to the POTW;
      c.   A baseline monitoring report, meeting the requirements set forth in
Section 34-3406 (a) of this ordinance, for each IU discharging to the POTW; and
      d.   Such other information as the director of utilities may deem
necessary.
   (3)   An intergovernmental agreement, as required by paragraph (1), above,
shall contain the following conditions:
      a.   A requirement for the contributing governmental entity to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section
34-3401(c) of this ordinance. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance
and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of
Moline's ordinance or local limits;
      b.   A requirement for the contributing governmental entity to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      c.   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including Individual Discharge Permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing governmental entity; which
of these activities will be conducted by the director of utilities and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing governmental
entity and the director of utilities;
      d.   A requirement for the contributing governmental entity to provide
the director of utilities with access to all information that the contributing
governmental entity obtains as part of its pretreatment activities. In any
event, all materials designated by the director of utilities will be required;
      e.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
governmental entity's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      f.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing governmental entity's
discharge;
      g.   A provision ensuring the director of utilities access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing governmental entity's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the director of utilities. In this respect,
other governmental entities may need to adopt or modify their own rules,
regulations or ordinances to allow representatives of the City of Moline to
enter their premises if their current rules, regulations or ordinances do not
allow now; and
      h.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the inter-municipal agreement.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3405 repealed; new Sec. 34-3405 enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3405 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3406.   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Baseline Monitoring Reports:
   (1)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the director of utilities a report which contains
the information listed in paragraph (2), below. At least ninety (90) days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the director of utilities a report which
contains the information listed in paragraph (2), below. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      a.   Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      b.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      c.   Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated process.
      d.   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      e.   Measurement of Pollutants.
         1.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for Existing
Sources.
         2.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director
of utilities, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section
34-3406 (l) of this ordinance. Where the standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the Control Authority or the applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard.
         3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in paragraphs (1) and (2) in Section
34-3406 (m) of this ordinance.
      f.   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      g.   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in Section
34-3406  (b) of this ordinance.
      h.   Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section
34-3404  (f) of this ordinance.
   (3)   Significant Industrial User Monitoring Reports. All SIUs, including
non-categorical SIUs must report all monitoring results. Data must be
representative of conditions during the monitoring period.
   (b)   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Section
34-3406(a)(2)(g) of this ordinance:
   (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
   (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the director of utilities
no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (4)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the director of utilities.
   (c)   Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of
utilities a report containing the information described in Section
34-3406 (a)(2)d-f of this ordinance. This report, the samples, and the analyses
that make it up must meet the standards and use the techniques set forth in 40
CFR 403.12(g)(3)-(5). The sampling procedures shall follow the protocols
outlined in 40 CFR 136. The sample collection method is described in Section
34-3406 (m) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
34-3404 (f) of this ordinance.
   (d)   Periodic Compliance Reports:
   (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the director of utilities but in no case less than three (3) per year, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
34-3404 (f) of this ordinance.
   (2)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director of
utilities , using the procedures prescribed in Section
34-3406 (m) of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included
in the report.
   (4)   Users subject to BMP requirements must submit compliance reports in
accordance with 403.12(b), (e), and (h).
   (5)   All significant industrial users must follow sampling requirements in
403.12 for periodic compliance reports.
   (6)   The Control Authority may reduce the requirement in paragraph (d)(1)
of this section to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year,
unless required more frequently in the Pretreatment Standard or by the Approval
Authority, where the Industrial User meets all of the conditions outlined in
paragraphs (i) through (v) in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(3).
   (e)   Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the director of
utilities of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system
which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least
thirty (30) days before the change.
   (1)   The director of utilities may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of an Individual Discharge Permit application under
Section
34-3404 (e) of this ordinance.
   (2)   The director of utilities may issue an Individual Discharge Permit
under Section
34-3404 (g) of this ordinance or modify an existing Individual Discharge Permit
under Section
34-3405 (d) of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
   (f)   Reports of Potential Problems:
   (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of
utilities of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.
   (2)   Within five (5) working days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the director of utilities , submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance.
   (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in paragraph (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (4)   Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the POTW
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a Slug
Discharge.
   (g)   Reports from Unpermitted Users. All users not required to obtain an
Individual Discharge Permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director
of utilities as the director of utilities may require.
   (h)    Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users and Middle Tier
Categorical Industrial User. The City reserves the right to assign "non-
significant categorical industrial user" classification or "middle tier
categorical industrial user" for qualified IUs allowing reduced reporting
requirements in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(i).
   (i)   Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director of
utilities within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation, and
in writing to the director of utilities within five (5) working days of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director of
utilities within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where
the Control Authority has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
Industrial User, the Control Authority must perform the repeat sampling and
analysis unless it notifies the User of the violation and requires the User to
perform the repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if:
   (1)   The Control Authority performs sampling at the Industrial User at a
frequency of at least once per month; or
   (2)   The Control Authority performs sampling at the User between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the User or the
Control Authority receives the results of this sampling.
   (j)    Notification of Changes in Discharge. Industrial Users must
immediately notify both the POTW and the EPA of changes in discharge in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(j).
   (k)   Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste:
   (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Administrator, and state hazardous waste
authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which,
if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in
40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred
(100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after
the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed conditions must be submitted under Section
34-3406 (e) of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section
does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections
34-3406 (a),
3406 (c), and
3406 (d) of this ordinance.
   (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph 1, above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (3)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director of
utilities , the EPA Regional Administrator, and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.
   (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. Nothing herein shall be
construed to limit, inhibit or diminish the City's ability to enforce its
Spiller Pays Ordinance located at Chapter 11, Article III, of the Moline Code
of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3060-2006; Sec. 34-3406(k)(5) repealed; new Sec. 34-3406(k)(5)
enacted; 12/12/06)
   (l)   Analytical Requirements. All analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedures pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR
136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
EPA. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutants in question, or where the EPA determines that the sampling and
analytical techniques described in 40 CFR 136 are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated
analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the Control Authority or other parties, approved by the
EPA.
   (m)   Sample Collection: Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements
must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
   (1)   Except as indicated in paragraphs (2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. The user shall take a minimum of one (1) representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director of
utilities may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90) day compliance reports required in Section
34-3406 (a) and
34-3406 (c), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, director of utilities may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs Section
34-3406(d), the Industrial User is required to collect the number of grab
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
   (4)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted
to the Control Authority.
   (5)   The City reserves the right to waive sampling for pollutants not
expected to be present for qualified IUs in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)
(v), 403.12(e).
   (6)   The Control Authority may allow the submission of a baseline report
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
   (7)   The report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and
methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
   (8)   The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate
of production, and Standard Industrial Classification of the operation(s)
carried out by such IU. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of Discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes.
   (9)   The User shall submit information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula.
   (n)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
   (o)   Record Keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
ordinance, including documentation associated with BMPs, shall retain and make
available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person
(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
(3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the City, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of
utilities.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3406 repealed; new Sec. 34-3406 enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3406 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3407.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (a)   Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The director of utilities
shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the
user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any Individual
Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director of
utilities ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
   (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the director of utilities or authorized
representatives will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
   (2)   The director of utilities shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
   (3)   The director of utilities may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
   (4)   Whenever required by permit, an industrial user shall install a large
manhole or sampling chamber for each separate discharge in the building sewer
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City, installed and
maintained at all times at user's expense, which shall have ample room in each
sampling chamber or to permit the City to take accurate composite samples for
analysis. The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently accessible to
authorized representatives of the City from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. five (5)
days per week and at other times when the City has reason to believe that
pollutants are being discharged which are in violation of this division.
   (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the director of utilities and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
   (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the director of utilities or
pretreatment staff access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this
ordinance.
   (7)   The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the
frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be
subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection and verification by the City.
   (8)   Where required by the City, additional control manholes or sampling
chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an
industrial user's facility suitable for the determination of compliance with
pretreatment standards.
   (b)   Search Warrants. If the director of utilities has been refused access
to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify
compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the director of utilities may seek issuance of a search warrant from the
appropriate court of Rock Island County.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3407 (a) repealed; new Sec. 34-3407 (a) enacted;
7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Section 34-3407 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3408.   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, Individual
Discharge Permit applications, Individual Discharge Permits, and monitoring
programs, and from the director of utilities’ inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the director of utilities, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR
2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available
to the public without restriction.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3408 repealed; new Sec. 34-3408 enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Section 34-3408 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3409.   PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The director of utilities shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term
significant noncompliance shall mean:
   (a)   Definition - Significant Noncompliance:
   (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater Discharge limits, defined herein as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
   (2)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
   (3)   Any other discharge violation that the director of utilities believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
   (4)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director of utilities’
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (5)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an Individual Discharge Permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   (6)   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (8)   Any other violation(s) which the director of utilities determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   (9)   Failure to perform or establish BMPs agreed to in the permit.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3409 (a)(1) and (a)(5) repealed; new Sec. 34-3409
(a)(1), (a)(5), and (a)(9) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3409 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3410.   ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (a)   Notification of Violation. When the director of utilities finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
Individual Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of utilities may serve upon
that user a written Notice of Violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the director of utilities. Submission of this plan
in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the director of utilities to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
Notice of Violation.
   (b)   Consent Orders. The director of utilities may enter into Consent
Orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as the compliance orders issued pursuant
to Sections
34-3410 (d) and
34-3410 (e) of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (c)   Show Cause Hearing. The director of utilities may order a user who has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
Individual Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director of
utilities and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least five (5) working days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (d)   Compliance Orders. When the director of utilities finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
Individual Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of utilities may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come
into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (e)   Cease and Desist Orders. When the director of utilities finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
Individual Discharge Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are
likely to recur, the director of utilities may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
   (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
   (f)   Administrative Penalties:
   (1)   When the director of utilities finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an Individual Discharge
Permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the director of utilities may assess an administrative penalty to
such user in an amount at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such
penalties shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long term average discharge limits, penalties shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   (2)   A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines, and penalties.
   (3)   Users desiring to dispute such penalties must file a written request
for the director of utilities to reconsider the penalty along with full payment
of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the penalty.
Where a request has merit, the director of utilities may convene a hearing on
the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be
returned to the user. The director of utilities may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the penalty.
   (4)   Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (g)   Emergency Suspensions. The director of utilities may immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The director of utilities may also
immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director of
utilities may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director of
utilities may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of utilities that the period
of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section
34-3410 (h) of this ordinance are initiated against the user.
   (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the director of utilities prior to the date
of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections
34-3410 (c) or
34-3410 (h) of this ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section.
   (h)   Termination of Discharge. In addition to the provisions in Section
34-3405 (f) of this ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions
is subject to discharge termination:
   (1)   Violation of Individual Discharge Permit conditions;
   (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section
34-3401 of this ordinance.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under Section
34-3410 (c) of this ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken.
Exercise of this option by the director of utilities shall not be a bar to, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3410 (a), (c), (d), (e), (f)(1) and (h)(1)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3410 (a), (c), (d), (e), (f)(1) and (h)(1) enacted; 7/16/
19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3410 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3411.   JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (a)   Injunctive Relief. When the director of utilities finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
Individual Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of utilities may petition
through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains such violation or compels the
specific performance of the Individual Discharge Permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The director
of utilities may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user, including any remedy
or other action provided by this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Penalties.
   (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, an Individual Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for
a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
   (2)   The director of utilities may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the City.
   (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   (c)   Criminal Prosecution.
   (1)   A user who, whether willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this ordinance, an Individual Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per misdemeanor, per day.
   (2)   A user who, whether willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per misdemeanor, per day. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law. Severe offenses resulting in serious injury, death,
or major property damage may be punishable by imprisonment.
   (3)   A user who, knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, Individual
Discharge Permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per misdemeanor, per day.
   (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per misdemeanor, per day.
   (d)   Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this ordinance are
not exclusive. The director of utilities may take any, all, or any combination
of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response
plan. However, the director of utilities may take other action against any user
when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director of utilities is empowered
to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3411 (a), (b)(1) and (c) repealed; new Sec. 34-
3411 (a), (b)(1) and (c) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3411 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3412.   SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (a)   Performance Bonds. The director of utilities may decline to issue or
reissue an Individual Discharge Permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this ordinance, a previous Individual Discharge Permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum
not to exceed a value determined by the director of utilities to be necessary
to achieve consistent compliance.
   (b)   Liability Insurance. The director of utilities may decline to issue or
reissue an Individual Discharge Permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this ordinance, a previous Individual Discharge Permit,
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances
sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
   (c)   Water Supply Severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this ordinance, an Individual Discharge Permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
   (d)   Informant Rewards. The director of utilities may pay up to one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by
a user. In the event that the information provided results in a civil penalty
levied against the user, the Moline City Council may disperse up to ten percent
(10%) of the fine or penalty actually collected by the City through the
informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (e)   Contractor Listing. Users which have not achieved compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive
a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a user found to
be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may
be terminated at the discretion of the director of utilities.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3412 (a), (b) and (c) repealed; new Sec. 34-3412
(a), (b) and (c) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3412; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3413.   AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Upset:
   (1)   For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
   (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph (3), below, are met.
   (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      a.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      b.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      c.   The user has submitted the following information to the director of
utilities within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days:
         1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards or as otherwise required by law.
   (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (b)   Prohibited Discharge Standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in Section
34-3401 (a)(2) of this ordinance or the specific prohibitions in Sections
34-3401 (a)(3)c through
34-3401(a)(3)u [excluding
34-3401(a)(3)h] of this ordinance if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
   (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit(s), and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (c)   Bypass:
   (1)   For the purposes of this section,
      a.   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
      b.   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs (3)-(5) of this section.
   (3)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the director of utilities, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
   (4)   A user shall submit oral notice to the director of utilities of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director of utilities may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within twenty-four (24) hours.
   (5)   Bypass is prohibited, and the director of utilities may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless
      a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
      b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
      c.   The user submitted notices as required under paragraphs (3) & (4) of
this section.
   (6)   The director of utilities may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the director of utilities determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (5) of this section.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3413 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3414.   PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   (a)   Purpose. The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs
of setting up and operating the City's pretreatment program which may include:
   (1)   Fees for Individual Discharge Permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
   (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
   (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (4)   Fees for filing appeals; and
   (5)   Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the City.
   (b)   Established Permits and Fees.
   (1)   Permit Fees.
      a.   An Individual Discharge Permit      $500.00
      b.   Renewal of an Individual Discharge Permit   $400.00
      c.   Supplemental (Baseline Monitoring) Report   $150.00
      d.   Waste Hauler Permit
            ERW                  $ 100.00
            Grease               $ 100.00
            Septic                  $ 100.00
            Thin Stillage Corn syrup         $ 100.00
            Industrial and Landfill Leachate      No Fee
             (included in an Individual Discharge Permit)
   (2)   Pretreatment Fees.
      a.   Industrial User Sampling (per sample)      $175.00
      b.   In-House Laboratory Testing Fees.
            BOD5                $ 20.00
            Total suspended solids       $ 16.00
             Chemical oxygen demand       $ 18.00
             Oxygen demand index       $ 18.00
             pH                $ 5.00
            Fecal coliform          $ 30.00
            Ammonia            $ 15.00
            Total Phosphorus         $ 30.00
      c.    Contract Laboratory Testing Fees.
Laboratory testing fees (testing done outside City) will be the cost of the
laboratory test(s) plus ten percent (10%) of test cost(s).
   (3)   Hauled Waste Fees.
      a.   Camper Trailer Discharge
         Camper trailers (Moline residents only)      No Fee
         Camper trailers (Non-Moline residents)      $ 10.00
      b.   Hauled Wastewater Receiving Fees
         (based on tank capacity of container per load)
         Industrial Waste (landfill leachate and thin stillage)
            $0.05/gallon – Moline Origin
            $0.075/gallon – Non-Moline Origin (Rock Island County only
             unless otherwise approved by director)
         Septic Waste
            $0.05/gallon – Moline Origin
            $0.10/gallon – Non-Moline Origin (Rock Island County only
             unless otherwise approved by director)
         Grease Trap Waste
            $0.15/gallon – Moline Origin
            $0.25/gallon – Non-Moline Origin (Rock Island County only
              unless otherwise approved by director)
   (4)   Environmental Remediation Wastewater (ERW) Discharge Fee
$0.0225/gallon
(Ord. No. 3029-2009; Sec. 34-3414 repealed; new Sec. 34-3414 enacted; 10/20/09)
(Ord. No. 3046-2011; Sec. 34-3414(c)(d) repealed; new Sec. 34-3414(c)(d)
enacted; 11/22/11)
(Ord. No. 3054-2013; Sec. 34-3414 repealed; new Sec. 34-3414 enacted; 11/19/13)
(Ord. No. 3025-2017; Sec. 34-3414(b)(2) repealed; new Sec. 34-3414(b)(2)
enacted; 10/10/17)
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3414 (a)(1), (b)(1)(a), (b)(1)(b), and (b)(1)(d)
repealed; new Sec. 34-3414 (a)(1), (b)(1)(a), (b)(1)(b) and (b)(1)(d) enacted;
7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3021-2022; Sec. 34-3414 amended; 9/20/22)
SEC. 34-3415.   ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND RESPONSES.
   (a)   Purpose and Policy. Industries found to be out of compliance with
federal, state, or local requirements are subject to the conditions of the
Enforcement Response Guide, of the WPC Division. Informal enforcement actions,
verbal telephone notices, letters of violation, site visits, administrative
orders, enforcement compliance schedules and administrative fines are
administered by the director of utilities, or in some cases delegated to other
personnel. Enforcement actions which require legal action are made by the
director of utilities with review and recommendations by the city attorney of
the City of Moline.
   Violations and discrepancies that have been identified during the review
process are to be evaluated as to the type of enforcement response necessary by
the director of utilities. In order to ensure equitable treatment of violators
and provide a stronger basis for selection of appropriate responses to
violations, the following Enforcement Response Guide (ERG) should normally be
followed, unless mitigating circumstances can be shown.
   The ERG indicates the type of noncompliance, the circumstances which might
vary the type of response, and the range of responses for that particular
category of noncompliance. The ERG has been developed with the intention of
serving the following three main purposes.
   (1)   It recommends enforcement responses that are appropriate in relation
to the nature and severity of the violation and the overall degree of
noncompliance;
   (2)   It provides a guide to encourage a uniform application of enforcement
responses to comparable levels in types of violations, and it can be used as a
mechanism to review the appropriateness of the response; and
   (3)   It allows the industrial community to realize the importance of the
pretreatment program along with proper operation of equipment and meeting
standards and limits, along with responses by the WPC Division if and when
various violations occur.
   (b)   Abbreviations and Definitions of Responses. The following
abbreviations and definitions, in order of severity, when used in this section,
shall have the designated meanings:
   VTN   Verbal Telephone Notice - is meant to describe a response to a very
minor type of violation, which is normally conveyed verbally to the contact
person at the industry and no further follow-up is expected. This is utilized
when there is a very minor infraction, such as a report being received one or
two days late.
   SV   Site Visit - a visit to the industrial site to discuss and observe the
problem. This can be a substitution for VTN or NOV. The SV can also be made in
conjunction with a written NOV. The SV also can require a response within ten
(10) days, indicating a reason for the noncompliance and what steps are being
taken to eliminate any future violations of this nature.
   NOV   Notice of Violation - is the most widely used and is a written
notification to the Industrial User indicating the type of apparent violation
and requesting a response within ten (10) days, indicating a reason for the
noncompliance and what steps are being taken to eliminate any future violations
of this nature.
   CO   Consent Order - A Consent Order would be in such cases where the WPC
Division believed the Industrial User was committed to providing necessary
corrective measures to correct previous violations, and would utilize the
Consent Order to outline minor compliance schedules, along with other
conditions that might be required, such as additional monitoring, more
reporting, etc. The order would normally contain a short time frame of above
one (1) month to six (6) months.
   SCH   Show Cause Hearing - is a meeting to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least five (5) working days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the use
appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the
hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any
other action against the user.
   COM   Compliance Order - This is a formal enforcement Compliance Order
signed by both the WPC Division and the industry involved. This control
mechanism is used when serious or long term violations of discharge limits
occur that require the design and installation of new or additional
pretreatment equipment. Usually the time-frame will be six (6) months to one
(1) year. Violations of the COM can result in the next step, consisting of
administrative penalties.
   AP   Administrative Penalties - An administrative penalty would be in such
cases where all lower types of enforcement responses have failed and/or where
deemed appropriate by the director of utilities because of the nature and/or
intent of the violation. The next response step is court action. The
administrative penalties step exists to try to prevent court activity and yet
to correct the problem and or show the seriousness of the problem to the
industry involved. The fine is at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation with each day being considered a separate violation.
   The administrative fine may also be part of a CO (Consent Order), and/or a
COM (Compliance Order).
   LIT   Litigation - Litigation is utilized to define several courses of
action, including civil suits for injunctive relief and/or civil penalties,
criminal suits, termination of service, etc. These types of actions would all
involve the courts, the city attorney, and would follow the procedures
necessary for due process.
   (c)   Utilizing Response Guide. A screening process for identifying
likelihood of violations will be conducted by the City within five (5) days of
receiving information. Criteria for screening includes categorical and local
limits, prohibited discharges, and potential violation items with corresponding
range of responses listed in Section 34-3415(e)-(h). Utilizing the Enforcement
Response Guide, the Pretreatment Coordinator will initiate the appropriate
response and see that the files have been updated to show the type of action
being taken and the response date, if one (1) is so indicated, and the type of
action taken. The Pretreatment Coordinator will initiate any field sampling
which he feels appropriate to substantiate previous data received, or to double
check the response of an Industrial User to the action which they have
indicated that they have taken.
   At the end of each six (6) month period, the Pretreatment Coordinator will
be responsible for reviewing the industry files to determine any SNCs, and if
so, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall be responsible for seeing that the SNCs
are tabulated on an annual basis and that the name of all SNCs are published in
the local daily newspaper.
   Regular surveillance, sampling, and unannounced inspections to detect
incidence of noncompliance not revealed by report submittals will be conducted
by the City. These include unannounced annual inspections of all IUs to confirm
IU classification, waiver conditions, and compliance to Pretreatment Program
regulations.
   (d)   Significant Noncompliance. Instances of Significant Noncompliance
(SNC) are Industrial User Violations which meet one or more of the following
criteria:
   (1)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits
      a.   Chronic violations . Sixty-six percent (66%) or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a
six (6) month period.
      b.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) . Thirty-three percent (33%) or more
of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the average same
average limit by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period.
         There are two groups of TRCs:
         1.   Group I for conventional pollutants:
            (BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease) TRC = 1.4
         2.   Group II for all other pollutants: TRC = 1.2
      c.   Any other violation or violations of an effluent limit (average or
daily maximum) that the director of utilities has caused, along or in
combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-
through, or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or the
public.
      d.   Any discharge of a pollutant which has caused imminent endangerment
to human health/welfare or to the environment and resulted in the POTWs
exercise of this emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
   (2)   Violation of compliance schedule milestones contained in a local
control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by ninety (90) days or more after
the scheduled date.
   (3)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring
data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from the due
date.
   (4)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
   (5)   Any other violation or group of violations which the director of
utilities considers to be significant.
   (e)   Responses to Violations of Sampling, Monitoring and Reporting:
NONCOMPLIANCE  CIRCUMSTANCES                                               RANGE OF
                                                                           RESPONSE
Failure to
sample,                                                                    VTN, SV, or
monitor or                                                                 NOV
report                                                                     requiring a
(routine       Isolated or infrequent.                                     report
reports),                                                                  within 10
baseline                                                                   days.
monitoring
report.
Failure to
sample,        IU does not respond to letters, does not follow through on  CO, COM, AP
monitor,       verbal or written agreement, or frequent violation – SNC. or LIT.
report or
notify.
Failure to                                                                 VTN, SV or
notify of                                                                  NOV. If no
effluent limit Isolated or infrequent. No known effects.                   response
violation or                                                               within 10
slug                                                                       days, issue
discharge.                                                                 a CO.
Failure to                                                                 Show cause
notify of                                                                  meeting,
effluent limit Frequent or continued violation – SNC.                    COM, AP, or
violation or                                                               LIT
slug                                                                       including
discharge.                                                                 penalties.
Failure to
notify of
effluent limit Known environmental or POTW damage results – SNC.         AP, LIT and
violation or                                                               penalties.
slug
discharge.
Minor                                                                      VTN, SV or
sampling,                                                                  NOV.
monitoring or                                                              Corrections
re-porting                                                                 to be made
deficiencies   Isolated or infrequent.                                     on next
(computational                                                             submittal
or                                                                         CO if
typographical                                                              continued.
errors).
Major or gross
sampling,                                                                  SV, NOV or
monitor-ing or                                                             CO.
reporting      Isolated or infrequent.                                     Corrections
deficiencies                                                               to be made
(missing                                                                   on next
information,                                                               submittal.
late reports).
Major or gross                                                             COM, AP or
reporting      Continued. Remains uncorrected 30 days or more – SNC.     LIT.
deficiencies.
 
   Whenever a NOV is issued that requires a response and Industrial User fails
to respond, the next level of enforcement should be undertaken.
   (f)   Responses to Violations of Compliance Schedules: (Construction phases
or planning)
NONCOMPLIANCE CIRCUMSTANCES RANGE OF RESPONSE
NONCOMPLIANCE           CIRCUMSTANCES               RANGE OF RESPONSE
Reporting false         Any instance - SNC.         AP, LIT penalties. Sewer
information.                                        ban.
                        Will not cause late final
Missed Interim Date     date or other interim       NOV, SV.
                        dates.
                        Will result in other missed
Missed Interim Date.    interim dates. Violation    NOV, SV or CO.
                        for good or valid cause.
                        Will result in other missed
Missed Interim Date.    interim dates. No good or   NOV, COM, AP or LIT.
                        valid cause - SNC.
                                                    Contact permittee and
Missed Final Date.      Violation due to strikes,   require documentation of
                        act of God, etc.            good or valid cause; show
                                                    cause.
                        90 days or more
Missed Final Date.      outstanding. Failure or     COM, AP or LIT including
                        refusal to comply without   penalty.
                        good or valid cause.
                                                    COM, AP to begin monitoring
Failure to install                                  (using outside contracts,
monitoring equipment.   Continued - SNC.            if necessary) & install
                                                    equipment w/in minimal
                                                    time.
Failure to mitigate non Does not result in harm     NOV
compliance              Does result in harm         AO with fine
                                                    Civil Action
 
   Whenever an NOV is issued that requires a response and the Industrial User
fails to respond, the next level of enforcement should be undertaken.
   (g)   Response to Violations of Discharge Limitations:
NONCOMPLIANCE CIRCUMSTANCES RANGE OF RESPONSE
NONCOMPLIANCE             CIRCUMSTANCES              RANGE OF RESPONSE
Exceeding final limits    Infrequent or isolated     VTN, SV or NOV. Retest of
(categorical local or     minor violation.           exceeded parameters within
prohibited).                                         30 days.
                                                     VTN, SV, NOV, CO, AP or
                          Infrequent or isolated     LIT if environmental harm
Exceeding Final Limits.   major violations exceed    resulted including
                          the limits by TRC of a     penalty. Retest of
                          single effluent limit.     exceeded parameters within
                                                     30 days.
Exceeding Interim Limits                             NOV or CO. Retest of
(categorical or local).   Without known damages.     exceeded parameters within
                                                     30 days.
                          Results in known           CO, COM, AP or LIT
Exceeding Interim Limits. environmental or POTW      penalty. Retest of
                          damage - SNC.              exceeding parameters w/in
                                                     30 days.
Reported Slug Load.       Isolated without known     NOV, Show cause or CO.
                          damage.
                          Isolated with known        COM, AP or LIT including
Reported Slug Load.       interference, pass through penalty.
                          or damage - SNC.
Reported Slug Load.       Recurring - SNC.           LIT including penalty.
Discharge without a       One time without known
permit or approval.       environmental or POTW      CO.
                          damage
                          One time which results in  COM, AP O LIT and penalty.
Discharge without a       environmental damage or    Request for criminal
permit or approval.       continuing violation -     investigation.
                          SNC.
                          Continuing violation with  COM, AP O LIT & penalty.
Discharge without a       known environmental or     Request for criminal
permit or approval.       POTW damage.               investigation &
                                                     disconnect.
Use of dilution instead   Initial violation          AO with fine
of treatment              Recurring                  SCH
 
   Whenever a NOV is issued that requires a response and the Industrial User
fails to respond, the next level of enforcement should be undertaken.
   (h)   Responses to Violations of Noncompliance Detected Through Inspections/
Investigations:
NONCOMPLIANCE CIRCUMSTANCES RANGE OF RESPONSE
NONCOMPLIANCE             CIRCUMSTANCES             RANGE OF RESPONSE
Minor violation of        Any instance.             VTN, SV.
analytical procedures
Major violation of        No evidence of intent.    NOV or CO.
analytical procedures.
Major violation of        Evidence of negligence or COM, AP or LIT and penalty
analytical procedures.    intent - SNC.             (possible criminal action).
Minor violation of permit No evidence of negligence VTN, SV, or NOV. Immediate
condition.                or intent.                correction required.
Minor violation of permit Evidence of negligence or COM, AP or LIT and penalty
condition.                intent - SNC.             (possible criminal action).
Major violation of permit Evidence of negligence or COM, AP or LIT and penalty
condition.                intent - SNC.             (possible disconnect from
                                                    sewer).
Failure to properly       Does not result in harm   NOV
operate and maintain      Does result in harm       AO with fine
pretreatment equipment                              Civil Action
                          Entry denied or consent   SCH
Denial of entry to        withdrawn
inspectors                Consent of records denied Obtain warrant and return
                                                    to IU
                          Inspectors finds files    NOV
Inadequate recordkeeping  incomplete to missing
                          Recurring                 AO with fine
 
   Whenever a NOV is issued that requires a response and the Industrial User
fails to respond, the next level of enforcement should be undertaken.
   (i)   Time Frames for Responses:
   (1)   All violations will be identified and documented within five (5)
working days of receiving compliance information.
   (2)   Initial enforcement responses (involving contact with the industrial
user and requesting information on corrective or preventative action(s) will
occur within thirty (30) days of violation detection.
   (3)   Follow-up actions for continuing or recurring violations will be taken
within sixty (60) days of the initial enforcement response. For all continuing
violations, the response will include a compliance schedule.
   (4)   Violations which threaten health, property or environmental quality
are considered emergencies and will receive immediate responses such as halting
the discharge or terminating service.
   (5)   All violations meeting the criteria for significant noncompliance
(SNC) will be addressed with an enforceable order within thirty (30) days of
the identification of significant noncompliance.
   (j)   IUs Subject to Reduced Reporting. IUs subject to reduced reporting may
be inspected every two (2) years by the City.
   (k)   Confidential Information. Section.
34-3408 states requirements for handling confidential information, also
applicable for enforcement response procedures.
   (l)   Evaluating the Need for Slug Control Plan. Requirements for a slug
control plan are stated in Section
34-3402(c). Based on IU reports, IU surveys, the following information may be
used to evaluate slug potential risks for an IU:
   (1)   Raw materials inventories and storage locations (i.e., chemical
utilization);
   (2)   Locations of wastewater discharge points;
   (3)   Site drainage patterns;
   (4)   Location of floor drains, sumps, etc.;
   (5)   Slug discharge prevention plans or control measures currently adopted;
   (6)   Chemical inventory, including maximum and average storage volumes;
   (7)   Comments, observations regarding existing control requirements and
physical conditions such as floor drains, improper storage practices, and
improper/inadequate containment of stored materials, operational data, and
general process information; and
   (8)   Slug risk classification.
IU SLUG DISCHARGE CATEGORY SAMPLE ATTRIBUTES RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SLUG DISCHARGE
                                             CONTROL
IU SLUG DISCHARGE SAMPLE ATTRIBUTES          RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SLUG
CATEGORY                                     DISCHARGE CONTROL
                  No or significantly less
Low               than reportable            Notification requirements
                  quantities, local limits,
                  etc.
                 No process discharge        
                 No discernible pathways to  
                  sewer system
                  Stores, uses batch
                  discharges of generates
Medium            somewhat less than         Notification requirements
                  reportable quantities of
                  constituents, local
                  limits, etc.
                  Stores, uses or generates  Dependent on site-specific
                 significant quantities of  situation, select one or
                  reportable constituents    more elements of Slug
                                             Control Plan.
                  Stores, uses batch
                  discharges or generates
High              significantly greater than Notification requirements
                  reportable quantities,
                  local limits, etc.
                 History of slugs or        Batch Discharge
                  surcharges                 Requirements
                 Poor housekeeping          Slug Control Plan Required
                  practices
                 No Slug Control Plan in     
                  existence
 
   (9)   Data on response measures such as recommendations for equipment,
structures, facility modifications and procedures for improving slug discharge
prevention and response at the facility.
   (m)   IUs without permits. Refer to Section
34-3404(h) for plan to locate all possible IUs and enforcing administrative or
legal action.
(Ord. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3415 (c), (f), (g), (h) and (i) repealed; new Sec. 34-
3415 (c), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l) and (m) enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3415 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3416.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Severability. If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this
division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections, shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
   (b)   Conflict. All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances
inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this division are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
DIVISION 5. ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION WASTEWATERS
SEC. 34-3500.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviation shall have the designated
meaning:
   (1)   ERG   Enforcement Response Guide
   (2)   ERW   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters
   (3)   IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
   (4)   IEPA DWPC   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Water Pollution Control
   (5)   IU   Industrial User
   (6)   TCLP   Toxic Characteristic Leaching Control Procedure
   (7)   UST   Underground Storage Tanks
   (b)   Words and terms:
   (1)   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters. Contaminated wastewaters
generated from, but not limited to: groundwater, lechate, surface run-off, or
other aqueous wastes that exist on-site, or process streams generated by
remedial activities. Examples of process wastestreams include without
limitation scrubber effluent resulting from incineration of soil or solid
waste; wastewater from soil washing activities; and water used to decontaminate
equipment after remedial activities.
SEC. 34-3501.   CITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Environmental Remediation Wastewaters (ERW), as defined in this
ordinance, that are conveyed to the City by truck, rail, dedicated pipeline or
sanitary sewer may be accepted by the City if all the requirements set forth in
the following provisions of this ordinance and all applicable administrative
procedures established by the director of utilities are met.
   (b)   Dischargers into the sanitary sewers of such ERW as defined in this
ordinance shall pay an ERW Discharge Fee of $0.0175 per gallon for each gallon
of such wastewaters delivered to the City under the provisions of this
ordinance. Such charge shall be in lieu of flow, BOD and TSS charges as
established by ordinance and rate ordinances in effect from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3501(b) repealed; new Sec. 34-3501(b) enacted; 11/
19/13)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3501(a) amended; 10/4/22)
   (c)   Except as specifically superseded or modified herein, all rates and
charges applicable to ERW, as defined in this ordinance, by reason of any City
ordinance or ordinances, shall continue to be due and payable.
SEC. 34-3502.   NON-HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   In order for the City to receive any wastewater for treatment, there must be
written assurances that the wastewater in Non-Hazardous as defined in 40 CFR
261 and 35 Illinois Administrative Code 721. This means that it must not be a
listed hazardous waste and it must pass the four criteria as found in 40 CFR
261 of Section 20, which are summarized as follows:
   (1)   It must not be a flammable waste, i.e., flashpoint must be >140 F.
   (2)   It has a Ph not lower than 2.0 or higher than 12.5.
   (3)   Does not contain any ‘reactive’ chemicals such as cyanides, sulfides
capable of generating a toxic gas.
   (4)   Passes the Toxic Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP), which means
it complies with all the criteria. Copies of the analysis must be on file at
the City.
SEC. 34-3503.   COMPLIANCE WITH SEWER USE ORDINANCE.
   The ERW discharged must comply with the requirements as found in this Sewer
Use Ordinance, General Pretreatment Requirements.
SEC. 34-3504.   ERW DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (a)   The user is required to complete an Individual Discharge Permit
Application in order to obtain an ERW Discharge Permit. The user would be
required to get an ERW Discharge Permit from the City before this particular
ERW could be discharged. If the user has an existing Individual Discharge
Permit, this permit would be amended to include these requirements.
   (b)   This ERW Discharge Permit would contain specific discharge limits and
special conditions for the user. Permit review will follow the same time
constraints as listed in Section 34-3404 of this ordinance. The potential user
may have to provide certain chemical analysis and/or representative sample(s)
to the City as necessary.
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-3504 repealed; new Sec. 34-3504 enacted; 7/16/19)
SEC. 34-3505.   PERMITTED ERW HAULER.
   The aforementioned ERW that are hauled to the City by truck and tanker must
be hauled by a City permitted ERW hauler. This is separate and different from
IEPA special waste hauler permit, which is also required. The potential user
can have its own truck and tanker permitted by filling out the appropriate City
forms and paying the fifty dollar ($50.00) permit fee. The permitted ERW hauler
must comply with all City requirements relative to discharging at the treatment
plant(s).
SEC. 34-3506.   LETTER FROM IEPA.
   Where deemed necessary by the director of utilities, the City will require a
letter from the IEPA stating that the ERW is not a hazardous waste and shall
determine that it is otherwise appropriate for the City to receive such waste.
(Ord. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3506 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3507.   ERW DISCHARGE COSTS AND MONITORING CHARGES.
   The City will bill the user for the ERW discharges into the sanitary sewers
as per ordinance, which is currently $0.0175 per gallon. The costs for City
sampling and analysis are also covered in the ordinance, and are separate
charges from ERW Discharge Fee.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3507 repealed; new Sec. 34-3507 enacted; 11/19/13)
SEC. 34-3508.   FLOW METERING REQUIREMENTS.
   ERW that is discharged to the sanitary sewer from a facility must be
measured volumetrically. This can be done either by installing a wastewater
flow meter or a water metering device. If the ERW is trucked to the City’s POTW
for disposal, the volume discharged will be determined by the volume of the
container or containment device on the truck.
SEC. 34-3509.   SAMPLING MANHOLE.
   For ERW discharged to the sanitary sewer, the potential user must provide a
sampling point for the wastewater. In certain situations, a separate sampling
manhole may be required. If a separate manhole is required, the sampling
manhole must be constructed and approved according to City standards.
SEC. 34-3510.   IEPA REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   IEPA Construction Permit – If the potential user is required to
install pretreatment equipment to control the pollutants in the ERW discharged,
then the potential user would have to contact the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control (IEPA DWPC) concerning
the need for a Construction Permit for the potential pretreatment system. The
IEPA DWPC permit section would make the determination as to whether an IEPA
Construction Permit would be necessary and such determination must be in
writing and forwarded to the City.
   (b)   IEPA Connection Permit – The potential users will have to obtain a
Connection Permit if: 1) the ERW will be hauled to the POTW(s), or 2) if the
user is not already connected to the sanitary sewer, or 3) is already connected
to the sanitary sewer, but the proposed ERW is substantially different than the
normal process wastewater discharged. The potential user bears the
responsibility of filling out whatever forms are required by the IEPA DWPC in
order to obtain any IEPA DWPC Connection Permit and the City shall have no
responsibility therefor.
   (c)   Operator Class K License – If a pretreatment system is constructed,
the IEPA may require a Certified Class K Operator for the pretreatment system.
The IEPA Operator Certification Unit can assist in determining if a particular
Class K Operator License is required for the personnel of a potential user to
operate the pretreatment system.
   (d)   IEPA Special Waste Stream Permit – If the ERW is to be hauled to the
City by truck, the user will have to obtain an IEPA Special Waste Stream
Permit. This application will be filled out by the user and sent to the City
for signature. The user will mail this to the IEPA DWPC with copies to the
City. If a Special Waste Hauler Permit is necessary, the hauler would be
required to manifest the waste.
   (e)   The above criteria are listed as guidance only. Other specific
criteria may vary and will be provided to any request, or at the time the
request for discharge to the sanitary sewer is made to the director of
utilities or the IEPA DWPC.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-3510; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-3511.   SURFACE WATER RUN-OFF.
   If the ERW is surface water run-off from stormwater associated with
industrial activity as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14), then it shall be
subject to ERW charge. However, if the source of ERW is potable water from
washing of manufacturing services such as loading platforms and docks, then the
industrial user shall not be subject to the ERW charge.
SEC. 34-3512.   GROUNDWATER MONITORING WELLS.
   (a)   Development wastewater shall not be considered ERW and therefore shall
not be charged at the rate of $0.0175 per gallon, but shall be charged at the
domestic rate and must first be settled out to remove suspended solids before
discharging to the sanitary sewer or at the treatment plant. For purposes of
this subsection, development wastewater shall be that water which contains
sediment and clay and is encountered when the wells must be drilled and
“developed” prior to ground pumping commencing at the site of the
contamination.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3512 repealed; new Sec. 34-3512 enacted; 11/19/13)
   (b)   Purge water, of volumes less than twenty (20) gallons may be discarded
to the sanitary sewer and not require permit so long as such purge waters
comply with the limits found in this ordinance. Said purge water will not be
subject to the ERW charges imposed elsewhere in this ordinance. For purposes of
this subsection, purge water shall be that water which is pumped out of several
well volumes throughout the life of the groundwater monitoring well in order to
take samples for analysis on an approximate quarterly basis.
SEC. 34-3513.   GROUND WATER CLEAN-UP.
   If the Industrial User (IU) is involved in a groundwater clean-up, which is
generating ERW and wishes to use this ERW as a substitute for potable water in
the normal processes which generate wastewater; then the IU shall not be
charged the $0.0175 per gallon ERW Discharge Fee. However, the IU must
demonstrate and prove to the satisfaction of the City by clear and convincing
evidence that it is not using this as process wastewater as a means of avoiding
the $0.0175 per gallon ERW Discharge Fee. As part of this test, the IU must
prove that they have not increased the amount of normal process wastewater to
accommodate all of the ERW that is generated.
(Ord. No. 3053-2013; Sec. 34-3513 repealed; new Sec. 34-3513 enacted; 11/19/13)
SEC. 34-3514.   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS (UST) WASTEWATERS.
   Wastewaters found in UST, which shall be removed as part of the UST Program
are to be considered ERW. Since the removal of UST can be considered a form of
environmental remediation, the wastewater generated from such a project,
whether it be from the storage tank itself or removal and recovery of
contaminated groundwater directly underneath the tank shall be considered ERW.
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE
SEC. 34-4100.   PURPOSE; INTENT.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of Moline from damage from stormwater runoff and
floods.
     (b)   These regulations provide for the regulation of matters relative to
the management of stormwater within the City of Moline and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Its provisions include, but are not limited to, regulating
drainage installations and improvements, requiring the preservation and
enhancement of certain natural environmental features, requiring the
installation of drainage improvements in developments, regulating uses,
maintenance, and activities in floodplains and flood hazard areas, requiring
permits, payment of fees and assurances of completion, and providing for
inspections and control of work. The requirements, standards and specifications
herein provided are in addition to any other applicable legal requirements.
   (c)   It is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter:
   (1)   To promote public health, safety, and welfare by permitting the
movement of emergency vehicles during flooding periods and minimizing flood
losses and the inconvenience and damage resulting from uncontrolled and
unplanned stormwater runoff in the City;
   (2)   To establish a stormwater utility to coordinate, design, construct,
manage, operate, maintain, and improve the stormwater system, to prevent the
infiltration of stormwater into the sanitary sewer system, and to fund same;
   (3)   To provide for and promote compliance by the City with federal and
state laws governing the discharge of pollutants from the municipal storm sewer
system and to provide for and promote compliance with a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the City for such
discharge;
   (4)   To establish reasonable stormwater fees based on the use of stormwater
and drainage facilities which will provide for a stable funding source to
enable the City of Moline to construct, operate, maintain, administer and
replace the City of Moline stormwater system and for compliance with United
States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) stormwater NPDES permit
requirements;
   (5)   To encourage and facilitate urban water resources management
techniques, including, without limitation, detention of stormwater and floods,
reduction of the need to construct storm sewers, reduction of pollution, and
enhancement of the environment;
   (6)   To maintain and improve the quality and quantity of water impacted by
the storm drainage system within the City of Moline;
   (7)   To preserve property values by protecting new and existing buildings
and improvements to buildings from damage due to stormwater flow;
   (8)   To assure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase
flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible
to erosion;
   (9)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, and to protect water quality;
   (10)   To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and
illicit discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction
sites into the storm drainage system within the City of Moline;
   (11)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil,
petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste,
sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system;
   (12)   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer products.
(Ord. No. 3015-2004; Sec. 34-4100 (a) repealed; new Sec. 34-4100 (a) enacted;
03/02/04; Ord. No. 3030-2020; Sec. 34-4100(c)(2) amended; 10/13/20; Ord. No.
3007-2022; Sec. 34-4100 amended; 5/24/22)
SEC. 34-4101.   DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms
and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
   (1)   Adverse Impacts are any negative impact on plant, soil, air, or water
resources affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics,
aquatic habitat, quality, and quantity.
   (2)   Applicant is any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of the City of Moline of a
development or permit to carry out construction of a new development or re-
development from the City of Moline.
   (3)   Base Flood Elevation is the elevation at all locations delineating the
level of flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event, which has
a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
The base flood elevation at any location is defined in the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM).
   (4)   Best Management Practices (BMPs) (with reference to stormwater BMPs)
refers to management practices and methods to control pollutants in stormwater.
BMPs are of two types: "source controls" (nonstructural) and "treatment
controls" (structural). Source controls are practices that prevent pollution by
reducing potential pollutants at their source, before they come into contact
with stormwater. Treatment controls remove pollutants from stormwater. The
selection, application, and maintenance of BMPs must be sufficient to prevent
or reduce the likelihood of pollutants entering the storm drainage system.
   (5)   Building Official is the officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of the International Building Code for
the City of Moline.
   (6)   Building Permit is a permit issued by the City of Moline, for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building, and the
related ground and surface preparation prior to, and after completion of,
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
   (7)   Bypass Flows is stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary
to a property's drainage system but not under its control.
   (8)   Certify or Certification means formally attesting that the specific
inspections and tests were performed, and that such inspections and tests
comply with the applicable requirements of this article.
   (9)   Channel is any defined river, stream, creek, brook, natural or
artificial depression, ponded area, on-stream lake or impoundment, abandoned
mine, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural
or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or
into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
   (10)   Channel Modification is the alteration of a channel by changing the
physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification
includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), filling, widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody
rooted vegetation. Channel modification does not include the man-made clearing
of debris or removal of trash.
   (11)   Director of engineering means the director of engineering for the
City of Moline or said engineer’s designee.
   (12)   Director of finance means the director of finance for the City of
Moline or said director’s designee.
   (13)   Director of utilities means the director of the department of
utilities for the City of Moline or said director’s designee.
   (14)   Clearing is any activity, which removes the natural vegetative ground
cover.
   (15)   Commercial means pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or
other activity engaged in for profit.
   (16)   Compensatory Storage is an artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain.
   (17)   Conduit is any channel, pipe, sewer, or culvert used for the
conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed.
   (18)   Contaminated means containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
   (19)   Contractor means any person or firm performing or managing
construction work at a construction site, including any construction manager,
general contractor or subcontractor. Contractor also includes, but is not
limited to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, or
landscaping contractors, and material suppliers delivering materials to the
site.
   (20)   Construction Site means any location where clearing, grading,
filling, or similar activity    occurs.
   (21)   County is the County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   (22)   Dam as defined by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office
of Water Resources.
   (23)   Detention Basin is a facility constructed or modified to provide for
the temporary storage of stormwater runoff, and the controlled release by
gravity of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
   (24)   Detention Time is the amount of time stormwater is held within a
detention basin.
   (25)   Development is any manmade change to real estate or property,
including, but not limited to:
      a.   The division or subdivision of any duly recorded parcel of property;
      b.   Any construction, reconstruction or placement of a building, or any
addition to a building where such addition is valued at more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000);
      c.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days per year;
      d.   Construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
      e.   Redevelopment of a site;
      f.   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, drilling,
mining, or other non-agricultural alterations of a ground surface;
      g.   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; or
      h.   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
direction, or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
   (26)   Discharge means any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater,
or any other substance whatsoever into the storm drainage system.
   (27)   Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is
otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner
of a construction site or industrial facility.
   (28)   Domestic Sewage means sewage originating primarily from kitchen,
bathroom, and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation,
dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks.
   (29)   Drainage Plan is a plan, including engineering drawings and
supporting calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage
system and environmental features, including grading, as well as proposed
alterations or changes to the drainage system and environment of a property.
   (30)   Dry Basin is a detention basin designed to drain after temporary
storage of stormwater flows    and to normally be dry over much of its bottom
area.
   (31)   Earthwork means the disturbance of soils on a site associated with
clearing, grading, or excavation activities.
   (32)   Erosion is the general process whereby soil or earth is moved by
rainfall, flowing water, wind, or wave action.
   (33)   Excavation is any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel,
rock or any other similar material, is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, re-located, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting from such actions.
   (34)   Excess Stormwater Runoff is the volume and rate of flow of stormwater
discharged from new development or redevelopment which is or will be in excess
of that volume and rate which existed before development or pre-development.
   (35)   Existing Grade is the vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to excavation or filling.
   (36)   Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or
activity from which there is, or may be, a discharge of a pollutant.
   (37)   Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains an essential
plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for
its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth
of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more
fertilizers.
   (38)   Fill is any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
material, is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported,
or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   (39)   Final Grade is the vertical location of the ground surface after
grading work is completed in accordance with the plans.
   (40)   Fire Protection Water means any water, and any substances or
materials contained therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a
fire, or to inspect or test fire equipment.
   (41)   Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from
the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
   (42)   Grading is the excavation or fill of land, or any combination
thereof, and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or
fill.
   (43)   Groundwater means any water residing below the surface of the ground
or percolating into or out of the ground.
   (44)   Harmful Quantity means the amount of any substance that the director
of engineering determines will cause an adverse impact to the storm drainage
system or will contribute towards the failure of the City of Moline to meet the
water quality based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the
MS4.
   (45)   Hazardous Substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40
CFR Part 302.
   (46)   Hazardous Waste means any substance identified or listed as a
hazardous waste by the USEPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261.
   (47)   Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) means any material generated in a
household (including single and multiple residences) that would be classified
as hazardous pursuant to the IEPA.
   (48)   Hydrograph is a graph showing, for a given location on a stream or
conduit, the flow rate with respect to time.
   (49)   Hydrograph Method is the method that estimates runoff volume and
runoff hydrographs for the point of interest by generating hydrographs for
individual subareas, combining them, and routing them through stream lengths
and reservoir structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution,
runoff curve number, time of concentration, and travel time are included.
   (50)   Illegal Discharge. See illicit discharge below.
   (51)   Illicit Discharge means any discharge to the storm drainage system
that is prohibited under this article.
   (52)   Illicit Connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm
drainage system.
   (53)   Impervious Surface is that area of property that is covered by
materials other than soil and vegetation and that has no intended capacity to
absorb stormwater, such as parking lots, roadways, driveways, sidewalks,
patios, tennis courts, roofs, and other similar structures.
   (54)   Infiltration is the passage or movement of water into the soil
surfaces.
   (55)   Jurisdiction means the City of Moline.
   (56)   Loessal Soil is a sediment, commonly non-stratified and
unconsolidated, composed predominately of silt sized particles with accessory
clay and sand.
   (57)   Lot is an individual platted parcel in an approved subdivision.   
   (58)   May means discretionary.   
   (59)   Major Drainage System is that portion of a drainage system needed to
store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
   (60)   Mechanical Fluid means any fluid used in the operation and
maintenance of machinery, vehicles, and any other equipment, including
lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum products, oil, and fuel.
   (61)   Minor Drainage System is that portion of a drainage system designed
for the convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers,
small open channels, and swales, and, where manmade, is to be designed to
handle a 10-year runoff event.
   (62)   Mitigation is when the prescribed controls are not sufficient and
additional measures are    required to offset the development, including those
measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which stormwater drainage
and development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare.
Examples of mitigation include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
   (63)   Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning (or mobile washing) means power
washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of
vehicles and/or exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or
related to a commercial activity.
   (64)   Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) means the system of
conveyances, including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains,
catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, and ponds
both owned and operated by the City of Moline and designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying
sanitary sewage.
   (65)   Natural are conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and
biological processes without intervention by man.
   (66)   Natural Drainages are channels or other conveyances formed in the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural
causes.
   (67)   NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   (68)   NPDES Permit means a permit issued by EPA that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   (69)   Notice of Violation means a written notice detailing any violations
of this article and any action expected of the violators.
   (70)   Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to:
petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease,
sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
   (71)   One Hundred-Year Event is a rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a
one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A
twenty-four (24 hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
   (72)   One Year Event is a rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one
hundred percent (100%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year. A 24-hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
   (73)   Owner means the person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or
land including the contract seller and contract purchaser.
   (74)   Parcel is a contiguous lot or tract of land under one ownership. A
lot or tract of land is land intended as a unit for the purpose of development
or transfer of ownership.
   (75)   Peak Flow is the maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a
channel or conduit.
   (76)   Permittee is any person to whom a building permit or a grading and
drainage permit is issued.
   (77)   Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives,
agents, or assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   (78)   Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to
prevent, destroy, repel, or migrate of any pest.
   (79)   Pet Waste (or Animal Waste) means excrement and other waste from
animals.
   (80)   Petroleum Product means a product that is obtained from distilling
and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or
lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline,
gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate
fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel.
   (81)   Pollutant means any substance attributable to water pollution,
including, but not limited to, rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris,
yard waste, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste,
domestic sewage, industrial waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank
waste, mechanical fluid, oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products,
antifreeze, surfactants, solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy
metals, toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste,
hazardous substances, hazardous waste, soil, and sediment.
   (82)   Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the
water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life,
property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or
the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
   (83)   Positive Drainage is provision for overland paths for all areas of a
property including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
   (84)   Potable Water means water that has been treated to drinking water
standards and is safe for human consumption.
   (85)   Private Drainage System means all privately or publicly owned ground,
surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or
convey stormwater, including but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts,
lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets,
drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins,
ponds, draws, swales, streams, and any ground surface.
   (86)   Public Improvement Plans means engineering drawings subject to
approval by the director of engineering for the construction of public
improvements.
   (87)   Qualified Person means a person who possesses the required
certification, license, or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as
demonstrated by sufficient education, training, and/or experience to perform a
specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the
regulatory requirements & generally accepted industry standards for such
activity.
   (88)   Release means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject,
leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system.
   (89)   Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that
consist of: (A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons,
wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and
similar materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass,
crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that
do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees
Fahrenheit).
   (90)   Sanitary Sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste
that is discharged into the City of Moline jurisdiction sanitary and passes
through the sanitary to a City of Moline sewage treatment plant for treatment.
   (91)   Sanitary Sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other
conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a City of Moline sewage
treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are
not intentionally admitted).
   (92)   Sediment means soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and
transported naturally by water, wind, gravity, or equipment tracking (tires,
vehicles).
   (93)   Sedimentation is the process that deposits soils, debris, and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater
drainage systems.
   (94)   Septic Tank Waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such
as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and aerated
tanks.
   (95)   Shall is mandatory.
   (96)   Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is
physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection
with the facility or activity.
   (97)   Slope Disturbance Line is the line which delineates relatively level
building areas from areas where slopes exceed 7 percent (7%) and where special
precautions must be taken.
   (98)   Small Quantity Generator Waste means any hazardous waste generated by
a small quantity generator as defined by IEPA.
   (99)   Solid Waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material,
resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining, or
agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional
activities.
   (100)   State means the State of Illinois.
   (101)   Stormwater Utility means all surfaces, structures, and systems that
contribute to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the
MS4, surface water, groundwater, waters of the state, and waters of the United
States.
   (102)   Storm Sewer is a closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
   (103)   Stormwater means runoff resulting from precipitation.
   (104)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) means a document that
describes the best management practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants.
   (105)   Stream is any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or
natural or man-made drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or
shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or
intermittently.
   (106)   Stripping is any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, by spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of top
soil.
   (107)   Subdivision Development includes activities associated with the
platting of any parcel of land into two or more lots and includes all
construction activity taking place thereon.
   (108)   Surface Water means water bodies and any water temporarily residing
on the surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers,
ponds, streams, puddles, channelized flow, and runoff.
   (109)   Ten-Year Event is a runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten
percent (10%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-
hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
   (110)   Time of Concentration is the elapsed time for stormwater to flow
from the most hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular
point of interest in that watershed.
   (111)   Tributary Watershed is all of the land surface area that contributes
runoff to a given point.
   (112)   Two-Year Event is a runoff, rainfall, or flood event having fifty
percent (50%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A 24-
hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
   (113)   Uncontaminated means not containing harmful quantities of
pollutants.
   (114)   Used Oil (or Used Motor Oil) means any oil that as a result of use,
storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of
impurities or the loss of original properties.
   (115)   Utility Agency means private utility companies, the City of Moline
or contractors working for private utility companies or the City of Moline,
engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and
services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas,
telephone, television, and communication services.
   (116)   Vacant is land on which there are no structures.
   (117)   Waste (industrial or commercial waste) means any wastes produced as
a by-product of any industrial, institutional, or commercial process or
operation, other than domestic sewage.
   (118)   Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than
uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
   (119)   Water of the State (or water) means any groundwater, percolating or
otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams,
creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of
the State, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial,
navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water
courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or
bordering the State or inside the jurisdiction of the State.
   (120)   Water Quality Standard means the designation of a body or segment of
surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical
criteria deemed by state or federal regulatory standards to be necessary to
protect those uses.
   (121)   Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently
used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or
foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the
flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all
other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or
could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters
otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all
tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to
waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal
definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not
including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to
meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
   (122)   Watershed is all land area drained by, or contributing water to, the
same channel, lake, marsh, stormwater facility, groundwater, or depressional
area.
   (123)   Wet Basin is a detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool
of water after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
   (124)   Wetlands are defined by regulation as "those areas that are
inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions."
Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
   (125)   Yard Waste means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil,
rocks or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance, or
land clearing operations.
   (b)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this article,
shall have the designated meanings:
   BMP   –    Best Management Practices
   CFR   –   Code of Federal Regulations
   FEMA   –   Federal Emergency Management Agency
   HHW   –   Household Hazardous Waste
   IDPH   –   Illinois Department of Public Health
   IEPA   –   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
   MS4   –   Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
   NPDES–   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   NRCS   –   Natural Resources Conservation Service
   RISWCD–   Rock Island Soil and Water Conservation District
   SWPPP–    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
   USDA   –   United States Department of Agriculture
   US EPA–   United States Environmental Protection Agency
(Ord. No. 3019-2019; Sec. 34-4101 (a)(4) repealed; new Sec. 34-4101 (a)(4)
enacted; 7/16/19)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4101 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4102.   PROHIBITED ACTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm
drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated
stormwater, except as allowed in listed exemptions of this article. Common
prohibited stormwater contaminants include trash, yard waste, stones, earth,
concrete, wood, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products,
cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, and sediment.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the listed exemptions of this section, any discharge
shall be prohibited by this article if the discharge in question has been
determined by the director of engineering to be a source of pollutants to the
storm drainage system.
    (c)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system, are prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. It is the intention of the
City Council that this section shall apply retroactively.
   (d)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic
sewage or industrial waste, to the storm drainage system, or allow such a
connection to or be made to continue.
   (e)   Surface water shall be allowed to travel its natural or pre-
regulations course unless changes are allowed by means of a drainage permit or
drainage plans approved by the director of engineering. It shall be unlawful
for any person to force surface water off that person's property and onto a
neighboring property or to prevent surface water which would have entered that
person's property from doing so without approval granted by a drainage permit.
   (f)   No buildings or permanent structures, including impervious surfaces,
may be placed wholly or in part within an easement that has been granted for
access to drainage facilities of any type, including agricultural drainage
conduit, without the written approval of the director of engineering; provided,
however, streets, sidewalks and driveways may be allowed to cross easements by
the shortest possible route, provided that the purpose of the easement is
maintained and all other requirements are met.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain any
obstruction within a watercourse or drainage facility of any type, except as
may be specifically authorized by this article.
   (h)   No person shall interfere with BMPs implemented pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. No. 3015-2004; Sec. 34-4102(b) repealed; new Sec. 34-4102(b) enacted; 03/
02/04)
(Ord. No. 3028-2022; Sec. 34-4102 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4103.   EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITED ACTIONS.
   The following discharges are exempt from the regulations in this article:
   (1)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing;
   (2)   Landscape irrigation;
   (3)   Rising ground waters;
   (4)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
   (5)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (6)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (7)   Foundation drains;
   (8)   Air conditioning condensate;
   (9)   Irrigation water (except for waste water irrigation);
   (10)   Springs;
   (11)   Water from crawl space pumps;
   (12)   Sump and footing drains;
   (13)   Storm sewer cleaning;
   (14)   Water from private, non-commercial car washing on properties zoned
residential;
   (15)   Routine external building wash-down which does not use detergents;
   (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (17)   De-chlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
   (18)   Residual street wash water;
   (19)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities;
   (20)   De-chlorinated water reservoir discharges; and
   (21)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed) and
which do not use detergents.
SEC. 34-4104.   REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISCHARGERS.
   (a)   Private Drainage System Maintenance. The owner of any private drainage
system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, sediment
removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of vegetative cover, and removal of
debris from pipes and structures.
   (b)   Minimization of Irrigation Runoff. Irrigation systems shall be managed
to reduce the discharge of water from a site.
   (c)   Cleaning of Paved Surfaces Required. The owner of any paved parking
lot, street, or drive shall clean the pavement as required to prevent the
buildup and discharge of pollutants. Buildup of mechanical fluid, waste
materials, sediment, or debris is a violation of this article. Paved surfaces
shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment
of wash water, or other methods in compliance with this article. This section
does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction activities, the
regulation of which is otherwise specified.
   (d)   Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning Operations. Mobile commercial
cosmetic cleaning operations shall not discharge to the storm drainage system
in violation of this article.
   (e)   Maintenance of Equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment
maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the
potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery, and equipment must be
maintained to reduce leaking fluids.
   (f)   Materials Storage. In addition to other requirements of this article,
materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of pollutants. The
uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of hazardous substances is
prohibited.
   (g)   Pet Waste. Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or sanitary
sewage in a timely manner, to prevent discharge to the storm drainage system.
   (h)   Pesticides, Herbicides and Fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations
and applicable laws. Excessive application shall be avoided.
   (i)   Prohibition on Use of Pesticides and Fungicides Banned from
Manufacture. Use of any pesticide, herbicide, or fungicide, the manufacture of
which has been either voluntarily discontinued or prohibited by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or any federal, state or local jurisdiction is
prohibited.
   (j)   Open Drainage Channel Maintenance. Every person owning or occupying
property through which an open drainage channel passes shall keep and maintain
that part of the drainage channel within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
retard the flow of water through the drainage channel. In addition, the owner
or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures adjacent to a
drainage channel, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the drainage channel.
   (k)   Release Reporting and Cleanup. Any person responsible for a known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in,
illegal discharges to the storm drainage system shall take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In
the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply
with all state, federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup,
containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the
release. In the event of such a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the director of engineering no later than the close of the next
business day.
   (l)   Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices. The City
of Moline may adopt and impose requirements identifying BMPs for any activity,
operation, or facility which causes or could cause a discharge of pollutants to
the storm drainage system. Where specific BMPs are required, every person
undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility
shall implement and maintain these BMPs at such person’s own expense.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4104 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4105.   INSPECTION AND MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
   (a)   The director of engineering may enter and inspect any private property
or premises, including, but not limited to, any private property or premises
which is, or may be, the source of a stormwater discharge associated with
industrial activity, or the source of a discharge from a site of industrial
activity, or the source of a discharge from a high risk facility, or the source
of an illicit discharge, upon reasonable notice to the person owning said
property or premises and the person in possession thereof and during normal
business hours, for the purpose of performing investigations regarding the
existence and source of contamination and determining from the person
responsible for such property or premise or other appropriate individual the
methods which are being or will be employed to stop, neutralize, remove, or
otherwise remedy the contamination, and, as needed, to determine compliance or
noncompliance with this article or with the conditions of a BMP plan approval.
No person shall refuse entry or access to the director of utilities or said
official's authorized representative when they requests entry for the purpose
of inspection and presents appropriate credentials. If requested, the person
responsible for such property or premises shall receive a report from the
director of utilities setting forth the findings of the inspection with respect
to compliance status.
   (b)   The director of utilities may require the person responsible for any
private property or premises, including, but not limited to, any private
property or premises which is, or may be, the source of a stormwater discharge
associated with industrial activity, or the source of a discharge from a site
of industrial activity, or the source of a discharge from a high risk facility,
or the source of an illicit discharge, at said person's expense, to establish
and maintain such records, make such reports, install, use and maintain such
monitoring equipment or methods, sample such discharge in accordance with such
methods, at such locations, and intervals as the director of utilities shall
prescribe and provide periodic reports relating to the discharge. To the extent
practicable, the director of utilities shall recognize and approve the sampling
procedures and test methods established by Part 136 of Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as the same may be amended or revised.
   (c)   The City of Moline shall make inspections as required and shall notify
the grading and drainage permit holder in the event that the work fails to
comply with the requirements of this article. The notification of any
deficiencies in the work or violations of this article shall be posted at the
site and mailed to the owner of the site by ordinary mail.
   The owner of the site shall notify the director of utilities:
   (1)   Two (2) working days prior to the start of any land disturbing
activities,
   (2)   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), and
   (3)   After final stabilization and landscaping and prior to removal of
temporary sediment controls.
   (d)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the City of
Moline determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that
further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to cause prohibited
sediment to discharge onto any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or
drainage structure, the City of Moline may require, as a condition of allowing
the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special
precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed
slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing,
compaction, cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and
recommendations of a certified professional in erosion and sediment control or
a professional engineer, which may be made requirements for further work.
   (e)   Where it appears that erosion may result in siltation leaving the
project limits or where grading is impeding flow of upstream stormwater because
the grading on any development site is not complete, work shall be stopped and
the drainage permit holder required to install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the
public safety. On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail,
the director of utilities shall specify the time of starting grading and time
of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific
stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to
the advent of seasonal rains.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4105 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4106.   VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   Right of Entry and Sampling. Whenever the appropriate official has
cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any
premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the
appropriate official shall have the right to enter the premises at any
reasonable time to determine if the discharger is complying with all
requirements of this article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses
entry after a request to enter has been made, the law director is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
   The appropriate official shall have the right to set up on the property of
any discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are necessary to
conduct sampling of discharges or said discharges shall be prohibited from
discharging into the stormwater drainage system.
   (b)   Notice of Violation.   Whenever an authorized enforcement person
determines that a person has violated or failed to meet a requirement of this
article, the enforcement person will order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. In the case of an improved property,
posting the written notice on the property or mailing such notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested, will constitute written notice. Whenever
possible, a copy of the notice of violation will also be mailed by certified
mail or email when an address has been provided through appropriate permitting
procedures.
   The notice of violation shall include:
   (1)   The name of the responsible person or property owner;
   (2)   The date and location of the violation;
   (3)   A description of the violation;
   (4)   Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the
violation;
   (5)   The deadline within which the required actions must be completed;
   (6)   Enforcement actions that may be taken by the law director;
   (7)   Notice date.
   Any person receiving a notice of violation may file a written appeal to the
director of utilities within fifteen (15) days of the notice date. The director
of utilities will affirm, modify, or rescind the notice in writing, within 15
days of the date of the appeal. If the recipient of a notice of violation is
dissatisfied with the outcome of the appeal to the director of utilities, the
appeal process outlined in Section
34-4300, of this article will be followed.
   (c)   Enforcement Action without Prior Notice.   Any person who violates or
fails to meet a requirement of this article will be subject, without prior
notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified in this article
when attempts to contact the person have failed and the enforcement actions are
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent danger to the environment, or to the health, safety, or
welfare of persons or to the storm drainage system.
   (d)   Enforcement Actions. Any person who fails to comply with, or appeal, a
notice of violation, or fails to comply with an appeal decision of the director
of utilities, will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement
actions:
   (1)   Stop Work Order. The director of utilities may issue a stop work order
to the owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at
the construction site and distributing the order to all City of Moline
departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site. Unless express
written exception is made, the stop work order shall prohibit any further
construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or
approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy
at the site. A notice of violation shall accompany the stop work order, and
shall define the compliance requirements.
   (2)   Abatement of an Illicit Connection. The director of utilities may
terminate an illicit connection. Any expense related to such abatement shall be
fully reimbursed by the property owner, and, if unpaid, shall become a lien
against the property upon which the illicit connection is made.
    (3)   Abatement of a Violation on Private Property. When a property owner
is not available, not able, or not willing to correct a violation which poses
an imminent threat to life, health, or public safety, the director of utilities
may enter private property to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the director of utilities to
enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such
abatement shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and, if unpaid, shall
become a lien against the property upon which the violation is made.
   (4)   Recovery of Costs. Within thirty (30) days after abatement by the
director of utilities, the director of utilities shall notify the property
owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the
deadline for payment. The property owner may appeal the recovery costs as
outlined in this article. Any expense related to said abatement shall be fully
reimbursed by the property owner, and, if unpaid, shall become a lien against
the property upon which the violation is made.
   (5)   Termination of Utility Services. After notice to the customer and
property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the director of utilities
shall have the authority to order the disconnection of City of Moline water,
sanitary sewer, and/or sanitation services, upon a finding by the director of
utilities that the disconnection of utility services will remove a violation of
this article that poses a substantial and imminent threat to public health or
the environment.
   (e)   Legal Remedies for Violations of this Article. Notwithstanding any
other remedies or procedures available to the City of Moline, if any person
violates this article, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate
legal and equitable relief, including without limitation, damages and court
costs. The city attorney may also seek a temporary restraining order, a
preliminary or permanent injunction, or any of them, which restrains or compels
the activities on the part of the discharger.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4106; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 2. CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS.
SEC. 34-4200.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (a)   Responsible entity. Any owner of a site of construction activity shall
be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the requirements of
this article.
   (b)   Waste disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any
other pollutants or waste, on any construction site shall be controlled through
the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained
by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential
for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash, or otherwise be
released from the site is prohibited.
   (c)   Ready-Mixed concrete. Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting
from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting,
or applying ready-mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction sites for
proper disposal. Release of these materials is prohibited.
   (d)   Erosion and Sediment Control. BMPs shall be implemented to prevent the
release of sediment from construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be
minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances
shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public
streets shall be removed immediately.
   (e)   Continued compliance. Upon completion of permitted construction
activity on any site, the property owner and subsequent property owners will be
responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of this article, in
the course of maintenance, reconstruction, or any other construction activity
on the site.
SEC. 34-4201.   DRAINAGE PERMITS.
   (a)   Class 1 Drainage Permit.
   Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall require a
Class 1 drainage permit:
   (1)   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (i.e., streets, roof, patio, parking area, or any combination
thereof) greater than or equal to 1500 square feet and less than one acre
(43,560 square feet);
   (2)   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area greater
than or equal to 10,000 square feet and less than one acre (43,560 square
feet);
   (3)   Any land disturbing activity that will exceed 100 cubic yards, but
does not otherwise require a Class 2 grading and drainage permit;
   (4)   Any land disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope
disturbance line, but does not otherwise require a Class 2 grading and drainage
permit; or
   (5)   Construction of one or more single-family dwellings constructed as
part of a subdivision development with an approved stormwater pollution
prevention plan. Those that are part of development for which there is a Class
2 grading and drainage permit will not be required to calculate pre-project and
post-project discharge rates.
   The drainage system for a parcel containing the proposed construction site
shall be designed to restrict the peak rate of discharge from the total parcel
(one (1) hour storm with a one (1) year) to pre-project levels. The director of
utilities will estimate the peak discharge rates. If the estimated post-
development peak discharge rate must be reduced, the director of utilities will
recommend appropriate stormwater control options. If a mutually acceptable
option cannot be developed, the appeal process outlined in this article will be
followed.
   The issuance of a drainage permit shall constitute an authorization to do
only that work which is described on the approved sketch. A Class 1 drainage
permit shall be valid for one year after the date of issuance.
   (b)   Class 1 Drainage Permit and Application Forms.
   Class 1 drainage permits and application forms shall include the following:
   (1)   Name(s), address(es), and 24-hour telephone numbers of the owner and
developer of the site, the contractor(s), and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant identifying the principal contractor;
   Certification that all construction covered by the drainage permit will be
undertaken in compliance with Section
34-4200 (general requirements for all construction sites) of this article;
   (3)   A plan showing existing and proposed topography;
   (4)   A grading plan acceptable to the director of engineering showing the
amount of impervious area being created; and
   (5)   An application fee as set forth in this article.
   (c)   Class 2 Drainage Permit.
   Any construction that meets one of the following thresholds shall require a
Class 2 drainage permit:
   (1)   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (i.e., streets, roof, patio, parking area, or any combination
thereof) greater than one acre (43,560 square feet), or
   (2)   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area greater
than one acre (43,560 square feet).
   (d)   Class 2 Drainage Permit and Application Form.
   A Class 2 drainage permit and application form shall include the following:
   (1)   Name(s), address(es), and telephone numbers of the owner and developer
of the site, the contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant identifying the principal contractor.
   (2)   Certification that any land clearing, construction, or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved
upon issuance of the permit.
   (3)   An application fee as set forth in this article.
   (4)   A faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other
improvement security satisfactory to the city attorney, in an amount deemed
sufficient by the director of utilities, to cover all costs of improvements,
maintenance of improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment
control measures for such period as specified by the director of utilities and
inspection costs to cover the cost of failure of improvement or repair of
improvements installed on the site on a form acceptable to the director of
utilities. (See sample in the
Appendix 1). Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements in the director
of utilities’ written opinion, the required security will become void.
   (5)   The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions for all applicable developments: a topographic
survey of the property at two-foot (2) contours (or one-foot contours for
relatively flat areas where additional detail will be required to see drainage
designs) unless otherwise specified or approved by the director of engineering
keyed to a consistent datum specified by the director of engineering; and an
existing drainage and proposed drainage plan for the property and one hundred
(100) feet surrounding the property at a scale of not more than one hundred
(100) feet to one (1) inch, and including the following (unless otherwise
specified by the director of engineering):
      a.   Property boundary, dimensions, and approximate acreage;
      b.   Building setback lines;
      c.    All existing and proposed structures and sizes;
      d.   Square feet of existing and proposed impervious surface;
      e.   All existing, or proposed easements;
      f.   All existing, abandoned, or proposed water or monitoring well head
locations;
      g.    All existing, abandoned, or proposed watermains;
      h.    All sanitary sewer lines and septic systems;
      i.   The banks and centerline of streams and channels;
      j.   Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins with normal water
level elevation;
      k.   Farm drains and tiles;
      l.   Location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales;
      m.   Existing and proposed topography;
      n.    Detention facilities;
      o.    Roads, streets and associated stormwater inlets including finished
grades;
      p.   Base flood elevation, flood fringe, and regulatory floodway;
      r.   A vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to its general
surroundings at a scale of not less than two thousand (2,000) feet to one (1)
inch (1:24,000);
      s.   Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of licensed professional
engineer, date, and name of person preparing plans;
      t.   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
      u.    Wetlands and buffer lines;
      v.    Route of overflows;
      w.    USTs, pumps, product lines, oil/water separators;
      x.   Abandoned mines; and
      y.   Soil Classifications.
   (6)   The following certifications and design statements shall be provided:
      a.   Basis of design for the final drainage system components;
      b.   A statement giving any applicable engineering assumptions and
calculations;
      c.   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's
provision for handling events greater than the 100 year, 24 hour runoff;
      d.   Design calculations and other submittals as required by this
article; and
      e.   A statement of certification of all drainage plans, calculations,
and supporting data by a licensed professional engineer.
   (7)   A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate
vicinity including the following:
      a.   The limits of designated regulatory and non-regulatory wetland
areas;
      b.   The location of trees greater than eight (8) inches in diameter in
areas to be disturbed;
      c.   Any designated natural areas or prime farmland; and
      d.   Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
   (8)   Any and all local, state, or federal maps marked to reflect any
proposed change in the floodway delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency
flood elevation that will change due to the proposed project.
   (9)   Conditional approval by FEMA or other regulatory agencies of the
proposed changes in the floodway map that have been made if the floodway
delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due
to the proposed project.
   (10)   Engineering calculations and data supporting all proposed plans.
Hydrologic design shall be completed in accordance with Section
34-4202 (hydrologic design criteria) of this article. Detention system design
shall be completed in accordance with Section
34-4203 (detention system design criteria) of this article.
   (11)   If the project involves channel modification, the following
information shall be submitted:
      a.   A discussion of the purpose and need for the proposed work;
      b.   Discussion of the practicability of using alternative locations or
methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
      c.   Analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected;
      d.   Copies of permits required by any other governmental entity; and
      e.   Additional information as required by this article.
   (12)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance
of this article.
   (e)   Permit Exceptions. Except as exempted below, no person shall commence
construction prior to obtaining the appropriate drainage permit as defined
below. The director of utilities will approve drainage permits.
   In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to circumvent the
intent of this article, when a proposed development activity will occur on a
lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of lands owned by the
same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this section will be
applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate ownership parcels.
   A drainage permit shall not be required for the following:
   (1)   Any construction activity below the minimum thresholds for a Class 1
drainage    permit.
   (2)   The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of
conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the
NRCS, and including the construction of agricultural structures.
   (3)   The maintenance of any existing stormwater control facility including
dredging, levee restoration, tree removal or other function that maintains the
original design capacities of the facility.
   (4)   The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of, any
street, road, highway or interstate highway or other public infrastructure
performed by the City of Moline; provided, however, that the intent of this
article will be honored by the City of Moline for such improvements.
   (5)   Subdivision Improvements. The requirements for obtaining a grading and
drainage permit are waived for a period of three (3) years after passage of
this article if the preliminary plat of a subdivision was approved by the City
Council prior to the passage of this article. All other requirements of the
article shall remain in effect.
   (6)   Non-Subdivision Improvements Requiring a Building Permit. The
requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for non-subdivision
related improvements requiring a building permit are waived for the duration of
the building permit if the building permit was issued prior to the passage of
this article. All other requirements of the article shall remain in effect.
   (7)   Improvements that previously did not require a permit. The
requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for construction that
did not require a permit prior to passage of this article are waived for a
period of one (1) year if the construction commenced prior to the passage of
this article. All other requirements of the article shall remain in effect.
   (f)   Submittal, Review and Approval.
   If a building and/or grading/fill permit is also required for the
development, drainage permit application shall be submitted to the building
official at the time application is made for a building and/or grading/fill
permit. Departments of the City of Moline shall coordinate their activities to
prevent unnecessary delays.
   (1)   Each application for a drainage permit shall be reviewed and acted
upon according to the following procedures. The director of utilities shall:
      a.   Provide a written evaluation to the applicant regarding the adequacy
and effectiveness of the proposal to address the provisions of this article.
The director of utilities may retain the services of an independent
professional to perform this evaluation. The City of Moline may assess a fee to
be charged to the applicant for this evaluation service as set forth in this
article.
      b.   Conduct onsite inspections during the active construction phases of
development projects to determine whether site development is in compliance
with the approved grading and drainage plans, and determine any adjustments
needed to the approved plans. After construction has been completed, determine
whether permanent site stabilization has been achieved and identify operation
and maintenance needs.
      c.   Prepare correspondence as needed regarding the effectiveness (or
corrective measures needed) or adequacy of soil erosion and sediment control
measures.
      d.   Consult with land developers, consultants, and contractors
concerning the design criteria, installation and maintenance procedures and
other information regarding BMPs recommended under the provisions of this
article.
      e.   After review of the application and required submissions, the
director of utilities shall either:
         (i)   Approve the drainage permit;
         (ii)   Approve the drainage permit subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
article, and issue an approval subject to these conditions; or
         (iii)   Deny the drainage permit, indicating the deficiencies and the
procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
   (2)   No approval for a drainage permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless one or more of the following conditions apply:
      a.   Land use regulations that apply to the development have been
approved by the City of Moline where applicable;
      b.   Such permit is accompanied by, or combined with, a valid building
and/or grading/filling permit issued by the building official;
      c.   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the director of utilities for the
area in which the site is situated;
      d.   All relevant federal, state, and local permits have been obtained by
the applicant; or
      e.   Applicant is successful in the appeals process where applicable.
   (3)   Amendments to stormwater drainage plans shall be submitted to the
director of utilities and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the
same manner as the original plans.
   (g)   Other Agency Permits.
   (1)   The director of utilities shall not issue a drainage permit unless all
required federal, state, and drainage district permits have been obtained by
the applicant and copies thereof reviewed by the director of utilities. The
acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
The granting of a drainage permit under these regulations shall in no way
affect the owner's responsibility to obtain the approval required by any other
statute, article, or code, or to meet the requirements of other City of Moline
ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to: building permits;
grading and filling permits; Section 404 of the Clean Waters Act; Section 106
of the National Historic Preservation Act; Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors
Act; or permitting required by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
Office of Water Resources in accordance with the Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act,
615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.; the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Act, 70 ILCS
405/1 et seq.; the Farmland Preservation Act, 505 ILCS 75/1 et seq.; the
Illinois Groundwater Protection Act, 415 ILCS 55/1 et seq.; and the NPDES and
Section 401 of the Clean Water Act through the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control; and the Threatened and
Endangered Species Act, 16 USC 1531 et seq.
   (2)   Any work involving the construction, modification, or removal of a dam
as defined herein, per 92 Ill. Adm. Code 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams),
shall require an IDNR/OWR Dam Safety Permit prior to permit being issued by the
City of Moline. Any development involving work in waters of the United States,
including wetlands and streams, as identified and regulated by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, shall require permits or sign-offs from the corps prior to
the issuance of a City of Moline permit.
   (h)   Permit Limitations.
   (1)   The issuance of a drainage permit shall constitute an authorization to
do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the
permit or on the plans and specifications approved by the director of
utilities.
   (2)   The issuance of a permit or the approval of drawings and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, nor an approval of,
any violation of, or deviation from, the provision of these regulations or any
other article, law, rule, or regulation.
   (3)   The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications,
shall not prevent the director of utilities from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said drawings and specifications or from stopping
unlawful construction operations being carried on thereunder.
   (4)   The drainage permit shall be valid until the completion date noted in
the permit. The director of utilities may grant an extension if relevant design
and construction standards have not changed and if in the director of
utilities’ opinion, the work approved under the permit does not unduly
adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. In all
other circumstances, a new permit shall be acquired before work is started or
continued. The director of utilities may require modification of the SWPPP to
prevent any increase in erosion or off-site sediment runoff resulting from any
extension.
   (i)   Liability.
   (1)   Nothing in this article is intended to relieve the applicant for a
drainage permit of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law nor shall liability for any such damage be placed in any manner
upon the City.
   (2)   The City of Moline, its employees, officers, or agents, will not be
made liable for any damage, by (1) the issuance of a drainage permit under this
article, (2) compliance with the provisions of that drainage permit or
conditions attached to it by the director of utilities, (3) failure of the City
of Moline to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, (4)
failure of the City of Moline officials to recommend denial or to deny a
drainage permit, or (5) exemptions from drainage permit requirements of this
article.
   (3)   The City of Moline will maintain those drainage facilities that are on
public land, public rights-of-way, and easements, and have been dedicated and
accepted for maintenance or stipulated by agreement for maintenance by the City
of Moline. All other drainage facilities, when located on other than public
property, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which
they exist or the owner of the drainage facility, regardless of whether or not
dedicated easements exist over said facilities and the City shall have no
responsibility or liability therefore.
   The responsible party shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances)
which are installed to achieve compliance with conditions of this permit.
Proper operation and maintenance includes effective performance, adequate
funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and appropriate quality
assurance procedures. Abandonment and alteration, either structural or
operational, of all facilities and systems shall occur only following
application and issuance of a permit.
   (k)   Retention of Plans. Plans, specifications, and reports for all site
developments shall be retained by the director of utilities as required by
Illinois Statute by law.
(Ord. No. 3007-2022; Sec. 34-4201 amended; 5/24/22)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4201 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4202.   CLASS 2 PROJECTS – HYDROLOGIC
   (a)   Reference Standards. Design standards for hydrologic design shall
comply with these regulations and with the applicable provisions of the IDOT
drainage and design manuals. Where the IDOT drainage and design manuals do not
detail requirements, the Illinois Urban Manual, latest edition, shall be used.
Where this article imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by the IDOT
drainage and design manuals or those required by other provisions of law or
article, the provisions of this article shall prevail.
   (b)   Release Rates. The drainage system for new developments or
redevelopments shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the
total property under development for the two year, 24-hour, ten year, 24-hour,
and one hundred year, 24-hour events (three (3) recurrence interval events to
consider) to pre-project levels which will not cause an increase in flooding or
channel instability downstream when considered in aggregate with other
developed properties and downstream drainage capacities. Where a detailed
hydrologic or hydraulic model exists, release rates shall be established and
incorporated as part of this article.
   (c)   Drainage System Design and Evaluation. The following criteria should
be used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The design will
provide capacity to pass the ten (10) year, 24 hour peak flow in the minor
drainage system and an overload flow path (major drainage system) for flows in
excess of the design capacity. Whenever practicable, the stormwater systems
shall not result in the inter-basin transfer of drainage unless no other
alternative exists.
   The design rainfall recurrence interval shall be set by the design
application as follows:
      Detention   100 year event
      Emergency Overflow Routing    100 year event
      Bridges   100 year event
      Roadway Underpasses   50 year event
      Swales, Ditches, and Culverts   25 year event
      Storm Sewers   10 year event
   (d)   Design Methodologies. An applicable hydrologic design method may be
selected from the IDOT drainage manual with the following modifications and
clarifications. Minor conveyance systems for areas up to 100 acres, and Major
conveyance systems for up to 10 acres may be designed using the Rational
Formula. Design runoff rates may be calculated using a continuous simulation
model or by event hydrographic methods. If event hydrographic methods are used
they must be HEC-HMS, HEC-1, SCS TR20, or SCS TR55, XP-SWMM. Event methods must
incorporate the following assumptions:
   (1)   Antecedent moisture condition 2 (normal moisture); and
   (2)   Huff or SCS type 2 distribution.
   For design events the Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70 (Northwest)
rainfall data must be used. Storage volumes for detention must be 24 hour
events. Stormwater conveyance capacities must be designed for the critical
duration creating the highest peak. The following table lists data from
Bulletin 70.
Frequency Distributions (in inches) for Zone 1
Illinois State Water Survey, Bulletin 70
         Frequency
Duration 2-month 6-month 1-year 2- year 5- year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-
         event   event   event  event   event   event   event   event   year
                                                                        event
         Frequency
Duration 2-month 6-month 1-year 2- year 5- year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-
         event   event   event  event   event   event   event   event   year
                                                                        event
48 hr    1.47    2.24    2.80   3.42    4.28    4.96    6.07    7.02    8.07
24 hr    1.40    2.08    2.57   3.11    3.95    4.63    5.60    6.53    7.36
18 hr    1.30    1.92    2.37   2.86    3.63    4.26    5.15    6.01    6.92
12 hr    1.23    1.81    2.24   2.71    3.43    4.03    4.88    5.66    6.51
6 hr     1.06    1.56    1.93   2.33    2.96    3.48    4.20    4.90    5.69
2 hr     0.84    1.23    1.52   1.83    2.33    2.74    3.31    3.86    4.47
1 hr     0.67    0.98    1.21   1.46    1.86    2.18    2.63    3.07    3.51
30 min   0.52    0.77    0.95   1.15    1.46    1.71    2.07    2.42    2.77
15 min   0.38    0.57    0.70   0.84    1.07    1.25    1.51    1.76    1.99
5 min    0.17    0.25    0.31   0.37    0.47    0.56    0.67    0.78    0.89
 
   (e)   Positive Drainage. All developments must be provided an overland flow
path that will pass the one hundred (100) year event, 24 hour flow within
designated drainage easements or the public right-of-way with a freeboard of at
least one (1) foot. Overland flow paths shall be provided drainage easements
unless the flow is contained in the public right-of-way.
   (f)   Culvert, Road and Driveway Crossings. Sizing of culvert crossings
shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the
culvert.
   (g)   Vegetated Filter Strips and Swales. To effectively filter stormwater
pollutants and promote infiltration of runoff, sites should be designed to
maximize the use of vegetated filter strips and swales, and shall be designed
to follow criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual. Whenever practicable, runoff
from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter strips and swales
comprised of native grasses and forbs before being routed to a storm sewer or
detention basin.
   (h)   Maintenance Considerations. The stormwater drainage system shall be
designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Use of native vegetation is
strongly encouraged to reduce maintenance, increase wildlife habitat, and to
provide other benefits. Where nonnative vegetation is used, turfed side slopes
shall be designed to allow lawn-mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet
basins shall be provided with alternate outfalls, which can be used to
completely drain the pool for sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if
drainage by gravity is not feasible. Pre-sedimentation basins shall be
included, where feasible, for localizing sediment deposit and removal. Site
access for heavy equipment shall be provided. A stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) for the ongoing maintenance of all stormwater management system
components including wetlands is required prior to plan approval. The plan
shall include:
   (1)   Maintenance tasks;
   (2)   The party responsible for performing the maintenance task;
   (3)   A description of all permanent public or private access maintenance
easements and overland flow paths, and compensatory storage areas; and
   (4)   A description of dedicated sources of funding for the required
maintenance.
   (i)   Provisions for Agricultural Drainage. Upon development of an area
serviced by agricultural drainage, the following shall apply:
   (1)   Existing easements for any agricultural drainage systems located
underneath areas that will be developed shall be preserved. If no such easement
exists, an easement shall be dedicated for access and maintenance as provided
for in this article.
   (2)   All agricultural drainage systems that serve upstream areas outside of
the development and that are located underneath areas that will be developed
shall be replaced with non-perforated conduit to prevent root blockage,
provided, however, that the existing drainage district system may remain in
place with the approval of the appropriate entity.
   (3)   Agricultural drainage systems that, due to development, will be
located underneath streets, driveways, and other paved areas as allowed by this
article, shall be replaced with conduits meeting the City of Moline standard
specifications, as needed to prevent the collapse of the agricultural drainage
conduit.
   (4)   Agricultural drainage systems may be relocated within the development
area upon the approval of the director of utilities. Such relocation shall
maintain sufficient slope and capacity to prevent sedimentation and to prevent
an increase in scouring or structural damage to the conduit. Such relocation
shall only be with the consent and approval of the appropriate entity
responsible for the system.   
   (j)   Waterway Modifications. Waterway modification is acceptable if the
purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality. If the
proposed development activity involves a waterway modification, it must be
demonstrated that:
   (1)   Water quality and other natural functions would be significantly
improved by the modification or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an
equivalent degree of natural resource values,
   (2)   The activity has been planned and designed, and will be constructed in
a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the
stream or body of water affected, and
   (3)   All appropriate permits have been obtained by the permittee from all
other governmental entities.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4202 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4203.   DETENTION SYSTEM CRITERIA.
   (a)   Referenced Standards. Design standards for detention basin design and
construction shall comply with the provisions of the following, unless
otherwise stated by this article:
   (1)   IL Urban Manual, latest edition
   (2)   IDOT Standard Specifications, latest edition
   (3)   IDOT Drainage Manual, latest edition
   (4)   IL Department of Natural Resources Dam Safety Regulations
   (5)   Clean Water Act (discharges regulated by the United States EPA through
NPDES Permits)
   (6)   City of Moline Standard Details and Specifications
   (7)   City of Moline Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances
   (b)   Detention Storage Requirements. The design storage to be provided in
the detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the runoff difference
before and after development from the one hundred (100) year, 24 hour event.
All detention basin storage shall be computed using hydrograph methods
utilizing reservoir routing (also called modified puls or level pool) or
equivalent method as described by this article.
   (c)   Waiver of Requirements.
   (1)   The requirement for stormwater detention and release rate does not
apply when:
   (a)   The development is in accord with the approved site plan and is on a
lot in a new subdivision for which detention is otherwise provided; or
   (b)   The development is on a lot or parcel in a subdivision for which
detention was provided and approved prior to the effective date of these
regulations.
   (2)   The requirement for stormwater detention and release rates may be
waived by the director of utilities when he/she determines it is in the best
interest of the City of Moline to require a fee in lieu of detention as
described in Section
34-4203(o).
   (3)   The requirement for stormwater detention and release rates for a
proposed development may be waived by the utilities director when such
detention or compensatory storage is installed by the developer in accordance
with the provisions of this article at another location within the watershed,
approved by the utilities director.
   (d)   Ownership. Detention basins are owned by the property owner (or a
homeowner's association) unless otherwise described by this article or
indicated by the director of utilities. Property developers shall contact the
director of utilities to inquire about the ownership and maintenance
responsibility of existing regional detention basins which may affect the
development.
   (e)   Maintenance and Repair Responsibilities.
   (1)   Director of engineering approved detention ponds and associated inflow
and outflow systems are maintained by the property owner absent any specific
legal agreement to the contrary.
   (2)   Maintenance agreements may be required at the option of the director
of utilities to define parties responsible for the maintenance of commercial
detention basins.
   (3)   For all detention basins existing in the City of Moline on the date of
adoption of this article as well as detention basins constructed after the
effective date, the detention basin owner and city staff shall be responsible
for the following items:
      a.   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the
checklist, shall be submitted to the director of utilities. This report shall
be conducted by city staff.
      b.   At the request of city staff, the basin shall be inspected by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Illinois. A report on this
inspection shall be submitted to the director of utilities within sixty (60)
days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the
checklist items in the attached checklist.
      c.   Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of their
maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to the
party with active maintenance responsibility.
   (f)   General Basin Design Requirements.
   (1)   Erosion Control.  Temporary and permanent erosion control shall be
required for all detention basins in accordance with this article.
   (2)   Verification and Final Approval.
      a.   Erosion protection shall be inspected by the director of utilities
throughout the subdivision project duration, as determined by the director of
utilities.
      b.   Detention basin storage volume shall be verified to the satisfaction
of the director of engineering through as-built surveys or other means.
      c.   Inflow, outflow, and emergency overflow elevations shall be verified
through as-built surveys.
      d.   Final vegetative cover and permanent erosion control shall be
inspected for completeness of cover.
      e.   The basin will receive final approval from the director of utilities
upon fulfillment of b, c, and d above, and the anniversary date of maintenance
and repair reporting will be recorded as such in the office of the director of
utilities.
      f.   All basins must receive final approval of the director of utilities
within ninety (90) days of substantial completion as determined by the director
of utilities of any of the following:
         1.   The first phase (as shown on approved plans) of construction of
public utilities and roadways in any approved Subdivision project. Detention
structures for the ultimate development area must be constructed during the
first phase of the project, and approved at its completion. The detention
structures must then be maintained and repaired in conformance with this
article, during any future construction phases.
         2.   Parking areas, floor slabs and/or other impervious areas (as
shown on approved plans, and not including sidewalks) for work on an individual
lot requiring an individual permit under this article.
         3.   Mass earthwork or rough grading, if no other phased construction
is scheduled to be started within one hundred eighty (180) days.
      g.   Failure to receive final approval as required will be considered a
violation of this article.
   (3)   Infiltration Practices. To effectively reduce runoff volumes,
infiltration practices including basins, trenches, and porous pavement shall
follow criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual. An appropriate sediment control
device shall be provided to remove coarse sediment from stormwater flows before
they reach infiltration basins or trenches. Stormwater shall not be allowed to
stand more than seventy-two hours over eighty percent of the dry basin's bottom
area for the maximum design event. The bottom of infiltration basins or
trenches shall be a minimum of three feet above the seasonally high groundwater
and bedrock level if practicable. Engineering calculations demonstrating
infiltration rates shall be included with the application.
   (4)   Side Slopes. The side slopes of all detention basins at one hundred
(100) year event, 24 hour capacity should be as level as practicable to prevent
accidental falls into the basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side
slopes of detention basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three
(3) to one (1) (horizontal to vertical) – provided, however, that certain types
of basins have different requirements as defined by this Article. Detention
basin side slopes above normal pool shall be designed with permanent erosion
protection consisting of grass, non-grass vegetation, or other similar
permanent finish. At least six (6) inches of topsoil must be provided on side
slopes above normal pool elevation whenever non-structural, permanent erosion
control is not being used. Permanent erosion protection shall be aesthetically
suitable to the development or existing surrounding land use.
   (5)   Overflow Structures. All stormwater detention basins shall be provided
with an overflow structure capable of safely passing the 100 year, 24 hour
inflow at a stage at least one foot below the lowest foundation grade in the
vicinity of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure
shall be equivalent to the one hundred (100) year event, 24 hour inflow rate.
Weirs, dams, and specialized outflows shall be designed by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois.
   (6)   Detention Basin Outlet Design.
   (a)   Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system
shall be reviewed and approved by the director of engineering upon developer's
design of the outlet.
   (b)   Minimum detention outlet size. Where a single pipe outlet or orifice
plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of
twelve (12) inches. If design release rates call for smaller outlets, a design
that minimizes the possibility of clogging shall be used.
   (7)   Other Design Requirements.
   (a)   “Bubble up” outlets are prohibited.
   (b)   Pumped outlets and other active control structures are discouraged and
must be pre-approved in writing, prior to installation, on a case-by-case basis
by the director of engineering.
   (c)   Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure a
full stand of cover vegetation in minimum time.
   (8)   Location Requirements.
   (a)   In subdivisions, detention basins and their one hundred (100) year
design high water shall be contained within platted lots dedicated for drainage
purposes. In redevelopments, detention basins and their one hundred (100) year
design high water shall be contained within a drainage easement.
   (b)   Detention basin lots shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of
frontage on a right-of-way for the purpose of providing unrestricted access for
maintenance. Exceptions may be made for infill development.
   (c)   A twenty (20) feet minimum setback shall be required from all property
lines to the normal pool elevation which is considered to be the elevation of
the water level at the permanent depth of the wet basin pool rather than the
temporary depth during drainage events.
   (d)   Detention basins shall be provided with a minimum of one (1) foot of
freeboard above the one hundred (100) year design water elevation.
   (e)   There shall be at least two (2) feet of freeboard between the one
hundred (100) year design water elevation and all boundaries of the parcel or
easement containing the basin.
   (9)   Accommodating Flows from Upstream Tributary Areas. Stormwater runoff
from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design of the
property's drainage system. Flows from neighboring properties may be bypassed
from the onsite detention system of the site being developed.
   (10)   Upstream Areas Meeting Article Requirements. When there are areas
which meet the storage and release rate requirements of this article, tributary
to the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed around the
applicant's detention basin if this is the only practicable alternative as
determined by the director of engineering. Storage needed for the applicant's
property shall be computed as described in this article. However, if the City
of Moline decides to route tributary area flows through an applicant's basin,
the final design stormwater releases shall be based on the combined total of
the applicant's property plus tributary areas. It must be shown that at no time
will the runoff rate from the applicant's property exceed the allowable release
rate for applicant's property alone.
   (11)   Early Completion of Detention Facilities. Where detention or
retention are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they
shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any
eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant
on a regular basis and before project completion in order to maintain the
design volume of the facilities.
   (g)   Wet Detention Basin Design. Wet detention basins shall be designed to
remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and, as
much as feasible, to be available for recreational use.
   (1)   Wet Basin Depths. Wet basins shall be at least three feet deep,
excluding near-shore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided
they shall be no less than ten (10) feet deep over twenty-five (25%) percent of
the bottom area to prevent winterkill.
   (2)   Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes. The side slopes of wet basins at the
normal pool elevation shall not be steeper than five to one (5 to 1) horizontal
to vertical. It is recommended that native aquatic vegetation be established
around the perimeter to provide protection from shoreline erosion. Slopes below
a depth of 8 feet are permitted to be two to one, in accordance with IDOT
Standard Specifications Section 204.
   (3)   Permanent Pool Volume. The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at
normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the two
(2) year, twenty-four (24) hour event at a minimum.
   (4)   Wet Basin Inlet and Outlet Orientation. The distance between detention
inlets and outlets shall be maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite
ends of the basin providing that the orientation does not create undue hardship
based on topography or other natural constraints. Designers are encouraged to
use baffles or berms in the basin bottom to prevent short-circuiting. There
shall be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. The minimum flow
length shall be ten (10) feet with a recommended minimum ratio of two to one
(2:1) for width.
   (5)   Safety Ledge. All wet detention basins shall have a level safety ledge
at least four feet in width two and one-half to three (2.5 to 3) feet below the
normal water depth.
   (6)   Aeration. Wet bottom basins shall have a natural or artificial means
of aeration.
   (7)   Dewatering. An outlet structure shall be provided to allow dewatering
of the pond for maintenance. Gravity dewatering is strongly preferred.
   (8)   Soil Permeability. Wet bottom basin design shall include an evaluation
of soil permeability. A basin liner shall be included in the design if needed
to ensure water retention to normal pool elevation.
   (9)   Detention/Sedimentation. It is encouraged that consideration of
routing runoff from the development through a stilling basin be considered.
   (h)   Dry Detention Basin Designs. In addition to the other requirements of
this article, dry basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to
be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be available
for multiple uses.
   (1)   Dry Basin Drainage. Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty
percent (80%) of their bottom area shall have standing water no longer than
seventy-two (72) hours for any runoff event less than the one hundred (100)
year, twenty-four (24) hour event. Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the
wet portion of the basin bottom. Underdrains directed to the outlet may be used
to accomplish this requirement.
   (2)   Minimum Bottom Slope. Dry bottom basins shall have two percent (2%)
minimum bottom slopes or underdrain systems as approved by the director of
engineering.
   (3)   Low Flow Channel. Dry bottom basins may include a low flow channel
with some form of erosion protection.
   (4)   Velocity Dissipation. Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize resuspension of pollutants.
   (5)   Dry Basin Inlet and Outlet Orientation. Dry basin inlet and outlet
orientation shall be the same as for wet basins.
   (6)   Temporary Sediment Trap. A sediment trap shall be constructed at each
major inlet to a dry basin during construction. The temporary sediment trap
should be designed in accordance with criteria in the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (i)   Detention on Prime Farmland. The placement of detention basins shall
avoid the utilization of prime farmland. All detention basin construction shall
examine potential impacts to adjacent agricultural land and shall address
measures that will be implemented to eliminate such impacts and comply with
other relevant permitting.
   (j)   Detention in Flood Plains. The placement of detention basins within
the flood plain is strongly discouraged because of questions about the reliable
operation of such basins during flood events. However, the stormwater detention
requirements of this article may be fulfilled by providing detention storage
within flood fringe areas on the project site, provided the following
provisions are met as well as all required state, federal, and local permits.
   (1)   Detention in Flood Fringe Areas. The placement of a detention basin in
a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the volume
below the base flood elevation occupied by the detention basin, including any
berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall be controlled
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall
demonstrate its operation for all stream-flow and floodplain backwater
conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses shall be
opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All floodplain storage
lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the
existing ten-year elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing
ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the existing ten-year flood
elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.
   (2)   Detention in Floodways. Detention basins shall be placed in the flood
way only in accordance with this article.
   (3)   On-stream Detention. On-stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this article with respect to water quality and control of the 5
year and 100 year, 24 hour events from the property. The volume of detention
shall be provided in addition to the existing stream flood way storage. Further
criteria are presented in this article. If on-stream detention is used in
watersheds larger than one square mile, the applicant will use hydrographic
modeling to demonstrate that the design will not increase the water level for
any properties upstream or downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the
stream as part of on-stream detention:
      a.   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which
require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
      b.   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or
stream aquatic habitat;
      c.   Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes, appropriate
bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin;
      d.   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands without approval/permitting from all other appropriate governmental
entities;
      e.   Shall require the implementation of an effective non-point source
management program throughout the upstream watershed which shall include at
minimum, runoff reduction BMP's.
      f.   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge;
      g.   Shall not contribute to the duration or flood frequency of any
adjacent land.
   (k)   Drainage into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds. Wetlands,
rivers, streams, lakes, and ponds shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated
with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of this article,
the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose drainage
flows into wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds:
   (1)   Detention in Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, or Ponds. Existing
wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds shall not be modified for the
purposes of stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the proposed
modifications will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform
beneficial functions and complies in all other respects with other relevant
permitting. Existing storage and release rate characteristics of wetlands,
rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds shall be maintained and the volume of
detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
   (2)   Sediment Control. The existing wetlands, rivers, lakes, or ponds shall
be protected during construction and as further regulated in this chapter.
   (3)   Alteration of Drainage Patterns. Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes, or ponds. Drainage patterns shall not be
altered by development to direct runoff offsite to other than natural drainage
outlets existing prior to development.
   (4)   Detention/Sedimentation. All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture
the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour event and hold it for at least twenty-
four (24) hours, before being discharged to the basin. This basin shall be
constructed before property grading begins and shall be maintained throughout
the construction process.
   (5)   Vegetated Buffer Strip. A buffer strip of at least twenty-five (25)
feet in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of a wetland, river, stream, lake,
or pond.
   (l)   Street Detention. If streets are to be used as part of the minor or
major drainage system, ponding depths shall follow the criteria below:
   (1)   Principal and Minor Arterials
   (a)   Flow from a ten (10) year storm shall not inundate the center twenty
(20) feet of the pavement.
   (b)   Flow from a fifty (50) year storm shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (2)   Collector Streets
   (a)   Flow from a ten (10) year storm shall not inundate the center ten (10)
feet of the pavement.
   (b)   Flow from a fifty (50) year storm shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (3)   Local Streets
   (a)   Flow from a ten (10) year storm shall not top the curb.
   (b)   Flow from a fifty (50) year storm shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (m)   Parking Lot Detention. The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any
parking area shall not exceed six (6) inches.
   (n)   Rooftop Detention. Rooftop storage of excess stormwater shall be
designed and constructed to meet with the City of Moline building code.
   (o)   Fee in Lieu of Detention.
   (1)   For the purpose of satisfying the requirements for stormwater
detention or compensatory storage for a development or redevelopment on a
property for which detention or compensatory storage was not previously
provided, a fee in lieu of detention or compensatory storage may be assessed
against the development prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be
calculated to establish the property's fair share of costs to provide detention
or compensatory storage for the watershed or drainage basin in which the
property exists. The cost figures used for detention shall be actual costs for
detention or compensatory storage being provided by contract or estimated costs
for planned detention or compensatory storage facilities approved by the
director of utilities. All revenues received through such fees shall be used
for no purpose other than defraying public costs associated with providing
detention or compensatory storage facilities.
   (2)   The City of Moline also may require a fee for each acre-foot of
detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on site, provided
the property will discharge stormwater into existing or proposed detention
facilities with added capacity for the additional runoff.
   (p)   Cooperative Detention. The City of Moline will review and, if approved
by the director of engineering, permit joint detention facilities developed
through cooperative efforts that comply with all requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 3007-2022; Sec. 34-4203 amended; 5/24/22)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4203 amended; 10/4/22)
(Ord. No. 3043-2023; Sec. 34-4203(c)(3) added; 10/24/23)
SEC. 34-4204.   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP); IN GENERAL.
   (a)   General.
   (1)   The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property
area unless the applicable plans specifically exclude certain areas from
disturbance.
   (2)   The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWPPP and
notification of all contractors and utility agencies on the site.
   (3)   SWPPP must be provided for all phases of development, including
sanitary sewer construction, storm drainage system construction, waterline,
street and sidewalk construction, general grading, and the construction of
individual homes. The Class 2 drainage permit holder will not be required to
provide an SWPPP for the activities of utility agencies.
   (4)   The regulations for construction or post-construction management will
be used for all regulated construction sites that are contained in the most
recent edition of the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (5)   The City of Moline will use the Illinois Department of Transportation
(IDOT) system of compliance that is outlined in the Bureau of Design and
Environment (BDE) design manual.
   (6)   The subsequent owners of individual lots in a subdivision with an
approved SWPPP bears the responsibility for continued implementation of the
approved SWPPP for all construction activity within or related to the
individual lot, excluding construction managed by utility agencies.
   (b)   Requirements For Utility Construction.
   (1)   Utility agencies shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this article.
   (2)   Utility agencies shall develop and implement BMPs to prevent the
discharge of pollutants on any site of utility construction within the City of
Moline. Disturbed areas shall be minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and
construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking.
Sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately by the
utility agency.
   (3)   Prior to entering a construction site, utility agencies shall obtain a
copy of any SWPPP’s for the project from the owner. Any disturbance to BMPs
resulting from utility construction shall be repaired immediately by the
utility agencies in compliance with the SWPPP.
   (c)   Required Documentation. A Class 2 drainage permit requires the
execution and record maintenance of the following forms and reports (see also
the erosion control plan action matrix, NPDES action matrix - IDOT). The most
current version of the standard forms from IDOT and the IEPA shall be used. The
approved project erosion control documents shall be kept on file at the
construction site or at a nearby field office and must be made available to the
general public upon request.
   (1)   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) using the IDOT SWPPP
Template (form BDE 2342).
   (2)   A Contractor Certification Statement (CCS) prepared prior to the start
of construction by the contractor responsible for erosion control using the
IDOT CCS template (form BDE 2342a). The drainage permit holder shall provide
the contractor responsible for erosion control with a copy of the IEPA NPDES
statewide permit ILR10.
   (3)   A Notice of Intent (NOI) shall be filed at least 48 hours prior to the
start of construction and shall be prepared by the drainage permit holder (the
original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy to the
director of utilities, and a copy kept in the project erosion control file).
Use the IDOT NOI template (Found in forms section of the IDOT construction
manual WPC 623).
   (4)   A NPDES / Erosion Control Inspection Report (ECIR) shall be prepared
by the drainage permit holder on a weekly basis and after any 1/2-inch rainfall
(to be kept in project erosion control file). Use current IDOT ECIR template
(BC 2259).
   (5)   An Incidence of Non-Compliance (ION) and corrective action shall be
filed by the drainage permit holder within five (5) working days of the
incident (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy
to the director of utilities and a copy kept in the project erosion control
file). Use current IDOT ION template (found in forms section of the IDOT
construction manual WPC 624).
   (6)   A Notice of Termination (NOT) shall be filed upon final stabilization
of erosion (minimum 70% viable vegetative growth) by the drainage permit holder
(the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal copy to the
director of utilities and a copy kept in the project erosion-control file). Use
current IDOT NOT template V (found in forms section of the IDOT construction
manual WPC 621).
   (d)   Applicability and Guidelines.
   (1)   It is the responsibility of the drainage permit holder to prepare and
maintain documentation to meet the NPDES permit requirements for private
grading and construction projects.
   (2)   The director of utilities shall be given immediate access to all
required project NPDES documents.
   (3)   All notices sent to the IEPA shall be copied to the director of
utilities.
   (e)   Referenced Standards. Design standards for erosion and sediment
control shall comply with the most current provisions of the USEPA regulations,
IEPA regulations, IDOT erosion control / NPDES guidelines and per the “Illinois
Urban Manual,” prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service unless otherwise stated by this article.
   (f)   General Erosion And Sediment Control Design Features.  The following
principles shall apply to all construction taken under the authorization of a
Class 2 drainage permit.
   (1)   New development or redevelopment shall be designed to create the least
potential for erosion. The disturbance of slopes greater than seven percent
(7%) should be avoided wherever possible. Natural contours should be followed
as closely as possible.
   (2)   Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands
are to be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of
watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures.
   (3)   Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond
or wetland. Preventive measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas to
erosion and sedimentation.
   (4)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   (5)   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior to
site clearing and grading, and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
   (6)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance must be reviewed and approved by
the director of utilities.
   (7)   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant
velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on-site or
downstream.
   (8)   Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional
as soon as practical during development. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized
with approved permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days following the
end of active disturbance or redisturbance.
   (9)   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
   (10)   All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be
properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   (11)   All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
   (12)   All temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be
maintained to function as intended until the contributing drainage area has
been permanently stabilized at which time they shall be removed within thirty
(30) days after final site stabilization.
   (g)   Materials and Construction Notes.
   (1)   Silt fence and coconut fiber shall be installed in accordance with the
material and construction requirements of the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (2)   Erosion control blankets, bales, seeding, and rip rap shall be
installed in accordance with material and construction requirements of the
Illinois Urban Manual, latest edition.
   (h)   Testing and Inspection. For testing and inspection purposes, the
residents weekly NPDES / erosion control inspection report BC 2259 from the
IDOT construction manual must be followed.
   (i)   Drainage Plan Requirements. A drainage plan shall be submitted showing
all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this article throughout all
phases of construction. The development of a drainage plan shall follow the
requirements of this article and the procedures in the latest edition of the
Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control which is hereby incorporated into this article by reference in haec
verba. Standards and specifications for BMPs shall follow the requirements of
this article and the criteria in the latest edition of the Illinois Urban
Manual which is hereby incorporated into this article by reference. The
director of utilities may waive specific requirements for the content of
submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show
that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this article.
Permanent soil erosion and sediment control features needed at the completion
of any development site shall be included in the submittal.
   The submitted drainage plan shall include:
   (1)   Mapping and Descriptions. The existing and proposed erosion and
sediment control features of the property and immediate vicinity including:
      a.   Items as required for the drainage plan submittal;
      b.   Location of the slope disturbance line;
      c.   Location and description of the soil erosion and sediment control
measures to be employed during construction;
      d.   For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of the
slope disturbance line, the map shall include the limits of disturbance
including: tree removal, soil erosion and sediment control measures during
construction, details of method(s) proposed for providing slope stability,
permanent stormwater control measures, and permanent erosion and sediment
control measures all being certified by a registered professional engineer or a
"Certified Professional Erosion Control Specialist;"
      e.   The predominant soil types on the site, their location, and their
limitations for the proposed use as defined by the USDA NRCS;
      f.   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and specifics of sediment basins and traps, including
outlet details;
      g.   Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion
control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation (type and extent of tillage, weed control, planting
equipment, etc.), expected seeding dates, type, method and rate of lime and
fertilizer application (soil fertility testing required), kind and quantity of
mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures, and
types of non-vegetative stabilization measures; and
      h.   Location and description of all runoff control measures, including
diversions, waterways, and outlets.
   (2)   Larger sites, at the discretion of the director of utilities, and
those requiring a SWPPP, may also require the following:
   (a)   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment
off-site including construction entrance details, as appropriate;
   (b)   Description of dust and traffic control measures;
   (c)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and
frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of maintenance;
   (d)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or
entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of soil erosion
control structures and measures during development and after development is
completed.
   (j)   Site Development Requirements. On-site sediment control measures, as
specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed as specified in the
referenced handbooks, and functional prior to initiating clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating, or fill activities on the site.
   (1)   For new developments or re-developments of more than one (1) acre but
less than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall
be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area.
   (2)   For new developments or re-developments of one (1) acre or more, a
sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the down
slope point of the disturbed area.
   (3)   Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both "dry"
detention and "wet" detention sediment storage. The detention storage shall be
composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and “dry” detention
storage and each shall be sized as regulated in this article. The release rate
of the basin shall be that rate as regulated in this article. The elevation of
the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage.
   (4)   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment
load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one year.
For construction periods exceeding one year, the 1-year sediment load and a
sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
   (5)   To the extent possible, or as otherwise regulated in this article, all
desirable trees eight (8) inches in diameter and larger shall be protected for
their present and future value for erosion protection and other environmental
benefits. Trees that have been selected for preservation shall be protected
following criteria from IL Urban Manual prior to the beginning of any clearing,
grading, stripping, excavation, or filling of the site. A "No Construction
Zone” shall be established and marked at the perimeter of the dripline of each
tree which is to be preserved.
   (6)   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed as regulated in this Article. All constructed or modified channels
shall be stabilized within forty-eight (48) hours, consistent with the
following standards and as required in the referenced handbooks:
      a.   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
      b.   For grades of four to eight percent (4-8%), sod or an equivalent
control measure shall be applied in the channel.
      c.   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied over filter fabric or other type of
soil protection, or the grade shall be effectively reduced using drop
structures.
   (7)   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where
possible, or as regulated by this article. If disturbance activities are
unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
      a.   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the
maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of non-erosive material, such as
riprap or gravel.
   b.   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a
minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized
within 48 hours after channel disturbance is completed, interru   pted, or
stopped.
      c.   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be
constructed under dry conditions and fully stabilized before flow is diverted,
incorporating meanders, pool and riffle sequence, and riparian planting.
   (8)   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps
or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
   (9)   Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than
fifty (50) feet to a roadway, drainage channel, or abandoned mine. Filter
barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be
installed immediately surrounding the perimeter of the pile.
   (10)   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent and shall not be
deposited into an abandoned mine.
   (11)   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access
drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a
public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled
sediment disposal area.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4204 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4205.   MODIFICATIONS TO SWPPP APPROVALS.
   A BMP plan approval issued under this article may be modified in order to
comply with any federal, state or local law, regulation, order or standard, or
when, in the opinion of the director of utilities, a modification is necessary
to accurately control changes in the character or amount of pollutants or the
characteristics of stormwater discharged into the municipal separate storm
sewer system, or any other applicable condition. A holder shall be given a
thirty (30) day notice of the impending modification. Deadlines for compliance
with the modified requirements shall be determined on a case-specific basis.
   Amendments to stormwater drainage and detention, or drainage plans, shall be
submitted to the director of utilities and shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as the original plans.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4205 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4206.   GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF A SWPPP APPROVAL.
   The director of utilities may revoke a permit:
   (1)   Where there has been any false or inaccurate statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit was based; or
   (2)   When work is performed contrary to the provisions of the application
or plans on which the permit is based.
   When a permit is revoked, the director of utilities shall inform the
permittee, in writing, of the specific steps the permittee must take in order
to have the permit reissued or otherwise reinstated. It shall be unlawful to
continue any work authorized by a permit after revocation of that permit until
that permit is reissued or until a new permit is issued.
   In cases where the permittee wishes to appeal the decision of the director
of utilities, the appeal process outlined in Section
34-4300 will be followed. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the director of utilities certifies to the
stormwater board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4206 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4207.   NONCOMPLIANCE WITH TERMS OR CONDITIONS OF A SWPPP PLAN APPROVAL
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to refuse or fail to comply with the terms or
conditions of a BMP plan approval issued under this article. Punishment for
violation of this article shall be as set forth herein.
SEC. 34-4208.   PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION AND TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information to
the director of utilities or anyone working under the director of utilities’
supervision when such person knows or has reason to know that the information
provided is false, whether such information is required by this article, any
BMP Plan approval granted under this article, or any inspection, record keeping
or monitoring requirement carried out or imposed under this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify, tamper with, or
knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
article or a BMP plan approval issued hereunder.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4208 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 3. STORMWATER BOARD OF APPEALS; VARIANCES; APPEALS OF PLANS OR
PERMITS.
SEC. 34-4300.   STORMWATER BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (a)   Creation, Membership and Procedure.
   (1)   A stormwater board of appeals consisting of three (3) members shall
include the city administrator, director of utilities, and city planner, or
each said official's designee.
   (2)   Meetings of the board shall be open to the public, minutes shall be
kept of proceedings, showing the action of the board and the vote of each
member upon each question, all of which shall be filed immediately in the
office of the city clerk.
   (3)   Two (2) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The board
shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of two (2) members shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
director of utilities, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in
the requirements of this article.
   (4)   The stormwater board of appeals, after a public hearing, may: 1)
Determine and vary the requirements and regulations of this article in harmony
with their general purpose and intent, where the stormwater board of appeals
makes written findings of fact in accordance with the standards herein after
prescribed and further finds that there are as described in this article in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of requirements and regulations of this
article; and 2) uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the director of
utilities.
   A written application for a variance from the requirements of this article
or an appeal of a decision by the director of utilities shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the time that the applicant became aware of the need for
the variance or the decision. The application shall fully state the grounds of
the request and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Each application shall
be filed with the director of utilities. Said application shall be accompanied
by a fee toward the costs of processing the application. Should the application
be withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such fee will be
returned upon the written request of the applicant.
   The director of utilities will review and transmit recommendations to the
stormwater board of appeals, which shall review such recommendations prior to
granting or denying the variance.
   (b)   Variances. The stormwater board of appeals shall not vary the
requirements and regulations of this article unless evidence is presented that
proves that the following three situations exist:
   (1)   The land in question is of such shape or size, or is affected by such
physical conditions, or is subject to such title limitations or record, that it
is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this article;
   (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant; and
   (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare, environment, or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject property.
   The stormwater board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each
application for variance within thirty (30) days after the application for a
variance is received by the director of utilities. Within thirty (30) days
after the public hearing, the stormwater board of appeals shall approve the
variance with the conditions it deems necessary, deny the variance, or take
other such action as appropriate to effectuate this article.
   (c)   Appeals. The stormwater board of appeals shall consider each
application for modification to the decision of the director of utilities at a
public meeting within thirty (30) days after the appeal application is received
by the director of utilities. Within thirty (30) days after the public meeting,
the appropriate entity shall uphold, modify, or overrule the decision of the
director of utilities.
   (d)   Judicial Review. All final administrative decisions of the stormwater
board of appeals shall be subject to judicial review, pursuant to the
provisions of the "Administrative Review Act," approved May 8, 1945, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4300 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 4. STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES.
SEC. 34-4400.   IN GENERAL.
   (a)   All owners of real property located within the City of Moline which
property discharges into the stormwater system shall be charged for and shall
pay the City of Moline for the use of the stormwater system based on the
relative amount and rate of flow of stormwater which is determined to be
entering the stormwater system from and as a result of the owner's real
property. The impact of the stormwater from the real property upon the
stormwater system shall be determined on the basis of the flat rates or the
measurements contained and set forth in this section.
   (1)   FLAT RATE CHARGES:
      Owners of real property specified herein shall pay to the City of Moline
a monthly stormwater utility service charge for the following real property
which discharges into the stormwater system:
      A.   The schedule of charges effective for bills issued after January 1,
2025 and thereafter shall be:
         $3.36 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on less than 0.25 acres of land;
         $6.46 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on 0.25 to under 0.50 acres of land;
         $13.26 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on 0.50 to 2.00 acres of land.
      B.   The schedule of charges effective for bills issued after January 1,
2026 and thereafter shall be:
         $3.43 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on less than 0.25 acres of land;
         $6.59 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on 0.25 to under 0.50 acres of land;
         $13.53 per month for residential parcels having a maximum of four (4)
dwelling units on 0.50 to 2.00 acres of land.
   (2)   CHARGES BASED ON INDIVIDUALLY MEASURED LAND AREA:
      Owners of nonresidential property or residential property measuring
greater than 2 acres, shall pay to the City of Moline a monthly stormwater
utility service charge based on the impervious acreage of said property.
      A.   The effective rate per impervious acre for bills issued after
January 1, 2025 and thereafter shall be $71.60 per month.
      B.   The effective rate per impervious acre for bills issued after
January 1, 2025 and thereafter shall be $73.04 per month.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, in no event
shall any owner specified herein pay a monthly charge less than the effective
charge stipulated in Sec. 34-4400(1) for a residential parcel having a maximum
of four (4) dwelling units on less than 0.25 acres of land.
   (c)   Properties which discharge to an approved stormwater detention or
retention system, retain stormwater on site, reduce the amount of impervious
areas as part of redevelopment, or are 100% vacant pervious property, or
discharge directly to the Mississippi or Rock Rivers, may be eligible to
receive up to a 100% discount from the monthly stormwater utility service
charge; said discount shall be incrementally granted by the director of
utilities based on the percentage detention, retention, or reduction of the
post-development discharge, pursuant to the BMP plan. Requests for discount
shall be addressed to the director of utilities and submitted to code
compliance. Requests shall include the percentage discount requested with
numerical justification for the amount, a physical description of the property
with topographic maps, aerial photos, drainage studies, and other relevant
information upon which the request is based.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4400 amended; 10/4/22; Ord. No. 3042-2022; Sec.
34-4400 amended; 10/25/22; Ord. No. 3041-2023; Sec. 34-4400 repealed; new Sec.
34-4400 enacted; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3060-2023; Sec. 34-4400 amended; 12/19/23;
Ord. No. 3038-2024; Sec. 34-400 repealed; new Sec. 34-4400 enacted; 10/22/24;
Ord. No. 3049-2025; Sec. 34-4400 repealed; new Sec. 34-4400 enacted; 10/14/25)
SEC. 34-4401.   PROPERTY SUBJECT TO STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE.
   All real property located within the City of Moline, which property
discharges into the stormwater system, and except as otherwise provided in this
section, whether publicly or privately owned and whether subject to or exempt
from real property taxation, shall be subject to the stormwater utility service
charges fees established and set forth under this section. Streets, highways
and railroads, however, shall not be subject to the stormwater utility service
charges established and set forth under this section.
SEC. 34-4402.   BILLING.
   The billing for stormwater utility service charges shall be combined with
the billing for other City of Moline utility services or may be assessed with
the property tax billing, or assessed as a special assessment or issued on a
stand alone basis at the discretion of the City Council. The basis for the
billing shall be computed by the city administrator or by the city
administrator's designee. Payment of bills shall be applied first to any
charges for stormwater utility services, then as provided in Sec.
34-2129 (i).
SEC. 34-4403.   APPEALS CONCERNING FEES.
   Any property owner aggrieved by the property classification or property type
assigned to his or her property under this section or aggrieved by the
computation of the stormwater utility service charge affecting his or her
property under this section, may appeal such actions, determination and/or
computations to the director of utilities, or to the director of utilities’
designee. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall state the reason and basis
for the appeal. The director of utilities shall consider the appeal and make a
written determination thereon, which such written determination shall be
provided to the property owner taking or filing the appeal. If the property
owner is not satisfied with the written determination of the director of
utilities, the property owner may then request in writing that the property
owner's appeal be heard and decided by stormwater appeals board. If the
property owner is not satisfied with the written determination of the
stormwater board of appeals, the property owner may then request in writing
that the property owner's appeal be heard and decided by City Council. Such
written request for City Council review shall be filed with the city clerk
within ten (10) days of the property owner's receipt of the written
determination from the stormwater appeal board. The decision of the City
Council shall be final in such appeals. In case of a successful appeal by the
property owner, said property owner shall be entitled to no more than one (1)
year of refunds or recoveries of fees paid prior to the appeal.
(Ord. No. 3003-2015; Sec. 34-4403 repealed; new Sec. 34-4403 enacted; 02/10/15)
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4403 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4404.   COLLECTION/LIEN.
   If billed as one bill with water and sewerage charges, stormwater service
charges shall be a lien upon real estate as earlier provided in this article.
If billed on a stand-alone basis, any unpaid stormwater utility service charges
shall constitute a lien against the property affected pursuant to this section.
Any such stormwater utility service charges which have remained unpaid for a
period of six (6) months prior to March 31 of any year may, after notice to the
owner of the property, by resolution of the City Council, be certified to the
city collector, who shall place such charges and/or fees on the next
appropriate tax billing and record such lien with the county recorder. In the
alternative, the City Council may authorize and direct the law director to take
appropriate legal action to collect all such unpaid stormwater utility service
charges.
SEC. 34-4405.   DRAINAGE PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for a Class 1 drainage permit shall be $150.00. The fee for a Class
2 drainage permit shall be $250.00. Where a technical code has been adopted by
the City of Moline for which no fee schedule is shown in the article, the fee
required shall be in accordance with the schedule established by the City
Council.
SEC. 34-4406.   USE OF FUNDS COLLECTED.
   All funds collected by the City of Moline as stormwater utility service
charges and permit fees shall be delivered to the director of finance to be
deposited in a separate account and shall be used solely for the construction,
operation, maintenance, administration and replacement of the stormwater system
within the City of Moline and for compliance with USEPA stormwater NPDES permit
requirements.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4406 amended; 10/4/22)
SEC. 34-4407.   SECTIONS INAPPLICABLE TO DISCHARGES OR ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED BY
A NPDES PERMIT.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to a discharge or activity
specifically authorized by a NPDES Permit.
SEC. 34-4408.   REGULATIONS FOR THE OPERATION, MANAGEMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND
MAINTENANCE OF THE STORMWATER SYSTEM.
   The director of utilities may promulgate regulations for the operation,
management, administration and maintenance of the stormwater system and for
connection to such stormwater system. All such regulations promulgated by the
director of utilities hereunder shall be submitted to the City Council for City
Council review and approval. The regulations shall take effect upon approval of
same by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Sec. 34-4408 amended; 10/4/22)
DIVISION 5. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION FOR THIS ORDINANCE.
SEC. 34-4500.   ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to all other remedies available to the City, violation of any
part of this ordinance may be addressed by referral to the Administrative
Hearing Officer established under
Chapter 2 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, or by prosecution in circuit court
as provided in Sec.
1-1107 of the Moline Code of Ordinances. In no event shall any enforcement
action under this ordinance be taken for an alleged violation of this ordinance
if any of the following conditions exist: (a) IEPA has issued a notice of
violation with respect to the same violation and is proceeding with enforcement
action; (b) IEPA has issued an administrative order with respect to the same
alleged violation and is proceeding with enforcement action, or; (c) IEPA has
commenced and is proceeding with enforcement action or has completed any other
type of administrative or civil action with respect to the same alleged
violation. However, enforcement action under this ordinance may be pursued for
continued or continuing violations, and each day or part thereof that a
violation of this ordinance continues shall be considered a separate violation.
SEC. 34-4501.   PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or any provision of
a BMP plan approval issued under this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon adjudication, shall be punished as provided above, including those
penalties set forth in Sec.
1-1107 of this code.
SEC. 34-4502.   EXISTING AUTHORITIES.
   Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit the existing authority
of the City to enforce rules and regulations regarding: (a) charges, limits and
restrictions on the discharge of waste into the sanitary sewerage system of the
City; (b) requirements of any subsequent stormwater management manual of the
City; (c) health or sanitation ordinances of the City; or (d) ordinances
governing the sanitation of premises where animals are kept. This ordinance
shall be cumulative to and in furtherance of any statutory, common law, or
other legal right, duty, power, or authority possessed by the City. Compliance
with this ordinance or a BMP plan approval issued hereunder shall not excuse
any person from compliance with any other federal, state or local law,
ordinance, regulation, rule or order.
SEC. 34-4503.   SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable, and if any
provision of this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, this determination shall not affect, impair,
or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance, but shall be confined in its
operation to the section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or phrase of this
ordinance in which such determination shall have been made.”
(Ord. No. 3035-2006; Art. IV repealed; new Art IV enacted; new App. 1 and 2
enacted; 08/15/06)
____________________________________________________
Amendment Reference Notes
(1) Ord. No. 2002-08-08; Chapter 34, “PUBLIC UTILITIES,” repealed; new Chapter
34, “WATER AND SEWERS,” enacted; 08/27/02
(2) Ord. No. 3035-2006; Art. IV repealed; new Art IV enacted; new App. 1 and 2
enacted; 08/15/06
   The following are ordinance amendment references to sections that were
eliminated pursuant to this Art. IV repeal and enactment.
   Sec. 34-4117 repealed; new Sec. 34-4117 enacted; Ord. No. 3015-2004; 03/02/
04
   Sec. 34-4117 repealed; new Sec. 34-4117 enacted; Ord. No. 3088-2004; 10/12/
04
   Sec. 34-4118 repealed; new Sec. 34-4118 enacted; Ord. No. 3015-2004; 03/02/
04
   Sec. 34-4119 repealed; new Sec. 34-4119 enacted; Ord. No. 3015-2004; 03/02/
04
(3) Prior and subsequent ordinance amendments are referenced below the
corresponding sections.
APPENDIX 1.
SAMPLE LETTER OF CREDIT; SAMPLE PERFORMANCE BOND.
SAMPLE
LETTER OF CREDIT
   (name of bank)       
   (City bank's located)    ,   (State)    
   Irrevocable Credit No.             Date:                , 20        
   City of Moline, Illinois   All drafts must be marked:
      , Illinois      "Drawn under Credit No.       ,
   dated    , 20    
   Gentlemen:
   We hereby open an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of       
($   ) in your favor for the account of
                                                  
(Developer), the developer of                                        (name of
project),
proposed in the City of Moline             , Illinois, or within its
territorial jurisdiction, for the benefit of the City of Moline.
   Said money hereunder shall be available by your drafts at sight drawn on us
drawn in the name of the City of Moline, Illinois. All drafts so drawn must be
marked "Drawn under    (name of bank)      , Credit No.        dated          ,
20   ."
   Drafts must be accompanied by a signed statement by the director of
utilities of the City of Moline, Illinois, that the request is for the
installation or construction of improvements required pursuant to the plans,
specifications, and cost estimates dated       , 20    , and approved by the
City of Moline, Illinois, and on file with the director of utilities. Further,
all requests for disbursements under this Letter of Credit made prior to (must
be 2 years after filing)               , 20   , shall be submitted by developer
and accompanied by a certified estimate of units and value of work completed
with contractor's sworn statement and waiver of mechanics' liens, all approved
by the Developer's engineer and the director of utilities of the City of
Moline, Illinois. It is understood as to all disbursements that the director of
utilities shall approve partial drawings only as long as there remains a
sufficient balance to the Credit to cover said engineers then current estimate
of costs for the required improvements which at that time remain to be
completed but in no case shall his approval exceed ninety percent (90%) of the
value of work completed.
   In the event that all of the work for the improvements is not completed to
the satisfaction of the City on or before    (1 day short of 2 years after
filing)      , 20   , the funds remaining under this Letter of Credit shall be
available to the City of Moline, Illinois upon presentation of their draft at
sight drawn on us in the name of the City of Moline, Illinois. This draft so
drawn must be marked as specified hereinabove. Further, such draft shall be
accompanied by a signed statement by the director of utilities of the City of
Moline, Illinois as follows: "I,    (name)      , director of utilities for the
City of Moline, Illinois, do hereby certify that work on required improvements
for the project named                  has not been completed to the
satisfaction of the City of Moline            on or before    (ten days short
of two years after filing)              , 20   .
   This Credit shall expire on    (2 years after filing)    , 20   ; provided,
however, the undersigned shall notify the director of utilities by certified
mail, return receipt requested, at least 90 days prior to expiration date that
this Letter of Credit is about to expire and provided, however, in no event
shall this Credit expire except upon prior written notice, it being expressly
agreed by the undersigned that the above expiration date shall be extended as
shall be required to comply with this notice provision.
   The undersigned further agrees that this Credit shall remain in full force
and effect and pertain to any and all amendments or modifications which may be
made from time to time to the specifications, and agreements for the project,
without notice from the City of the amendments or modifications.
   All acts, requirements and other preconditions for the issuance of this
Irrevocable Letter of Credit have been completed.
   We hereby engage with the drawers, endorsers, and bona fide holders of
drafts, drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this Credit, that same
shall be honored upon presentation to the drawer. This Credit must accompany
any draft which exhausts the Credit and must be surrendered concurrently with
the presentation of such draft.
   We hereby undertake and engage that all demands made in conformity with this
Credit will be honored upon presentation. If, within ten (10) days of the date
any demand made in conformity with this Credit is presented, we fail to honor
same, we agree to pay all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses
incurred by the City of Moline in enforcing the terms of this Credit.
   Dated:          , 20   .
      (name of bank)   
               
   By               
         (title)
   Attest:
            
   (title)
SAMPLE
PERFORMANCE BOND
   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that                , as
   PRINCIPAL,          , as SURETY, and             ,
as ADDITIONAL SURETY, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Moline
 
         , Illinois, as OBLIGEE, in the sum of             
 
             ($      ) lawful money of the United States, for the payment
whereof to the Obligee, the Principal and the Surety, and Additional Surety
bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and
assigns, jointly and severally, firmly to these presents:
   SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED, THIS    day of          , 20   .
   WHEREAS, application was made to the Obligee for approval of a project
entitled "                   ", located in the City of Moline, Illinois, filed
with the director of utilities of the City of Moline , Illinois, on
            , 20   , said project may be approved upon certain conditions, one
of which is that a performance bond in the amount of                         
($     
   NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION is such that if the above
named Principal shall within two (2) years from the date hereof will and truly
make and perform the required improvements and construction of public
improvements in and adjacent to said project in accordance with the
specifications of the City of Moline and the Stormwater Regulations of the City
of Moline , then this obligation to be void; otherwise to remain in full force
and effect.
   It is hereby understood and agreed that in the event that any required
improvements have not been installed as provided aforesaid within the term of
this Performance Bond, the City Council may thereupon declare this bond to be
in default and collect the sum remaining payable thereunder and upon receipt of
the proceeds thereof, the City of Moline shall install such improvements as are
covered by this bond and commensurate with the extent of development that has
taken place in said project but not exceeding the amount of such proceeds.
                  Principal
   By:                  Principal
                  Surety
   By:                  
   Attorney in Fact
   Additional Surety
   Approved as to Form:                        
By:                              
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Appendix 1 amended; 10/4/22)
APPENDIX 2. CONVENANT
Covenant To Be Included In Subdivision Covenants
Stormwater Detention Basin
A stormwater detention basin has been constructed within the subdivision, in
accordance with the requirements of the municipal stormwater ordinance, and is
so designated as "Detention Basin" on subdivision plat. The detention basin
shall provide for the temporary detention of stormwater runoff from the
subdivision to meet release rates as required by the municipality.
The real estate upon which the detention basin is located, designated as Outlot
A on the Plat, shall be deeded from the Developer to the Homeowner's
Association upon the sale of 75% of the lots within the Subdivision.
The Developer as owner, and subsequent to the conveyance of title, the
Homeowners Association as owner, shall be responsible for the following:
a.   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the checklist,
designated below, shall be submitted to the director of utilities.   
b.   At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois. A report of this inspection shall
be submitted to the director of utilities within sixty (60) days of the
inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the checklist items
in the checklist below. An annual report is not required the year the five year
report is due.
c.   The Developer, as owner, shall notify the Homeowners Association of its
maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to the
Homeowners Association.   
Each owner of an improved lot within the Subdivision shall be assessed by the
Homeowners Association for the cost of maintaining the Detention Basin and for
the cost of complying with the requirements of these covenants and the
requirements of the municipality. The Declaration regarding the establishment
of a Homeowners Association and the procedures for the assessment and
collection of dues for the cost of maintaining the detention basin shall be
filed and recorded by the Developer as a separate document.
   DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIVE AND PROTECTIVE COVENANTS AND CONDITIONS REGARDING
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION FOR THE STORM WWATER DETENTION
BASIN SYSTEM AS LOCATED WITHIN ________________________________________
   Dated                
_________________________      
Filed                
_________________________
To The Public
This Declaration, made on the date hereinafter set forth by
__________________________________, hereinafter referred to as "Declarant".
   WITNESSETH:
Whereas, Declarant is the owner of certain property in the City of
_____________________, ____________________County, Illinois, which is more
particularly described as:
                                                      
NOW, THEREFORE, Declarant hereby declares that all of the properties described
above shall be held, sold and conveyed subject to the following easements,
restrictions, covenants and conditions, all of which are for the purpose of
enhancing and protecting the value, desirability and attractiveness of the real
property, and for the purpose of complying with stormwater retention
requirements of the City of __________________________. These covenants,
restrictions and conditions shall run with the real property and shall be
binding on all parties having or acquiring any right, title or interest in the
described property or any part thereof, and shall inure to the benefit of each
owner thereof.
   ARTICLE I
   DEFINITIONS
1. "Association" shall mean and refer to Homeowners Association of
___________________________________, Inc., an Illinois nonprofit corporation,
its successors and assigns.
2. "Properties" shall mean and refer to that certain real property hereinbefore
described, more particularly described as: Lots _____________ through
______________ of _______________________, City of ___________________,
Illinois, and such additions thereto as may hereafter be brought within the
jurisdiction of the Association.
3. "Lot" shall mean and refer to any plot of land shown upon any recorded
subdivision map or plat of the properties.
4. "Member" shall mean and refer to every person or entity who hold membership
in the association.
5. "Owner" shall mean and refer to the record owner, whether one or more
persons or entities, of a fee simple title to any lot which is a part of the
Properties, including contract sellers, but excluding those having such
interest merely as security for the performance of an obligation.
6. "Declarant" shall mean and refer to ______________________________________,
to
successors and assigns, if such successors or assigns should acquire more than
one undeveloped lot from the Declarant for the purpose of Development.
7. "Developer" shall mean the same as "Declarant."
ARTICLE II
   MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS
Every person or entity who is a record owner of a fee or undivided fee interest
in any Lot which is subject by covenants of record to assessment by the
Association, including contract Sellers, shall be a member of the Association.
The foregoing is not intended to include persons or entities who hold an
interest merely as security for the performance of an obligation. No owner
shall have more than one membership. Membership shall be appurtenant to and may
not be separated from ownership of any lot which is subject to assessment by
the Association. Ownership of such lot shall be the sole qualification for
membership.
   ARTICLE III
   ESCROW FUND FOR MAINTENANCE
The primary source of funds for maintenance of the master stormwater detention
system shall be an escrow fund. Declarant shall establish the Escrow Fund at
some local banking institution at such time as the first lot in The Properties
is transferred to an owner other than the Declarant. The Association shall have
the power to expend the escrow fund for maintenance authorized in accordance
with the provisions of Article V.
   ARTICLE IV
   COVENANT FOR MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT
1. Creation of the lien and Personal Obligation of Assessments. The Declarant,
for each improved Lot owned within the Properties, hereby covenants, and each
Owner of any Lot by acceptance of a Deed therefor, whether or not it shall be
so expressed in such Deed, is deemed to covenant and agree to pay to the
Association: (1) annual assessments or charges, such assessments to be
established and collected from time to time as hereinafter provided. The term
"improved Lot" shall mean any Lot having a building erected thereon and ready
for occupancy as approved by the City of __________________________, Illinois.
The annual assessments, together with interest, shall be a charge on the land
and shall be a continuing lien upon the property against which each such
assessment is made. Each assessment together with interest, costs and
reasonable attorney's fees for collection, shall also be the personal
obligation of the person or entity who was the owner of such property at the
time the assessment fell due. The personal obligation for delinquent
assessments shall not pass to his successors in title unless expressly assumed
by them.
2. Purpose of Assessments. The assessments levied by the Association shall be
used exclusively to maintain the stormwater detention basin system, as provided
for under the Restrictive and Protective Covenants of
__________________________________. The Board of Directors of the Association
shall establish a budget by January 1st of each year and shall levy an
assessment upon each improved Lot without the Subdivision by February 1st of
each year, payable by the 1st day of May.
3. Notice and Quorum for Any Action Authorized Under Section 3. Written notice
of any meeting called for the purpose of establishing the budget and making the
assessment shall be sent to all members not less than 15 days nor more than 30
days in advance of the meeting. At the first such meeting called, the presence
of Members or of proxies entitled to cast 50% of all votes of each class of
membership shall constitute a quorum. If the required quorum is not present,
another meeting may be called subject to the same notice requirement, and the
required quorum at the subsequent meeting shall be one-half of the required
quorum at the preceding meeting. No such subsequent meeting shall be held more
than 60 days following the preceding meeting.
4. Uniform Rate of Assessment. Annual assessments must be fixed at a uniform
rate for all improved Lots and shall be collected on an annual installment
basis, except as hereinafter provided.
5. Date of Commencement of Annual Assessments; Due Dates. The annual
assessments provided for herein shall commence as to all improved Lots on the
first day of the month following the conveyance of any such improved Lot. The
first annual assessment shall be adjusted according to the number of months
remaining in the calendar year. The Board of Directors of the Association shall
fix the amount of the annual assessment against each lot at least 30 days in
advance of each annual assessment period. Written notice of the annual
assessment shall be sent to every Owner subject thereto. The annual assessment
shall be paid in one annual payment, and the due dates and delinquency dates
shall be uniformly established by the Board of Directors of the Association.
The Association shall, upon demand, and for a reasonable charge, furnish a
certificate signed by an officer of the Association setting forth whether the
assessments on a specified Lot are current or delinquent. Such certificate
shall be conclusive evidence of payment of any assessment therein stated to
have been paid.
6. Effect of Non-payment of Assessments: Remedies of the Association. Any
annual payment not paid within 30 days after the due date shall bear interest
from the date of delinquency at the rate of 10% per annum. The Association may
bring any action at law against the Owner personally obligated to pay the same,
or foreclose the lien against the property by an action in equity. In any such
action, interest, costs and reasonable attorneys fees shall be added to the
amount of the delinquent assessment and collected as part of said judgment. In
the event of such foreclosure, if the Association waives any and all rights to
a deficiency judgment against the Owner, the period for redemption as provided
by the statutes off the State of Illinois shall be reduced to six months from
the date of foreclosure sale. Any lot ultimately acquired by the Association
through Judges Deed after such a foreclosure shall be sold by the Association
within a reasonable time either at public or private sale, and any surplus
remaining after the payment of assessments, interest, costs and attorney's fees
shall be paid over to the former Owner of said Lot. No Owner may waiver or
otherwise escape liability for the assessments provided for herein by non-use
of the Detention Basin or by abandonment of his Lot.
7. Subordination of the Lien to Mortgages. The lien of the assessments provided
for herein shall be subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage placed upon
any Lot. Sale or transfer of any Lot shall not affect the assessment lien.
However, the sale or transfer of any lot pursuant to Mortgage foreclosure or
any assessments as to payments which became due prior to such sale or transfer,
provided that such sale or transfer shall not extinguish the personal
obligation of the prior Owner or his heirs, successors or assigns, for payment
of such assessment. No sale or transfer shall relieve such Lot from liability
for any assessments thereafter becoming due or from the lien thereof.
   ARTICLE V
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Enforcement. The Association, or any Owner shall have the right to enforce
by any proceeding at law or in equity all restrictions, conditions, covenants
or reservations now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of this Declaration.
The Association shall have the sole right to enforce, by proceedings at law or
in equity, the liens and charges now or hereafter imposed by the provisions of
this Declaration. Failure by the Association or by any Owner to enforce any
covenant or restriction herein contained shall in no event be deemed a waiver
of the right to do so thereafter.
2. Severability. Invalidation of any one of these covenants or restrictions by
judgment or Court Order shall in no wise affect any other provisions which
shall remain in full force and effect.
3. Duration. The covenants and restrictions of this Declaration shall run with
and bind the land, for a term of 21 years from the date this Declaration is
recorded, after which time they shall be automatically extended for successive
periods of 10 years each.
4. Amendment. This Declaration may be amended during the first 21 year period
by an instrument signed by not less than 75% of the Lot owners and thereafter
by an instrument signed by not less than 65% of the Lot Owners, provided,
however, that no such amendment shall be valid or effective until is has been,
and a certified copy of said resolution, and a certified copy of the amendment
adopted by the Lot Owners, having both been recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Rock Island County, Illinois.
         By:   
   OWNER AND DECLARANT
   By:      
                        OWNER AND DECLARANT
(Ord. No. 3029-2022; Appendix 2 amended; 10/4/22)
CHAPTER 35
ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
   Art. I.   General Provisions and Administration
      Div. 1.   In General, §
35-1100 –§
35-1113
      Div. 2.   Word Usage, Abbreviations and Definitions, §
35-1200 – §
35-1203
      Div. 3.   Decision Making Authority, §
35-1300 – §
35-1305
   Art. II.   Development Review and Procedures
      Div. 1.   Administrative Development Review, §
35-2100 - §
35-2110,
      Div. 2.   Non-Administrative Development Review, §
35-2200 - §
35-2211
   Art. III. Zoning
      Div. 1.   In General, §
35-3100 - §
35-3115
      Div. 2.   Residential and Resource Zoning Districts, §
35-3200 - §
35-3211
      Div. 3.   Non-Residential/Resource Zoning Districts, §
35-3300 - §
35-3314
      Div. 4.   Land Use Regulations, §
35-3400 - §
35-3420
      Div. 5.   Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Facilities, §
35-3500 - §
35-3527
      Div. 6.   Density and Intensity Regulations, §
35-3600 - §
35-3604
      Div. 7.   Planned Unit Development, §
35-3700 - §
35-3705
      Div. 8.   Adult Use Cannabis Businesses, §
35-3800 - §
35-3805
      Div. 9.   Moline Centre Districts, §
35-3901 - §
35-3909
   Art. IV. Development Standards
      Div. 1.   Natural Resource Protection Standards, §
35-4100 - §
35-4109
      Div. 2.   Infrastructure and Public Improvement Standards §
35-4200 - §
35-4224 
      Div. 3.   Public Art Requirements for Private Development, §
35-4300 - §
35-4315
   Art. V. Site Improvement and Performance Standards
      Div. 1.   Parking and Loading Standards, §
35-5100 - §
35-5101
      Div. 2.   Landscaping and Bufferyard Standards, §
35-5200 - §
35-5210
      Div. 3.   Illumination Standards, §
35-5300 - §
35-5305
      Div. 4.   General Performance Standards, §
35-5400 - §
35-5412
      Div. 5.   Quality Building and Site Design and Materials Standards, §
35-5500 - §
35-5503
   Appendix A. Detailed Classification of Plant Species
   Appendix B. Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 1 Sites
Approved for Administrative Review
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 35-1100.   TITLE.
   This Code shall be known, cited and referred to as the City of Moline Zoning
and Land Development Code, as referred to herein, where it shall be known as
“this Code.”
SEC. 35-1101.   AUTHORITY.
   This Code is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Illinois
compiled Statutes and Article III, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution of
1920. Statutory references are provided within the body of this Code solely as
a means of assisting the reader. Such references are not to be considered as
all inclusive and shall in no manner be construed so as to limit the
application or interpretation of this Code.
SEC. 35-1102.   LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   In enacting this Code, special attention has been given to ensuring a direct
relationship of these regulations to the City of Moline’s Comprehensive Plan.
The general intent of this Code is to implement certain goals and objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan which are best addressed through zoning and other land
development regulations, as enabled by the Illinois compiled Statutes and
Article III, Section 6 of the Illinois Constitution of 1920.
SEC. 35-1103.   RATIONALE AND THE APPEARANCE OF ORDINANCE TEXT.
   (a)   RATIONALE . Throughout this Code, paragraphs labeled “Rationale” are
included to ensure a complete understanding of the purpose and reasoning of the
City in adopting that particular portion of this Code. Each Rationale is
intended as an official statement of the legislative findings or purposes, and
shall be treated in the same manner as other aspects of legislative history,
and shall serve to guide the administrative and judicial interpretation of this
Code. The specific rationale expressed in each Rationale section is not
intended to be exhaustive, and other non-explicit rationale may also be
applicable.
   (b)   APPEARANCE OF ORDINANCE TEXT . The underlined, boldfaced, italicized,
alternative point-sized, and/or capitalized typefaces used in this Code are
inserted only for convenience, and are in no way to be construed as part of the
provisions of this Code or as a limitation of the scope of the particular
sections or subsections to which they refer.
SEC. 35-1104.   PURPOSE.
   (a)   The overall purpose of this Code is to implement the City of Moline’s
Comprehensive Plan and Official Map to the extent possible under zoning,
subdivision, and other land development regulations, as permitted by and in
accordance with law.
   (b)   This Code is designed to control and lessen congestion in the streets,
to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to preserve, protect, and
promote the public health, safety, and the general welfare; to avoid legal and
other problems by requiring that subdivided land be properly monumented and
recorded; to preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent; to promote adequate light and air; to encourage protection of
groundwater resources; to protect against injury or damage caused by fire,
pollution, flooding, stormwater runoff, or erosion and sedimentation; to
prevent the overcrowding of lands; to avoid undue concentration of population;
to preserve, protect and promote property values; to provide safe and
convenient access to new developments by requiring the proper location, design,
and construction of streets and sidewalks; to reduce the cost of installing and
maintaining adequate water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and other
utilities and services; to provide for the acceptance of lands for public
rights-of-way; to provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the
orderly layout and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to the
productive development of the City and to ensure that adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other similar public
facilities can be made available to serve the residents of current and new
developments.
   (c)   Specifically, this Code is adopted for the purpose of protecting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare by
implementing certain goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. Additional
purposes of this Code are specified throughout this Code.
   Rationale: In developing the specific regulations of this Code, much effort
has gone into balancing the components (including the Official Zoning Map).
This Code represents the cohesive result of carefully considering plan
implementation practices. Amendments to these provisions and/or the Official
Zoning Map shall seriously consider the effect of such changes on the
interrelationships which exist within this Code, and between this document, the
Comprehensive Plan, and related long-range planning policies and programs.
SEC. 35-1105.   RELATIONSHIP TO ILLINOIS QUAD CITIES UNIFIED ZONING CODE.
   Most of the zoning districts in this Code are contained in the Illinois Quad
Cities Unified Zoning Code (IQCUZC) dated May 2002. However, several of the
zoning districts and some of the development standards found in the Unified
Code are not included in this Code as they were found to be inconsistent with
the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. Likewise, of the districts and
development standards from the IQCUZC that are included in this Code, some
modifications have been made as necessary to achieve consistencies with and
fully implement the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. Similarly, some
additional development standards have been included in this Code that are not
contained in the Unified Code. In some instances these modifications and
additions to the Unified Code are highlighted in this Code to assist readers
who have familiarity with the Unified Code. It is the intention of the City,
however, that in every instance where there are differences between the codes,
whether noted or not, the provisions of the Moline Zoning and Land Development
Code shall prevail.
SEC. 35-1106.   SEPARABILITY AND NON-LIABILITY.
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
several provisions of this Code are separable in accordance with the following:
   (1)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of
this Code not specifically included in said judgment.
   (2)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any portion of this Code to a particular property, water body,
building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, water body, building, or structure not
specifically included in said judgment.
   (3)   If any requirement or limitation attached to an authorization given
under this Code is found invalid, it shall be presumed that the authorization
would not have been granted without the requirement or limitation and,
therefore, said authorization also shall be invalid.
   (4)   The City does not guarantee, warrant, or represent that only those
areas designated as floodlands will be subject to periodic inundation and
hereby asserts that there is no liability on the part of the City, its
officers, employees, agents, or representatives for any flood damages,
sanitation problems, drainage problems or damages, or structural damages.
   (b)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
office, board member, agent, or employee of the City shall be personally liable
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of duties set forth under this
ordinance. (See “Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity
Act,” 745 ILCS 10/1-101, et seq.)
   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee of
the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
duties under this ordinance, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
SEC. 35-1107.   ABROGATION.
   It is not intended that this Code abrogate or interfere with any
constitutionally protected vested right. It is also not intended that this Code
abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
SEC. 35-1108.   RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public
health, safety, morals and welfare, and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the City and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any
other power now or hereafter possessed by the City of Moline.
   (b)   Where property is affected by the regulation imposed by any provision
of this Code and by any other governmental regulations, the regulations which
are the most restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
prevail. Regardless of any other provision of this Code, no land shall be
developed or used, and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any
state or federal regulations. Thus, in accordance with state law, whenever this
ordinance imposes higher standards than the county subdivision ordinance, said
higher standards shall supersede the county regulations in the unincorporated
territory located within the City of Moline’s subdivision jurisdiction.
   (c)   No structure, land, water or air shall hereafter be used and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered without a
building permit, except those specifically exempted by the building code, and
without full compliance with the provisions of this Code and all other
applicable local, county and state requirements.
   (d)   Nothing herein contained shall require any changes in plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building or part thereof, for which
a zoning certificate or building permit has been issued before the effective
date of this Code and the construction of which shall have been started within
six (6) months from the date of such permit.
   (e)   Except as provided in this Code, under provisions for Nonconforming
Uses (Sec.
35-3111), Nonconforming Sites and Structures (Sec.
35-3112), Nonconforming Lots (Sec.
35-3110), no building, structure, development or premises, shall be hereinafter
used or occupied and no applicable permit granted, that does not conform to the
requirements of this Code.
   (f)   In cases of mixed-occupancy or mixed-use, the regulations for each
land use shall apply to the portion of the structure or land so occupied or so
used.
   (g)   Except for outlots that are exclusively used for permanently protected
green space area, no yard or other open space shall be considered as providing
a yard or open space for a building or structure on any other lot.
   (f)   This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant,
deed restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided,
that, where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction,
or other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this ordinance
shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction
or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this ordinance or the
determination of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
ordinance, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this ordinance
or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative
and supplemental to this ordinance and determinations made thereunder. The City
does not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the
plat and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature
of the document and the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement
rights over same.
SEC. 35-1109.   JURISDICTION.
   Except as otherwise expressly stated, this Code is applicable to all
territory located within the corporate limits of the City of Moline.
   The City of Moline has subdivision jurisdiction over all land within the
corporate limits of the City and within the unincorporated areas of Rock Island
County that are located within 1.5 miles of the City’s corporate limits. The
City may elect to defer subdivision jurisdiction to another municipality in
accordance with an intergovernmental agreement or pursuant to state law.
   Except as otherwise expressly sated in this Code or in the Illinois Plat
Act, no land that is within the City’s subdivision jurisdiction may be
subdivided or developed except in compliance with all applicable regulations
and procedures of this Code and applicable provisions of state law.
   No lot in any subdivision may be conveyed until all of the following have
occurred:
   A final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the
applicable subdivision procedures of Article II and recorded in the office of
the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds; and
   The portion of an approved and recorded subdivision in which the lot is
located has been improved in accordance with the infrastructure and public
improvement standards of Article IV, Division 2, or until a performance
guarantee has been provided in accordance with Sec.
35-4209.
   No building permits or certificates of occupancy may be issued for lots
conveyed in violation of this section.
SEC. 35-1110.   RE-ENACTMENT AND REPEAL.
   (a)   This Code, in part, carries forward by re-enactment some of the
provisions of the regulations governing zoning and related matters, being
previously known collectively as the “Moline Zoning Ordinance,”
Chapter 35 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Moline, adopted prior to
the effective date of this Code. It is not the intention of this Code to
repeal, but rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions
so that all rights, obligations and responsibilities that have accrued
thereunder are preserved and may be enforced, unless explicitly surrendered by
specific provisions of this Code or altered by the Official Zoning Map.
   (b)   All provisions of
Chapter 35 of the City of Moline Code of Ordinances which are not re-enacted
herein are hereby repealed.
   (c)   The adoption of this Code shall not adversely affect the City’s right
to prosecute any violation of the predecessor zoning ordinance provided the
violation occurred while the Ordinance was in effect.
SEC. 35-1111.   EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All plans approved under previous zoning regulations shall be valid and may
be used to obtain permits for a period of not more than one (1) year after the
effective date of this Code, except where subject to the provisions of an
executed development agreement. This Code shall become effective upon passage
and publication according to law, following the date of repeal and re-enactment
of the Official Zoning Map.
SEC. 35-1112.   FEES.
   Any submittal or application required for land development within this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in “The Development Review
Application Fee Schedule” as adopted by the City Council, from time to time, by
a separate resolution, unless a fee is otherwise specifically set forth within
this chapter. “The Development Review Application Fee Schedule” shall be
maintained in the office of the City Clerk, and available for review and
inspection by the public, during normal business hours. Said schedule shall
also be a part of the written administrative policies and supplemental
procedures pertaining to the processing of subdivision applications maintained
by the zoning administrator.
(Ord. No. 2002-06-18; new Sec. 29-103.1 enacted; 06/25/02)
SEC. 35-1113.   PENALTIES.
   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty
of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 98-2-6; §29-5104 repealed; new §29-5104 enacted; 01/03/98)
   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this ordinance.
DIVISION 2. WORD USAGE, ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SEC. 35-1200.   INTRODUCTION TO WORD USAGE, ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   The purpose of this Division 2 is to define words, terms and phrases
contained in this Code which are essential to the understanding, administration
and enforcement of this Code, and which are not part of common English usage.
SEC. 35-1201.   WORD USAGE.
   The interpretation of this Code shall abide by the provisions and rules of
this section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise, or where the
result would clearly be inconsistent with the manifest intent of this Code.
   (1)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
   (2)   Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the single number.
   (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
   (4)   The words “shall,” “must” and “will” are mandatory.
   (5)   The words “may,” “can” and “might” are permissive.
   (6)   The word “person” includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations, trusts, and any other legal entity.
   (7)   The word “City” shall mean the City of Moline, Illinois.
   (8)   The word “County” shall mean the County of Rock Island, Illinois.
   (9)   The word “State” shall mean the State of Illinois.
   (10)   The word “Commission” shall mean the City of Moline Plan Commission.
   (11)   The words “Council” and “City Council” shall refer to the City of
Moline City Council.
   (12)   If there is any ambiguity between the text of this Code and any
caption, illustration, or table, the text shall prevail.
SEC. 35-1202.   ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations in this Chapter are intended to have the
following meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
Abbreviation  Meaning
Ac            acre
AG-2          General Agricultural District
B-1           Neighborhood Business District
B-2           Central Business District
B-3           Community Business District
B-4           Highway/Intensive Business District
C-2           Conservation District
db            Decibel
du            dwelling unit
FAR           Floor Area Ratio
ft            foot
GSA           Gross Site Area
GSR           Green Space Ratio
I-1           Light Industrial District
I-2           General Industrial District
ISR           Impervious Surface Ratio
LSR           Landscape Surface Ratio
max           maximum
MBS           Maximum Building Size
MGD           Maximum Gross Density
Min           Minimum
MH            Maximum Height
MLA           Maximum Lot Area
MSA           Minimum Site Area
na            not applicable
NC            Neighborhood Center District
NDA           Net Developable Area
Nonres        Nonresidential
O-1           Office District
ORT           Office/Research Park and Technology District
R-2           One-Family Residential District
R-4           One- to Six-Family Dwelling District
R-6           Multi-Family Dwelling District
R-7           Mobile Home Park District
Res           Residential
RPA           Resource Protection Area
sf or sq. ft. square feet
#F            number of floors
-             or fewer
+             or more
 
SEC. 35-1203.   DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, wherever they occur in this Code, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them by this section. Definitions shown in
italics are unique to this Code and are not included in the Unified Code.
Definitions provided by this section include:
   Abutting. Having a common border with.
   Access. A means of vehicular or non-vehicular approach, entry to or exit
from a property, street or highway.
   Access, direct. A means of vehicular or non-vehicular approach, entry to, or
exit from a property immediate physical connection to a road or right-of-way
abutting a property.
   Access, secondary. A means of vehicular or non vehicular approach, entry to,
or exit from property from a source other than a public street or highway.
   Accessory building or use:
      a.   Accessory Structure. A subordinate structure, including Accessory
Dwelling Units, as further defined in Sec.
35-3411(a) of this Code, detached but located on the same lot of record as the
principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of
the principal structure.
      b.   Accessory Use. A structure or use that: (a) is clearly incidental to
and customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; (b) is
subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; (c) is
subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal
use served; (d) contributed to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants, business, or industry in the principal building or principal use
served; and (e) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use
served, including Accessory Dwelling Units, as further defined in Sec.
35-3411(a) of this Code.
   Acre. 43,560 square feet.
   Activity center. An area which is typified by a concentration of
nonresidential and/or multi- family development.
   Addition. Any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter and/or height of a
building which is connected by a common load-bearing wall. Any walled and
roofed expansion, which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by
independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
   Adjacent. Abutting, or being located directly across a right of way from, a
separate lot.
   Adequate public facilities and services. Transportation , water, sewer,
stream water, parks and open space, electrical, gas, telecommunications,
infrastructure and police, fire, sanitation, recreation and library services
available to serve proposed development at levels of service equivalent to
those being provided to existing development.
   Agrivoltaics. A solar energy system co-located on the same parcel of land as
agricultural production, including crop production, grazing, apiaries, or other
agricultural products or services.
   Airport (land use). See Sec.
35-3409(a).
   Alley. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
   Appeal. A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order, or
failure to act pursuant to the terms of this Code as expressly authorized by
the provisions of Sec.
35-2208.
   Arterial street. See Street, Arterial.
   Automobile repair, major. General repair, rebuilding of or reconditioning of
engines of any type, motor vehicles, trucks, buses or trailers. Collision
service, including body work, frame or fender straightening or repair, overall
painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailers or painting booth. See Sec.
35-3408(o).
   Automobile repair, minor. Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work,
touch-up painting and upholstering, replacement of minor parts and general
tune-up service to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-
half (1½) ton capacity. See Sec.
35-3408(n).
   Average ground elevation. The average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
   Balcony. An outside deck located at least on the second floor or any higher
floor of a building that can be cantilevered or supported on piers.
   Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having one
half or less of its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
   Bed and breakfast establishment (land use). See Sec.
35-3411(1).
   Bedroom. A room in a residence marketed, designed, or otherwise likely to
function primarily for sleeping.
   Block. An area of land entirely bounded by any combination of streets parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
   Boarding house (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(l).
   Bufferyard. Any permitted combination of distance, vegetation, fencing and
berming which results in a reduction of visual and other interaction with an
adjoining property. See Sec.
35-5207.
   Building. Any permanently anchored structure used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any use or occupancy. When a building is divided into separate
parts by unpierced walls, each part shall be deemed a separate building (see
structure).
   Building, completely enclosed. A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structure, by a permanent
roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
   Building coverage. The percentage of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings, including all structures with a roof.
   Building envelope. A component of a group development which conforms to the
lot lines of developments which are not group developments, in that required
minimum setback distances are measured from the building envelope line.
   Building front. That exterior wall of a building which faces the front lot
line of the lot.
   Building height. The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, which ever
yields a greater height of the building:
      a.   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building
when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest
grade.
      b.   An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk
or ground surface described in (a) above, is more than 10 feet above the lowest
grade.
      c.   The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum of any
segment of the building.
   Building line. A line on a lot, generally parallel to a lot line or road
right of way line, located a sufficient distance therefrom to provide the
minimum yards required by this Code. The building line determines the area in
which buildings are permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this
Code. This is also referred to as a "setback."
   Building Mounted Solar Systems. An assembly of components which captures
radiant energy from the sun to provide heat, electricity, or other usable form
of converted energy to onsite buildings and structures. Attached solar energy
systems typically consist of an array of solar cells, photovoltaic panels, and/
or thermal collectors mounted to a building, and also include inverters,
batteries, and interconnection wiring.
   Building, principal. A building in which is conducted, or in which is
intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
   Building separation. The narrowest distance between two buildings. See
Minimum Building Separation.
   Building size. The total gross floor area of a building. See Maximum
Building Size.
   Bulk (of a building). The combination of building height, size, and location
on a lot.
   Bulk Storage. Means the storage of flammable or combustible liquid in an
above ground tank that is not for dispensing purposes. If an above ground tank
is used for any bulk storage purposes, it is classified as a ‘bulk storage
tank' for the remainder of the calendar year in which it was so used.
   Business Districts. See Sec.
35-3306.
   Cafeteria, company (land use). See Sec.
35-3414(1).
   Caliper. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its
trunk measurement 0.5 foot above natural grade. Used for trees in a nursery
setting.
   Campground (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(c).
   Candlepower. The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one-foot
distant from a light source to an intensity of one foot-candle. Maximum (peak)
candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light
source, or luminaire.
   Caretaker's residence. A dwelling unit which is used exclusively by either
the owner, manager, or operator of a principal permitted use and which is
located on the same parcel as the principal use. See Sec.
35-3417(a).
   Carport. A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
   Cellar. That portion of the building having more than one-half of the floor-
to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   Centerline Offset. The distance between the centerlines of two roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said
"parallel" streets intersect.
   Central Business District "B-2." See Sec.
35-3309.
   Certificate of Occupancy. See Sec.
35-2104.
   Charging Level. The standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage
at which an electric vehicle’s battery is recharged. Typical electric vehicle
charging levels and specifications are:
      a.   Level 1: AC slow battery charging. The charging station delivers
electric power to a vehicle’s charging module which converts the AC power to DC
power and delivers it to the battery. Voltage is one hundred twenty (120)
volts.
      b.   Level 2: AC medium battery charging. The charging station delivers
electric power to a vehicle’s charging module which converts the AC power to DC
power and delivers it to the battery. Voltage is between two hundred eight
(208) volts for commercial use and two hundred forty (240) volts for
residential use.
      c.   Level 3: DC fast or quick battery charging. Sometimes referred to as
“DC fast.” The charging station bypasses a vehicle’s on-board charger to
directly deliver electricity to the vehicle’s high voltage battery. Voltage is
equal to or greater than four hundred eighty (480) volts.
   Charging Station. A location to access electric vehicle supply equipment for
the transfer of electric energy by conductive or inductive means to a battery
or other rechargeable energy storage system in an electric vehicle. For a
charging station(s) as a principal use, see “sales or service in-vehicle.” Sec.
35-3408(g). For a charging station(s) as an accessory use, see “Accessory
Residential Land Uses” (Sec.
35-3411) or “Accessory Commercial Land Uses” (Sec.
35-3414).
      Types of charging stations include:
      a.   Private Charging Station: A charging station that is: 1) privately
owned and has restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking,
designated employee parking, etc.), or 2) publicly owned and has restricted
access (e.g., fleet parking with no access to the general public).
      b.   Public Charging Station: A charging station that is: 1) publicly
owned and publicly available (e.g., park and ride, public parking lots, on-
street parking, etc.), or 2) privately owned and publicly available (e.g.,
shopping center parking, non-reserved parking in multi-family parking lots,
etc.).
   Clear cutting (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(e).
   Clerestory window. A window in which the lowest glassed area is a minimum of
7 feet above the level of the floor located directly under the window.
   Climax tree. A tree that would occupy the uppermost canopy of a forest in a
natural ecological situation. These trees are often referred to as shade trees.
Examples include hickory, oak, maple, etc. See Appendix A.
   Collector street. See Street, Collector.
   Commercial animal boarding (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(p).
   Commercial indoor lodging (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(j).
   Commercial solar energy system. Any device or assembly of devices that (i)
is ground installed and (ii) uses solar energy from the sun for generating
electricity for the primary purpose of wholesale sale and not primarily for
consumption on the property on which the device or devices reside as defined in
55 ILCS 5/5-12020(a). (Commercial solar energy systems exclude community solar
energy systems in county jurisdictions.)
   Commercial vehicle. Any motor vehicle used for business or institutional
purposes or having painted thereon or affixed thereto a sign identifying a
business or institution or a principal product or service of a business or
institution. Agricultural equipment used as part of a permitted agricultural
principal use shall not be considered as a commercial vehicle.
   Common Ownership. Common ownership shall be defined as lands that both share
a common boundary and are singly owned by one individual, jointly owned by a
married couple including that individual, owned by a partnership or corporation
in which that individual was a member, or any combination. Lands shall be
considered to share a common boundary even if they are divided by a public road
or navigable waterway, or if they connect at only one point.
   Communication Tower (land use). See Sec.
35-3502. (Ord. No. 3003-2008; repealed Sec. 35-1203(54); enacted new Sec. 35-
1203(54); 01/22/08)
   Community Business District "B-3." See Sec.
35-3310.
   Community character. The impression which an area makes in regard to the
type, intensity, density, quality, appearance, and age of development.
   Company provided on site recreation (land use). See Sec.
35-3414(3).
   Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Moline, Illinois,
currently in effect, and as subsequently amended. The Comprehensive Plan is a
policy guide, advising decisions regarding the physical development of the
community. The Comprehensive Plan also encompasses the one and one-half mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as authorized by 65 Illinois 5/11-12-
15. The Comprehensive Plan is a guide and subject to change as warranted to
address new situations.
   Conservation District "C-2." See Sec.
35-3209.
   Construction, start of. The installation of foundation footings and/or
materials for road construction.
   Contractor's on-site equipment storage (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(d).
   Contractor's project office (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(e).
   Cross-slope. The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way rather
than in the direction traffic moves on said right-of-way.
   Cul-de-Sac. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having
the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for vehicles; the term
may also be used to refer solely to the turn-around.
   Cultivation (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(a).
   Curb and Gutter, Integral. The rim forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a
single facility.
   Day Care. See family day care home, intermediate day care home, or group day
care center.
   Deck. An outside porch without a roof (not necessarily attached to a wall),
whose floor is built on a foundation, piers, or blocks, as a distinct structure
requiring a building permit, above ground grade, limited to a maximum height of
the adjacent first floor level in the dwelling. It is not allowed at any higher
level than above ground grade, to avoid the deck floor from creating a de-facto
roofed porch underneath; but a deck can be located on the existing roof of
dwellings and garages.
   Dedication or Dedicate. The transfer of property interest from private to
public ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of fee simple
interest or of a less than fee simple interest, including without limitation,
an easement.
   Density. A term used to describe the number of dwelling units per acre.
   Developer. The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development, including an optionee or contract
purchaser.
   Development. The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or
enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of any buildings or
land; any extension of any use of land; or any clearing, grading, or other
movement of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Code.
   Development option(s). The type of residential or nonresidential development
as categorized by the proportion of the site devoted to permanently protected
green space.
   Development pad. The area of a lot where site disruption will occur,
including building areas, paved areas, yards and other areas on non-native
vegetation, and areas devoted to septic systems.
   Disposal land use(s). See Sec.
35-3410(f).
   Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff, to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after development, and the means necessary
for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
   Drainageway. Drainageways are non navigable, above ground watercourses,
detention basins and/or their environs which are identified by the presence of
one or more of the following: (a) All areas within 75 feet of the ordinary high
water mark of a "perennial stream" as shown on USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps
for the City of Moline and its environs; (b) All areas within 50 feet of the
ordinary high water mark of an "intermittent stream" or "open channel
drainageway" as shown on USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of
Moline and its environs. See Sec.
35-4107.
   Drainage structure (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(b).
   Drip line. Outer perimeter edge of a tree canopy as transferred
perpendicularly to ground level.
   Drive-in theater (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(l).
   Dryland access. A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood
elevation and which connects land located in the floodplain to land which is
outside the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above the regional
flood elevation and wide enough to accommodate wheeled vehicles.
   Duplex. See Sec.
35-3405(d).
   Dwelling. A building or one or more portions thereof, containing one or more
dwelling units, but not including habitations provided in nonresidential uses
such as lodging uses and commercial campgrounds.
   Dwelling, attached. A dwelling joined to another dwelling at one or more
sides by a shared wall or walls.
   Dwelling, detached. A dwelling entirely surrounded by open space on the same
lot.
   Dwelling unit. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as
living quarters for a family, or for a community residence, as a single
housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in
addition to sleeping and living areas.
   Dwelling unit separation. The narrowest distance between two dwelling units.
See Minimum dwelling unit separation.
   Easement. Written authorization, recorded in the Rock Island County Recorder
of Deeds' office, from a landowner authorizing another party to use any
designated part of the land owner's property for a specified purpose.
   Electric Vehicle. “Electric Vehicle” as defined by the most-recent version
of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-6100), as amended (National
Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): An automotive-type vehicle for on-road
use, such as passenger automobiles, buses, truck, vans, neighborhood electric
vehicles, electric motorcycles, and the like, primarily powered by an electric
motor that draws current from a rechargeable storage battery, fuel cell,
photovoltaic array, or other source of electric current. Plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles (PHEV) are considered electric vehicles. For the purpose of
this chapter, off-road, self-propelled electric vehicles, such as industrial
trucks, hoists, lifts transports, golf carts, airline ground support equipment,
tractors, boats and the like, are not considered electric vehicles.
   Electric Vehicle Connector. “Electric Vehicle Connector” as defined by the
most-recent version of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-6100), as
amended (National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): A device that, by
insertion into an electric vehicle inlet, establishes an electrical connection
to the electric vehicle for the purpose of power transfer and information
exchange. This device is part of the electric vehicle coupler.
   Electric Vehicle Coupler. “Electric Vehicle Coupler” as defined by the most
recent version of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-6100), as amended
(National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): A mating electric vehicle inlet
and electric vehicle connector set.
   Electric Vehicle Inlet. “Electric Vehicle Inlet” as defined by the most-
recent version of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-6100), as amended
(National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): The device on the electric
vehicle into which the electric vehicle connector is inserted for power
transfer and information exchange. This device is part of the electric vehicle
coupler. For the purposes of this chapter, the electric vehicle inlet is
considered to be part of the electric vehicle and not part of the electric
vehicle supply equipment.
   Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment. “Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment” as
defined by the most-recent version of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-
6100), as amended (National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): The
conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding
conductors and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other
fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed specifically for the
purpose of transferring energy between the premises wiring and the electric
vehicle.
   Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Infrastructure. The electrical
infrastructure necessary to support future installation of electric vehicle
supply equipment, including, but not be limited to, the design load placed on
electrical panels and service equipment to support the additional electrical
demand, the panel capacity to support additional feeder/branch circuits,
raceways, and wiring.
   Electromagnetic radiation standards. See Sec.
35-5411.
   Elevated Building. A non basement building built to have its lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, pilings columns (post and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls.
   Entertainment, adult. See Sec.
35-3408(m).
   Entertainment, indoor. See Sec.
35-3408(k).
   Entertainment, outdoor. See Sec.
35-3408(l).
   Environmental control facility. Any facility, temporary or permanent, which
is reasonably expected to abate, reduce, or aid in the prevention, measurement,
control or monitoring of noise, air, or water pollutants, solid waste or
thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities
installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or
equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control
standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution
control facilities.
   Environs (of the City of Moline). The area in which the City of Moline
exercises extraterritorial powers.
   Erosion. The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice, and/or gravity.
   Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and underground
water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare but not
including buildings.
   EV-Installed. Having all necessary electric vehicle supply equipment
infrastructure and electric vehicle supply equipment installed for Level 2 or
Level 3 electric vehicle charging.
   EV-Ready. Having electric vehicle supply equipment infrastructure installed
that at least provides conduit for a dedicated branch circuit originating at
the service equipment and terminating at a receptacle, junction box, or
electric vehicle supply equipment adjacent to the parking space for Level 2 or
Level 3 electric vehicle charging.
   Exterior communication devices (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(c).
   Exterior light fixture. An outdoor artificial illuminating device, either
permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement of parking lots,
architecture, signage, landscaping, entryways, or areas requiring security. See
Division 3 of Article V for illumination standards.
   Extraction use (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(j).
   Extraterritorial area. The area outside of the City limits in which the City
of Moline may exercise extraterritorial powers of planning, land division, and/
or zoning review.
   Family. One or more persons each related to them by blood, marriage, or
adoption (including foster children), together with such relative of the
respective spouses who are living with the family in a single dwelling and
maintaining a common household. A family may also be composed of not to exceed
three persons not so related, provided that such unrelated persons live in a
single dwelling and maintain a common household and single household unit. A
family includes any domestic servants and not more than one gratuitous guest
residing with said family; such servants or guest shall be included in the
unrelated persons attained by this definition, and shall not be in addition
thereto.
   Family day care home (land use). See Sec.
35-3411(2).
   Fence. A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially
constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials or plantings/
shrubbery planted or erected to enclose or screen areas of land. See Sec.
35-5209 for fencing standards.
   Filling (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(d).
   First habitable floor. The top surface above an unfinished basement, cellar,
or crawl space that is intended for living quarters.
   Floodplain and related topics. See Chapter 13 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances.
   Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached
accessory buildings, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches,
detached accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility
rooms, inside off-street parking or loading space. Measurements shall be made
from the inside of the exterior walls and to the center of interior walls.
   Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The ratio calculated by dividing the total floor
area of all buildings on a site by the Gross Site Area. See Maximum floor area
ratio.
   Food Truck. A self-contained motorized vehicle used for mobile food
services.
   Food Truck Park. An outdoor lot with the capacity for two or more food truck
vendors to congregate to offer food or beverages for sale to the public for
immediate consumption.
   Foot-candle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of
which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one candle.
   Freestanding Solar Systems. An assembly of components which captures radiant
energy from the sun to provide heat, electricity, or other usable form of
converted energy to onsite buildings and structures. Freestanding solar energy
systems typically consist of an array of solar cells, photovoltaic panels, and/
or thermal collectors mounted to the ground or a pole or similar support
structure, or a minor accessory structure, and also include inverters,
batteries, and interconnection wiring. This description shall exclude solar
panels on lawful traffic control equipment and also exclude solar panels up to
18 square feet in size on standalone devices such as signs, lighting, security
equipment, or emergency telephones, provided that such devices comply with all
other applicable codes and regulations.
   Freight terminal (land use). See Sec.
35-3409(c).
   Frontage. The boundary of a lot along a street.
   Frontage Road. A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
   Garage (private). A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building, including a carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger
vehicles, trailers or one (1) truck of a rated capacity not in excess of eight
thousand (8,000) pounds.
   Gas station. See sales or service in-vehicle. Sec.
35-3408(g).
   General Agricultural District "AG-2." See Sec.
35-3210.
   General floor plans. A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization
of the floor area within a building or structure, but not necessarily as
detailed as construction plans.
   General Industrial District "I-2." See Sec.
35-3314.
   General temporary outdoor sales (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(h).
   Glare. The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort, to a
healthy observer, such as the zoning administrator. See Sec.
35-5302 for glare standards.
   Grade. The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for "slope."
   Green Space Ratio (GSR). The percentage of the gross site area which is
preserved as permanently protected green space. Green space ratio is calculated
by dividing the area of permanently protected green space by the gross site
area.
   Gross density. The result of dividing the number of dwelling units located
on a site by the gross site area. See Maximum gross density.
   Gross floor area. The total floor area on all levels of a building.
   Gross Site Area (GSA). The total area of a site available for inclusion in
calculations of the maximum permitted density or intensity of development.
   Ground floor area. The floor area of the first habitable floor.
   Group day care center (land use). See Sec.
35-3411.
   Group development. See Sec.
35-3419.
   Group/Institutional Residential (land use). See Sec.
35-3405 (m)(1) and (2).
   Habitable buildings. Any building, or portion thereof used for human
habitation.
   Hardship, Undue. See Undue Hardship.
   Hazardous material or substance. Any substance or material that, by reason
of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties,
may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or
otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has developed a list of hazardous
materials based upon corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity. Hazardous
substances include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids or sulfur,
fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and
their common salts, lead, nickel, and mercury and their inorganic salts, or
metallo-organic derivatives; coal, tar acids, such as phenol and cresols and
their salts, and all radioactive materials.
   Heat standards. See Sec. 35-5506.
   Height of structure. See Building Height.
   Heliport (land use). See Sec.
35-3409(a).
   Holding zone. A zoning district designed to limit development potential
until adequate public services and infrastructure are provided.
   Home occupation (land use). See Sec.
35-3411(3) and (4).
   Hotel. See lodging.
   Husbandry (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(f).
   Illinois Quad Cities Unified Zoning Code. A document authored by the Bi-
State Regional Commission dated May 2002. Also referred to as the Unified Code.
   Impervious surface. Areas designed and installed to prohibit infiltration of
stormwater. Homes, buildings, and other structures, as well as concrete, brick,
asphalt, gravel and similar paved surfaces are considered impervious. Areas
with "landscaped pavers" that are ninety (90) percent impervious, which are
intended for vehicular traffic are considered to be impervious.
   Improvements. Same as "Public Improvement."
   Improvement Plan. Engineering plans showing the design and construction
details for infrastructure and improvements to be installed in, or in
conjunction with, a development.
   Indoor commercial entertainment (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(k).
   Indoor institutional (land use). See Sec.
35-3407.
   Indoor sales (land use). See Sec.
35-3408.
   Indoor sales accessory to light industrial use (land use). See Sec.
35-3416.
   Indoor storage (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(b).
   Indoor wholesaling (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(b).
   Industrial Districts. See Sec.
35-3312.
   Infill development. Development located in areas which are largely developed
already.
   Institutional, indoor – daycare center (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(e).
   Institutional, indoor – general (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(f).
   Institutional, indoor – intensive (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(g).
   Institutional, outdoor (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(d).
   Institutional residential development (land use). See Sec.
35-3405.
   Institutional Residential (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(m).
   Intensity. A term used to describe the amount of gross floor area or
landscaped area, on a lot or site, compared to the gross area of the lot or
site.
   Intensive agricultural (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(g).
   Interpretation. See Sec.
35-1108 for application procedures.
   Intersection. The point at which two or more rights-of-way (generally
streets) meet.
   In vehicle sales (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(g).
   In vehicle service (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(g).
   Junkyard (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(e).
   Kennel, private residential (land use). See Sec.
35-3411(5).
   Landscape point. See Sec.
35-5202.
   Landscaped area. The area of a site which is planted and continually
maintained in vegetation, including grasses, flowers, herbs, garden plants,
native or introduced groundcovers, shrubs, bushes, and trees. Landscaped area
includes the area located within planted and continually maintained landscaped
planters.
   Landscape Surface Area Ratio (LSR). The percentage of the gross site area or
lot area which is preserved as permanently protected landscaped area.
   Land use. The type of development and/or activity occurring on a piece of
property.
   Lawn care (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(f).
   Legal objector. The owner of a lot, parcel, or tract of land, which is next
to a lot, parcel, or tract of land, for which a special use is proposed or
which is the subject of an amendment of this Code. For the purposes of this
Code, a lot shall be deemed to be next to another if the lots, parcels, or
tracts share a common lot boundary line in whole or in part or if a common lot
boundary in whole or in part would occur if all street, highway, or alley
right-of-way between such lots were excluded.
   Light Industrial District "I-1." See Sec.
35-3313.
   Light Industrial (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(g).
   Light Industrial incidental to indoor sale (land use). See Sec.
35-3416(1).
   Lighting standards. See Division 3 of Article V.
   Loading standards. See Sec.
35-5101.
   Local street. See Street, Local.
   Lot. A parcel of land that: (1) is undivided by any street or private road;
(2) is occupied by, or designated to be developed for, one building or
principal use; and (3) contains the accessory buildings or uses customarily
incidental to such building, use, or development, including such open spaces
and yards as designed and arranged or required by this Code for such building,
use, or development. A lot may or may not coincide with a "lot of record."
   Lot area. The area contained within the property boundaries of a lot of
record.
   Lot, corner. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on, two (2) or
more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of
a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135 degrees.
All yards abutting streets (see definition (354) for streets) shall be enforced
as required front yards.
   Lot depth. The average distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line of a lot.
   Lot, Flag. A lot with two distinct parts: (1) The flag, which is located
behind another lot; and (2) the pole, which connects the flag to the street and
is at any point less than the required lot width or frontage.
   Lot frontage. Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more
than one street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot
width required by this Code shall be provided, at each such line.
   Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
   Lot line. The property line (including the vertical plane established by the
line and the ground) bounding a lot except that where any portion of a lot
extends into the public-right-of way or a proposed public right-of-way, the
line of such public right-of-way shall be the lot line for applying this Code.
   Lot line, front. A lot line that abuts a public or private street right-of-
way. In the case of a lot that has two or more street frontages, the lot line
along the street from which the house is addressed shall be the front lot line.
   Lot line, rear. In the case of rectangular or most trapezoidal shaped lots,
that lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of
the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore shaped lot, a line 20
feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
possible distance from the front line shall be considered to be the rear lot
line. In the case of lots that have frontage on more than one road or street,
the rear lot line shall be selected by the property owner.
   Lot line, side. Any boundary of a lot, which is not a front lot line, a
street side lot line, or a rear lot line.
   Lot line, street side. Any lot line that abuts a public or private street
right-of-way which is not the front lot line.
   Lot of record. A platted lot or lot described in a boundary survey or in a
metes and bounds description which has been approved by the City or by Rock
Island County; and has been recorded in the office of the Rock Island County
Recorder of Deeds.
   Lot, reverse corner. A corner lot where the lot width exceeds the lot depth.
   Lot, through. A lot which abuts two parallel public streets, or abuts two
public streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. The yard
that abuts a public street and is considered its principal frontage shall be
the front yard. The yard that abuts a public street and is not considered its
principal frontage shall be the rear yard, with the exception that a front yard
(s) has been established along the same public street block and on the same
side of the street and has been enforced as a front yard(s). If a front yard(s)
has been established along the same public street block and on the same side of
the street and has been enforced as a front yard(s), then the yard that abuts a
public street and not considered its principal frontage shall also be a front
yard.
   Lot width. The maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot, measured at the building line. See minimum lot width.
   Lowest floor. The lowest enclosed floor (including basement) in a particular
structure. Any unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement
area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosed
area is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non elevation design requirements of this Code.
   Maintenance guarantee. A financial guarantee posted by the developer and
approved by the City of Moline, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of
required infrastructure and improvements required pursuant to this Code.
   Manufactured Home. See Sec.
35-3405(i).
   Manufactured home park. Mobile home park. See Sec.
35-3405(k).
   Maximum accessory building coverage. The largest permitted area of all
accessory buildings on a lot.
   Maximum building coverage. The largest permitted ground floor area of all
buildings on a lot.
   Maximum Building Size (MBS). The largest permitted total gross floor area a
building may contain. See building size.
   Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The largest amount of floor area permitted
on a lot. See floor area ratio.
   Maximum Gross Density (MGD). The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
per acre of Gross Site Area. See gross density.
   Maximum height. The maximum height of the highest portion of any structure.
See Height.
   Minimum area per unit. The minimum amount of lot area required for each
dwelling unit located on that lot.
   Minimum building separation. The narrowest permitted building separation.
   Minimum dwelling unit separation. The narrowest permitted dwelling unit
separation.
   Minimum floor elevation. The lowest elevation permissible for the
construction, erection, or other placement of any floor, including a basement
floor.
   Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR). The lowest permitted landscape
surface ratio. See landscape surface ratio.
   Minimum Lot Area (MLA). The minimum size lot permitted within the specified
zoning district and development option.
   Minimum lot dimension. The minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum
street frontages and minimum area per unit.
   Minimum lot width. The smallest permissible lot width for the applicable
dwelling unit type or nonresidential development option.
   Minimum yard setback. The narrowest distance permitted from a street, side,
or rear property line to a structure.
   Minimum Site Area (MSA). The minimum gross site area in which the specified
development option may occur. See gross site area (GSA).
   Minimum street frontage. The narrowest distance permitted along the street
abutting the front yard of the lot.
   Mini warehouse. See Sec.
35-3410.
   Mobile Food Establishment. Establishments primarily engaged in mobile food
services using food trucks. The establishment is the central location from
which the food truck route is serviced, not each food truck.
   Mobile Food Services. Preparing and serving meals and snacks for immediate
consumption from motorized vehicles, such as food trucks, mobile food carts,
mobile food concession stands, mobile refreshment stands, mobile snack stands,
and motorized food vendors. Mobile food services do not include ice cream
trucks; hot dog carts; charitable organizations distributing food to those in
need; and persons engaged in the door-to-door delivery of previously prepared
food or beverages to customers who have placed an order for such items.
   Mobile home (land use).  See Sec.
35-3405(j).
   Mobile Home Park District "R-7." See Sec.
35-3207.
   Mobile Home Park Residential Development. See Chapter 19 of the Moline Code
of Ordinances.
   Mobile Home Residential Development. See Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances.
   Mobile home sales. See Sec.
35-3408(h).
   Motel. See lodging.
   Motor Court. See commercial indoor lodging.
   Motor freight terminal. See freight terminal.
   Multifamily Residential District "R-6." See Sec.
35-3206.
   Multiple-Family Dwelling. See Sec.
35-3405(h).
   Multiplex. See Sec.
35-3405(g).
   Navigable water. All natural inland lakes and all rivers, streams, ponds,
sloughs, flowages, and other waters within the territorial limits of this
state. For the purposes of this Code, rivers and streams will be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways
on the United States Geological Survey quadrangle maps until such time that the
State of Illinois has made a determination that the waterway is not, in fact,
navigable.
   Neighborhood Business District "B-1." See Sec.
35-3307.
   Neighborhood Center District "NC." See Sec.
35-3308.
   Net Developable Area (NDA). The area of a site that may be disturbed by
development activity. Net Developable Area is the result of subtracting
Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) from the Gross Site Area (GSA).
   Noise standards. See Sec.
35-5409.
   Nonconforming building or structure. Any building, or other structure, which
was lawfully existing under ordinances or regulations preceding this Code or
subsequent applicable amendments thereto, but because of subsequent amendments
to the Code, no longer conforms to one or more of the applicable bulk
standards, dimensional requirements or setback or encroachment regulations set
forth in Article III (“Zoning”), including but not limited to Tables 35-3201.1,
35-3201.2 and 35-3301.1, or the design requirements established in Article V,
Division 5 (“Quality Building and Site Design and Materials Standards”).
   Nonconforming lot. A lot of record in existence prior to the date of
adoption of this Code or subsequent applicable amendments to lot dimension
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, but because of
subsequent amendments to the Code, no longer conforms with one or more of the
minimum lot dimensions specified in this Code. See Sec.
35-3110.
   Nonconforming site. A lawful development approved under ordinances or
regulations preceding the effective date of this Code or subsequent applicant
amendments thereto, but which would not conform to one or more of the site
improvement or performance standards of Article V (“Site Improvement and
Performance Standards”) or the required landscape surface ratio for the host
zoning district as identified in Table 35-3301.1 of this Code if the
development were to be created under the current provisions of this Code due to
a nonconforming site development element. See Sec.
35-3112.
   Nonconforming site development element. An element of the site development
improvements, such as landscape, lighting, or parking, or an element of the
operations, such as noise, vibration, odor, heat, glare and smoke externalities
that were lawful when established, but due to subsequent amendments to Article
V of this Code, no longer conforms with one or more of the site improvement or
performance standards set forth in Article V (“Site Improvement and Performance
Standards”) of this Code. See Sec.
35-3112.
   Nonconforming use. An active and actual use of land, buildings or
structures, or both, which was lawfully existing prior to the effective date of
this Code or subsequent applicable amendment thereto, which has continued as
the same use to the present, but because of the adoption of the Code or
subsequent amendments thereto, would not be allowed under the current terms of
the Code. See Sec.
35-3111.
   Nonmotorized Transportation Facilities. Improvements designed and intended
primarily for the use, safety and comfort of pedestrians, cyclists, and other
users of nonmotorized means of transportation. Examples include sidewalks,
trails, bike lanes and related appurtenances, such as signs, signals and
wheelchair ramps.
   Noxious matter or materials. Material capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on
the physical or economic well being of individuals.
   Noxious materials standards. See Sec.
35-5412.
   Odor standards. See Sec.
35-5410.
   Office Districts. See Sec.
35-3303.
   Office District "O-1." See Sec.
35-3304.
   Office (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(c).
   Office Research Park Technology District "ORT." See Sec.
35-3305.
   Official Map. The official map indicates sites for planned public
facilities. Public facility sites that may be indicated on the official map
include but are not limited to: sites for new streets or widening of existing
streets; school sites; park sites, public building sites; and sites for future
drainage and stormwater management facilities, energy or other public service
or utility easements.
   Official Zoning Map. The map adopted and designated by the City of Moline as
being the "Official Zoning Map." See Sec.
35-3103.
   Off site parking lot (land use). See Sec.
35-3409(b).
   On site. Located on the lot in question, except in the context of on site
detention, when the term means within the boundaries of the development site as
a whole.
   On site agricultural retail (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(c).
   On-site parking lot (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(g).
   On-site real estate sales office (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(j).
   One-Family Detached Dwelling. See Sec.
35-3405(a).
   One-Family Residential District "R-2." See Sec.
35-3204.
   One to Six Family Residential District "R-4." See Sec.
35-3205.
   Open sales lot. An unenclosed portion of a lot or lot of record where goods
are displayed for sale, rent or trade.
   Ordinary high water mark. The point on the bank or shore of a body of water
up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily
recognized characteristics.
   Other permanently protected green space. Permanently protected green space
areas not constrained by one of the protected natural resources (wetlands,
floodplains, steep slopes, lakeshores, drainageways, and woodlands). Examples
include: portions of private lots, outlots, or parcels commonly held by a
property owners' association which are deed restricted from site disruption.
   Outbuilding and Recreational Facilities, private residential (land use). See
Sec.
35-3411(6).
   Outdoor assembly (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(f).
   Outdoor commercial entertainment (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(l).
   Outdoor display (land use). See Sec.
35-3414.
   Outdoor display incidental to indoor sales (land use). See Sec.
35-3414.
   Outdoor institutional (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(d).
   Outdoor sales of farm products (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(g).
   Outdoor storage (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(c).
   Outdoor wholesaling (land use). See Sec.
35-3510(c).
   Overlay Zoning District. A zoning district which imposes uniform
restrictions on all properties within its area which are in addition to the
restrictions specific to the standard zoning districts.
   Owner. The person, persons, or entity having the right of legal title to a
lot or parcel of land.
   Pad, Development. See Development pad.
   Parcel. The area within the boundary lines of a lot.
   Parking area pod. An area of parking spaces within a parking lot
substantially separated from other areas of the parking lot by landscaped
islands or medians.
   Parking standards. See Sec.
35-5100.
   Parking lot design standards. See Sec.
35-5100.
   Parking requirements. See Sec.
35-5100.
   Parking space design standards. See Sec.
35-5100.
   Passive outdoor public recreational (land use). See Sec.
35-3407(a).
   Performance guarantee. A financial guarantee posted by the developer and
approved by the City of Moline, guaranteeing that all improvements, facilities,
or work required by this Code will be completed in compliance with the Code,
regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a development.
   Performance standard. Criterion established to control and limit the impacts
generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. See Article V.
   Peripheral setback. The distance between a structure and the boundary of a
development.
   Permanently protected green space. An area in which site disruption and/or
development is strictly limited. See Article IV.
   Permitted by right, use. See Sec.
35-3401(1).
   Person. An individual, group of individuals, corporation, association,
partnership, joint venture or other entity, and includes any trustee, estate,
receiver, assignee or personal representative.
   Personal service(s) (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(d).
   Personal storage facility (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(a).
   Piers and wharfs. See Sec.
35-3420(13).
   Plan Commission. The plan commission of the City of Moline. See Sec.
35-1301.
   Planned Unit Development. See Division 7 of Article III.
   Plat, Dedication. A plat required for the dedication to the City of all
right-of-way easements, and improvements outside of a subdivision plat or
within a special use classification.
   Plat, Final Subdivision. A plat and supporting documentation of a
subdivision which, if approved, must be recorded with the Rock Island County
Recorder of Deeds.
   Plat, Preliminary Subdivision. Preliminary maps, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
   Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV). “Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicle
(PHEV)” as defined by the most-recent version of the Moline Electrical Code
(Code Sec. 8-6100), as amended (National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): A
type of electric vehicle intended for on-road use with the ability to store and
use off-vehicle electrical energy in the rechargeable energy storage system,
and having a second source of motive power.
   Pod. See Parking Area Pod.
   Porch. A roofed structure (either enclosed, or unenclosed) attached to one
(1) or two (2) permanent exterior walls of a dwelling building, whose floor is
at or just below the level of the dwelling first floor adjacent to the porch.
   Principal building. See Building, principal.
   Principal use. Any and all of the primary uses of a property, treated as a
use permitted by right or as a conditional use (rather than as an accessory use
or a temporary use) per Sections
35-3405,
35-3406,
35-3407,
35-3408,
35-3409, and
35-3410.
   Professional service(s) (land use). See Sec.
35-3408(d).
   Protected natural resources. Resources such as wetlands, drainageways,
woodlands, steep slopes, and shorelands, which are protected by the provisions
of this Code. See Division 1 of Article IV.
   Public improvement (or Improvement). Any improvement, facility, or service,
together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to
provide for public needs such as: streets, roads, alleys or pedestrian walks or
paths, bicycle paths, stormwater management facilities, storm sewers, flood
control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage
disposal and treatment, public utility and energy services.
   Public services and utilities (land use). See Sec.
35-3409(e) and (f).
   Public sewer. Includes the City of Moline sewer system and other forms of
sewer systems approved by the State of Illinois and maintained by an agency
authorized to operate such systems.
   Rechargeable Energy Storage System. “Rechargeable Energy Storage System” as
defined by the most-recent version of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-
6100), as amended (National Electrical Code, Sec. 625.2 (2011)): Any power
source that has the capability to be charged and discharged.
   Recorded lot. See Lot of record.
   Recreation, outdoor – passive public (land use). See Sec.
35-3407.
   Recreation, outdoor – active, public (land use). See Sec.
35-3407.
   Recreation, outdoor – private campgrounds/camping resort (land use). See
Sec.
35-3407.
   Recreational vehicle. A general term for a vehicular unit bearing current
license and/or registration, not exceeding 20 feet in overall length, 8 feet in
width or 6 feet in overall height (from ground to its highest point, excluding
the antenna), which includes but is not limited to the following specific
vehicle types.
      a.   Camper Trailer. A folding or collapsing vehicular structure without
its own (motive) power designed as temporary living quarters for travel,
camping, recreation and vacation uses; and (to) be licensed and registered for
highway use.
      b.   Travel Trailer. A rigid structure without its own motive power
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation
use; to be licensed and registered for highway use; and which, when equipped
for the road, has a body width of not more than 8 feet 6 inches.
      c.   Truck Camper. A portable structure without its own motive power
designed to be transported on a power vehicle as a temporary dwelling for
travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and which, in combination with
the carrying vehicle (shall) be licensed for highway use.
      d.   Motor Home. A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self-
propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary
dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and to be licensed
and registered for highway use. This category shall include converted bus
campers.
      e.   Boat Trailer. A vehicle structure without its own motive power
designed to transport a boat for recreation and vacation use and which is
licensed and registered for highway use.
      f.   Horse Trailer. A vehicle structure without its own motive power
designed primarily for the transportation of horses and which, in combination
with the towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for highway use.
      g.   Utility Trailer. A vehicle structure without its own motive power
designed primarily for the transportation of all manner of motor vehicles,
goods or materials and licensed and registered for highway use.
      h.   Recreational Boat. A vessel, whether impelled by wind, oars or
mechanical devices, and which is designed primarily for recreation or vacation
use. A recreation vessel when mounted upon a boat trailer shall be considered
one unit.
   Relocatable building (land use). See Sec.
35-3418(k).
   Required resource protection area (RPA). The area of a site which may not be
disturbed by development activity and which must also be reserved as
permanently protected green space. Required resource protection area is the
result of subtracting the net developable area (NDA) from the gross site area
(GSA).
   Residential infill standards. See Sec.
35-3211.
   Residential land use(s). See Sec.
35-3203.
   Residential solid waste. Waste that normally originates in a residential
environment.
   Residentially zoned. A property located in a residential district per Sec.
35-3203.
   Resource Districts. See Sec.
35-3208.
   Restrictive, more (less). A regulation imposed by this Code is more (less)
restrictive than another if it prohibits or limits development to a greater
(lesser) extent or by means of more (less) detailed specifications.
   Restaurant. See Sec.
35-3408(i).
   Restaurant, fast food. See in vehicle sales and service. See Sec.
35-3408(g).
   Right of way. A strip of land dedicated to the City or other unit of
government for streets, alleys, and other public improvements.
   Salvage yard (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(e).
   Scale (of development). A term used to describe the gross floor area,
height, or volume of a single structure or group of structures.
   Sedimentation. The deposition of soil that has been transported from its
site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a result
of erosion.
   Selective cutting (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(d).
   Septic systems (land use). See Sec.
35-3417(b).
   Service Equipment. “Service Equipment” as defined by the most-recent version
of the Moline Electrical Code (Code Sec. 8-6100), as amended (National
Electrical Code, art. 100 (2011)): The necessary equipment, usually consisting
of a circuit breaker(s) or switch(es) and fuse(s) and their accessories,
connected to the load end of service conductors to a building or other
stricture, or an otherwise designated area, and intended to constitute the main
control and cutoff of the supply.
   Setback. The shortest distance between a building's or structure's exterior
and the nearest point on the referenced lot line. See minimum setback.
   Shielded light fixture. An outdoor lighting fixture which through design is
shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected at least
fifteen degrees below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on
the fixture where light is emitted. Except for ground and sign mounted light
fixtures, that horizontal plane shall be parallel to the surface of the ground.
See Division 3 of Article V for Exterior Lighting Standards.
   Shoreland. Those lands lying within the following distances from the
ordinary high water mark of navigable waters: 1,000 feet from a lake, pond, or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream; or to a landward side of the
floodplain, whichever distance is greater. Shorelands shall not include those
lands adjacent to farm drainage ditches where (a) such lands are not adjacent
to a navigable stream or river; (b) those parts of such drainage ditches
adjacent to such lands were not navigable streams before ditching or had no
previous stream history; and (c) such lands are maintained in non-structural
agricultural use. See Sec.
35-4108.
   Shrub. A low lying deciduous or evergreen plant. See Appendix A.
   Sign. See Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   Silviculture, Clear Cutting (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(e).
   Silviculture, Selective Cutting (land use). See Sec.
35-3406(d).
   Single family detached dwelling unit (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(a).
   Site area. See Gross site area.
   Site Plan. See Sec.
35-2105 for applicable procedures.
   Skylight. A window or other paned area located on the ceiling or roof of a
structure.
   Soil. All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
   Solar energy. Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   Solar energy system. A device, array of devices, or structural design
feature, the purpose of which is to provide for generation or storage of
electricity from sunlight, or the collection, storage and distribution of solar
energy for space heating or cooling, daylight for interior lighting, or water
heating.
   Special use. A land use which requires a special use permit in order to
develop. See Sec.
35-2206 for applicable procedures.
   Stable, commercial (land use). See commercial animal services. Sec.
35-3408(p).
   Stacking space. A space specifically designated as a waiting area for
vehicles whose occupants will be patronizing a drive-through facility for in-
vehicle sales and service.
   Standard Industrial Classification code (SIC). The numeric code for
categorizing land uses developed by the US Department of Commerce. SIC codes in
this Code are based on the listing contained within the 1987 manual.
   Standard pavement width. Required pavement width per the infrastructure and
public improvement standards of Article IV, Division 2, in subdivisions on a
street that allows parking or as otherwise determined by the City engineer.
   Standard Zoning Districts. Zoning districts which primarily regulate the use
of land and intensity or density of such use. See Sec.
35-3102.
   Standards and Specifications. The City of Moline Supplemental
Specifications. See Sec.
35-4208.
   Steep slope. Steep slopes are areas which contain a gradient of 20% or
greater, (equivalent to a 2 foot elevation change in a distance of 10 feet or
less), as shown on USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps for the City of Moline and
its environs. See Sec.
35-4105.
   Storage land use(s). See Sec.
35-3410.
   Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under floor space is more than 6 feet above
grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused
under-floor space shall be considered a story.
   Story, half. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than 4
feet above the floor of such story.
   Street. The portion of a public or private right-of-way, other than an
alley, that affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties.
   Street, arterial. A street which is anticipated to carry in excess of 3,500
vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from 30 to 45
miles per hour, and which is used for travel between areas within and outside
the City.
   Street, collector. A street which is anticipated to carry from 2,500 to
5,000 vehicles per day in traffic volume, at desirable speeds ranging from 30
to 35 miles per hour, which serves a collecting function by distributing
traffic between local streets and arterial streets.
   Street, local. A street which is anticipated to carry less than 2,500
vehicles per day in traffic volume at desirable speeds up to 30 miles per hour,
and which provides access to abutting property and primarily serves local
traffic.
   Street, local residential. A local street serving primarily to collect
traffic originating directly from residential driveways and private residential
courts and streets.
   Street, Major. Any arterial or collector street.
   Street line. See Lot line, front.
   Street, Stub. A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned
for future continuation.
   Strip development. A pattern of land uses typified by nonresidential and/or
multi-family development located along one or both sides of a street which is
generally only one lot deep and which is characterized by many curb cuts, low
green space ratios, low landscape surface ratios, high floor area ratios, and/
or low quantities of landscaping.
   Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Structures include, but are not limited to: buildings, walls, swimming pools,
signs and fences.
   Subdivider. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate
or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as defined in this article.
   Subdivision. Any division of land into two or more lots, any of which is
less than five acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress or
egress, except as set forth in the Plats Act, 765 ILCS 205/1.
   Subdivision, Minor. A land division that (1) results in the consolidation of
lots into a fewer number of lots or (2) results in the creation of 5 or fewer
lots that meet the applicability criteria of Sec.
35-2108(2).
   Swale. A linear depression in land running downhill or having a marked
change in contour direction in which sheet runoff would collect and form a
temporary watercourse.
   Temporary use. A land use present on a property for a limited and specified
period of time. See Sec.
35-3418.
   Terrace/Patio. An unroofed paved area located outside at ground grade, which
is paved as concrete, stone, brick or wood paver blocks (also known as patio
blocks).
   Townhouse (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(f).
   Transportation land use(s). See Sec.
35-3415.
   Truck stop. See In-Vehicle sales and service.
   Twin house (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(c).
   Two flat house (land use). See Sec.
35-3405(e).
   Undue hardship. The circumstance where special conditions affecting a
particular property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity
with restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
ordinance. See Sec.
35-2207(c)(1).
   Use. The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   Use, accessory. See Accessory use.
   Use, special. See Special Use.
   Use, principal. See Principal use.
   Utility. A business or service that is engaged in regularly supplying the
public with some commodity or service that is of consequence and need and that
has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A
utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes, without limitation,
the following services or commodities:
      a.    Electricity;
      b.    Gas, oil, or steam;
      c.    Water;
      d.    Sanitary sewerage;
      e.    Drainage and stormwater management;
      f.    Telephone and Internet service;
      g.    Cable television and other communication lines; and
      h.    Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly
stated.
   Utility shed (land use). See Sec.
35-3411(6).
   Vacate. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision or
portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the Rock Island
County Recorder of Deeds (765 ILCS 205/6 through 765 ILCS 205/8.)
   Variance. Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this Code
for purposes or reasons set forth herein, except for the infrastructure and
public improvement standards of Article IV, Division 2, requests for relief
from the infrastructure and public improvement standards are processed as
waivers and modifications, in accordance with Sec.
35-2211.
   Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, major. See Automobile Repair, major.
   Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, minor. See Automobile Repair, minor.
   Vibration standards. See Sec.
35-5405.
   Visibility standards. See Sec.
35-5210.
   Waivers and Modifications. Permission to depart from strict compliance with
the infrastructure and public improvement standards of Article IV, Division 2.
   Waste disposal facility (land use). See Sec.
35-3410(f).
   Wetland. See Sec.
35-4109.
   Woodland. Woodlands are areas of trees whose combined canopies cover a
minimum of 50% of an area of one-half acre or more, as shown on USGS 7.5 minute
topographic maps for the City of Moline and its environs. See Sec.
35-4106.
   Working days. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; excluding
holidays granted by the City of Moline to its employees.
   Yard. A required open space on a lot, which is unoccupied and unobstructed
by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly
permitted in this Code. A yard shall extend along a lot line and at right
angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations
for the district in which such lot is located.
   Yard, front. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line, or
side street lot line, and extending from the abutting street right of way line
to a depth required in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot
is located.
   Yard, rear. A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line
extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
   Yard, required. The open space area between a lot line and the buildable
area in which no structure shall be located except as may otherwise be provided
by this Code.
   Yard, side. A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and
rear yards, having a width as specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
   Yard, sum side. The combined width of two opposite side yards, having a
width as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot
is located.
   Yards, all. The front, rear and side yards on a lot.
   Zoning Administrator. The person authorized and charged by the City with the
administration and enforcement of this Code. See Sec.
35-1303.
   Zoning District(s). See Sec.
35-3102.
   Zoning Map. See "Official Zoning Map," above and see Sec.
35-3103.
(Ord. No. 3008-2009; Sec. 35-1203(171) & (359) repealed; new Sec. 35-1203(171)
& (359) enacted; 03/24/09) (Ord. No. 3015-2019; new subsections Sec. 35-1203
(31a) and (112a) enacted; 05/21/19) (Ord. No. 3006-223; Sec. 35-1203 (234),
(235), (236), (237) amended; new Sec. 35-1203 (236.5) added; 03/07/23) (Ord.
No. 3012-2023; new Sec. 35-1203 (47a), (47b), (90a), (90b), (90c), (90d),
(90e), (90f), (99a), (99b), (291a), (300a), (321a) added; 04/11/23; Ord. No.
3037-2023; new Sec. 35-1203 (345) enacted; 09/26/23; Ord. No. 3039-2023; new
Sec. 35-1203 (112), (113), (221), (222) enacted; subsequent subsections
renumbered; 10/10/23) (Ord. No. 3020-2024 amended Sec. 35-1203(5); 5/7/24)(Ord.
No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-1203(106) and (313) amended; 02/4/25) (Ord. No. 3036-
2025; new definitions enacted; enumeration of defined terms removed; 9/9/25)
DIVISION 3. DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY
SEC. 35-1300.   CITY COUNCIL.
   The following is a summary of the responsibilities the City Council shall
perform related to this Code:
   (1)   Initiate and decide requests for adoption or amendments to:
      a.   The Comprehensive Plan, Future Land Use Map and Official Map;
      b.   Special area plans, corridor plans and neighborhood plans;
      c.   The text of this Code and the Official Zoning Map; and
      d.   The establishment of development review application fees.
   (2)   Review and decide all requests for:
      a.   Rezoning to planned unit development;
      b.   Planned unit development district outline development plan approvals
and amendments;
      c.   Planned unit development district preliminary plan approvals and
amendments;
      d.   Appeals from actions of the plan commission;
      e.   Preliminary subdivision plat approval if the plat requires a
Comprehensive Plan amendment or involves a requested waiver or modification of
applicable regulations or standards; and
      f.   Final subdivision plat approval if the plat proposes the dedication
of right-of-way land or improvements to the City.
SEC. 35-1301.   PLAN COMMISSION.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive City plan and for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous territory
not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporation limits of the City,
and not included in any municipality, a plan commission is created.
   (1)   COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; MAYOR TO BE EX
OFFICIO MEMBER.  The plan commission shall consist of eleven members, citizens
of the City, appointed by the mayor on the basis of their particular fitness
for their duty on the plan commission, and subject to the approval of the City
Council.
   (2)   TERMS AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS . The term of office of members of
the plan commission shall be six years. All members of the plan commission
shall serve without compensation.
   (3)   ORGANIZATION. Immediately following their appointment, the members of
the plan commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem
necessary, and adopt and later alter rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with state law, the provisions of this Code and other City
ordinances.
   (4)   RECORDS. The plan commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection.
   (5)   POWERS AND DUTIES. The plan commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
      a.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, a comprehensive plan
for the present and future development or redevelopment of the City and
contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (1½) miles
beyond the corporate limits of the City and not included in any other
municipality. The plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
   functional parts, each of which, when adopted shall be the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the City. Such plan shall be advisory,
except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances duly
adopted by the City Council. All requirements for public hearing, filing of
notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of the
comprehensive plan and ordinances with the City clerk shall be complied with as
provided by law.
      b.   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the City and its contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as defined in this division, and shall establish
reasonable requirements in respect to public improvements as defined in this
division, and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course, and surfacing of streets and highways, storm water drainage,
water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and
treatment. The requirement specified in this subsection shall become regulatory
only when adopted by ordinance.    
      c.   To designate land suitable for annexation to the City and the
recommended zoning classification for the land upon annexation.
      d.   To recommend to the City Council, from time to time, such changes in
the official comprehensive plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary,
including any specific improvements thereto.
      e.   To give aid to the officials of the City charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official comprehensive plan or
parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to
promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
      f.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding, within budgeted
amount therefore.
      g.   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and
other groups or agencies to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
      h.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of the “Illinois Municipal Code,” 65 ILCS 5-1-1-1, et al, and as
amended, as may be conferred by the City Council.
      i.   Initiate, hear and recommend to the City Council all requests for
adoption or amendments to the text of the Code and the Official Zoning Map;
      j.   Hear and recommend to the City Council all requests for:
         1.   Rezoning to planned unit development;
         2.   Planned unit development outline development plans and
amendments; and
         3.   Planned unit development preliminary development plans and
amendments.
      k.   Hear and decide all requests for:
         1.   Special use permits;
         2.   Planned unit development final plans and amendments;
         3.   Variances of certain provisions of this Code as provided for in
this Code;
         4.   Preliminary subdivision plats that do not require a Comprehensive
Plan amendment or involve a requested waiver or modification of applicable
regulations or standards; and
         5.   Minor subdivisions in specific cases where the zoning
administrator defers decision making authority to the plan commission.
SEC. 35-1302.   ZONING HEARING OFFICER.
   (a)   CREATION AND APPOINTMENT. There is hereby established a zoning hearing
officer who shall have the powers as assigned by this Code. The zoning hearing
officer shall be appointed by the City attorney on the total basis of the
individual’s fitness for duty and subject to the approval of the City Council.
Upon the appointment of the zoning hearing officer, the terms of office of the
then existing members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall immediately expire
and the Zoning Board of Appeals dissolved.
   (b)   POWERS AND DUTIES. The zoning hearing officer is hereby vested with
the following jurisdiction and authority:
   (1)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or building
official under this Code. The zoning hearing officer may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partially, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from in the manner that the zoning hearing officer may
decide to be fitting and proper in the premise and to that end, the zoning
hearing officer shall also have all powers of the officer from whom the appeals
are taken.
   (2)   To hear and decide all matters referred to such zoning hearing officer
or upon which such zoning hearing officer is required to pass under this Code
as provided for in Sec.
35-2207.
   (3)   To hear and pass upon applications for variations from a strict
application of the terms of this Code as provided for in this Code.
   (c)   DECISIONS OF THE ZONING HEARING OFFICER.  Decisions of the zoning
hearing officer, on appeal or upon application for a variation after a hearing,
shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be
subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review law, found generally
at 735 ILCS 513-101, et al.
SEC. 35-1303.   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The director of planning and development shall appoint a member of the
department of planning and development as zoning administrator which person
shall be under the supervision of the director of planning and development.
   (1)   POWERS AND DUTIES: The following is a summary of the responsibilities
of the zoning administrator related to this Code:
      a.   Maintain permanent and current records of this Code, amendments,
special uses and variations, and all actions and decisions of the zoning
administrator on requests for administrative permits;
      b.   Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all
matters arising out of this Code;
      c.   Issue all zoning certificates and keep permanent records thereof;
      d.   Issue all certificates of occupancy for non-conforming uses and keep
permanent records thereof;
      e.   Conduct inspections and issue all certificates of occupancy where no
building permit is    required;
      f.   Conduct and act upon all requests for site plan review, unless
directed otherwise by this    Code;
      g.   Act upon all requests for fence and wall permits;
      h.   Issue all Zoning Compliance letters;
      i.   Act upon all requests for administrative variance;
      j.   Review and recommend all requests for non-administrative development
permits to be heard by the plan commission and zoning hearing officer;
      k.   Interpret all provisions of this Code;
      l.   Enforce all provisions of this Code and all permits and approvals
granted here under; and
      m.   Initiate amendments to this Code;
      n.   Initiate amendments to and maintain the Official Zoning Map. The
zoning administrator shall maintain the Official Zoning Map in paper format or
electronically, digitally, or any other unalterable media format; (Ord. No.
3013-2007; Sec.
35-1303(1)(m) repealed; new Sec.
35-1303(1)(m) enacted; new Sec.
35-1303(n) enacted; 03/27/07)
      o.   Review and act on requests for exempt subdivisions under the
Illinois Plat Act;
      p.   Review and act on minor subdivisions or refer them to the plan
commission for final action;
      q.   Review and act on final subdivision plats or refer them to the plan
commission for final action, except those that involve dedications of land or
public improvements to the City; and
      r.   Formulate, initiate amendments to, and maintain written
administrative policies and supplemental procedures pertaining to the
processing of subdivision applications.
SEC. 35-1304.   BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The building official shall enforce this Code with respect to, and in
instances where, permits are issued by the building division which relate to
the restrictions of this Code and in furtherance of said authority, including:
   (1)   Conduct such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with
provisions of this Code which relate to construction permits; and
   (2)   Issue all certificates of occupancy for conforming uses and keep
permanent records thereof except occupancy permits for new uses of land where
no building permits are required.
SEC. 35-1305.   CITY ENGINEER.
   The City engineer shall assist in administering, interpreting and enforcing
this Code with respect to the design and installation of infrastructure and
improvements and other engineering-related matters, including acting as the
final decision-maker on improvement plans required under Sec.
35-2109.
(Ord. No. 3009-2015; Article I repealed in its entirety; new Article I enacted;
03/24/15)
ARTICLE II. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND PROCEDURES
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
SEC. 35-2100.   REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (a)   No land development activity requiring review and approval under this
Division shall be initiated without having first received such review and
approval.
   (b)   Review procedures differ depending upon the type of proposal.
Generally, the procedures for all applications have three common elements: (1)
submittal of a complete application, including required fee payment along with
appropriate information; (2) review of the submittal by appropriate City staff
and related agencies; and (3) action to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the application. Submittal dates and review time periods are established
as part of the administrative policies and supplemental procedures of the City,
copies of which may be obtained from the zoning administrator.
   (c)   
Table 35-2100.1. summarizes the procedures, agencies and personnel involved in
the administrative development review process. Detailed information about the
general procedures and applications and the agencies and public bodies involved
in the process, and methods of appeal, are further discussed in Sec.
35-2101.
Table 35-2100.1.
Administrative Development Review Procedures Summary
Application Process Pre-app. Conf. Acting Body
                                   ZA BO CE BBA PC CC ZHO
Application Process        Pre-app. Conf. Acting Body
                                          ZA    BO CE BBA PC CC    ZHO
Zoning Certificate         Optional       DM    -  -  -   -  -     A
Building Permit            Optional       RB    DM -  A      -     -
Certificate of Occupancy   Optional       RB    DM -  A   -  -     A
Site Plan Review           Mandatory      DM    -  -  -   A  -     -
Zoning Compliance Letter   Optional       DM    -  -  -   -  -     A
Administrative Variance    Optional       DM    -  -  -   -  -     A
Minor Subdivision          Mandatory      DM[1] -  RB -   A  -     -
Improvement Plan           Optional       -     -  DM -   -  -     -
Final Subdivision Plat (No Optional       DM[2] -  RB -   A  DM[2] -
Dedication)
 
Table Legend:
 
A = Appeal Body           CC = City Council       DM = Decision-Making Body
BO = Building Official    PC = Plan Commission    RB = Review Body
ZA = Zoning Administrator ZHO = Zoning Hearing    - = Not applicable
                          Officer
CE = City Engineer        BBA = Building Board of
                          Appeals
[1]The zoning administrator is authorized to defer decision-making
authority to the plan commission. If the zoning administrator defers
decision-making authority to the plan commission, the City Council becomes
the appeal body.
[2] Only the City Council is authorized to take action on final plats that
propose the dedication of land or improvements to the City.
 
(Ord. No. 3007-2025; Table 35-2100.1 amended; passed 2/4/25)
SEC. 35-2101.   COMMON ELEMENTS OF PROCEDURE.
   The following elements are common to all procedures unless modified by more
specific provisions.
   (1)   DECISION-MAKING.
      a.   Decision-maker . Unless specified otherwise, the zoning
administrator shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove all
applications for an administrative permit.
      b.   Action . After the applicant has had the opportunity to respond to
the comments of staff and other agencies, the zoning administrator shall decide
on the application based on the applicable review criteria. At the applicant’s
request, the zoning administrator may provide another set of comments and allow
the applicant an additional opportunity to respond before rendering a decision.
      c.   Authority to Condition Development Approvals . After a review of the
application and other pertinent information, the zoning administrator may
impose conditions to assure compliance with applicable standards stated in this
Code. The zoning administrator shall include a copy of the conditions with the
record of the decision. The applicant shall be notified of any conditions
imposed on the application.   
   (2)   APPEAL FROM AN INTERESTED PARTY, AND AMENDMENTS . The zoning
administrator’s decision is final unless a written appeal is received. The form
and requirements of an appeal shall be in accordance with the provision in Sec
35-2208. A permit shall be amended through the same process specified for the
type of original approval, as may be amended.
   (3)   VALIDITY . Unless otherwise provided herein or on the permit, all
administrative permits shall expire within one year of issuance; however, the
zoning administrator may approve an extension of up to six months upon receipt
of an application providing evidence that the applicant can proceed with the
initial permit in conformance with currently adopted codes and policies.
   (4)   CONTINUED COMPLIANCE . Once constructed, a development shall remain in
substantial compliance with all approved plans and conditions of approval. The
developer, owner or occupant shall provide all maintenance necessary to keep
the development in substantial compliance. Failure to achieve substantial
compliance by, including but not limited to, the replacement of required plant
materials that have died or are diseased, shall constitute a violation of this
Code.
   (5)   ENFORCEMENT AND REVOCATION . In accordance with the provision of this
Code the zoning administrator may revoke any permit for failure to comply with
the conditions of the permit.
SEC. 35-2102.   ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   PURPOSE . A zoning certificate is needed to ensure that all applicable
building permit applications are consistent with the provisions of this Code.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . No person shall establish, modify or expand a
structure, until a zoning certificate has been obtained in accordance with
requirements contained herein and a building permit obtained pursuant to
adopted building codes.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The proposed development shall:
   (1)   Be located on a lot or parcel that is authorized for development by
this Code;
   (2)   Be consistent with the zoning district and use provision established
in Article III of this Code;
   (3)   Have access to adequate public facilities and services in conformance
with this Code and other City requirements; and
   (4)   Have received all other applicable local, state and federal permits.
   (d)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES. Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1. and Sec.
35-2101 with the following modification:
   (1)   Validity . A zoning certificate shall be valid for six months during
which the applicant shall obtain a building permit. Once a building permit is
obtained, the zoning certificate shall be valid for as long as the building
permit remains valid.
SEC. 35-2103.   BUILDING PERMITS.
   (a)   PURPOSE . A building permit is needed to ensure that all structures
comply with the provisions of this Code and the adopted Moline Building Code
pursuant to adopted building codes.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . No person shall construct or modify a structure until
a zoning certificate has been obtained and a building permit has been issued.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The proposed structure shall:
   (1)   Have an approved zoning certificate; and
   (2)   Conform with the adopted building code, fire code, electrical code,
plumbing code, health code, mechanical code, and any other applicable codes and
policies.
   (d)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES . Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1. and Sec 35-2101 with the following modifications:
   (1)   Applications . Applications shall be submitted to the building
official on forms supplied by that official;
   (2)   Inspections . All building plan reviews and inspections shall be
conducted as directed by the building official;
   (3)   Decision-Making . The building official shall decide all requests for
a building permit. For appeals of a decision based on adopted building codes,
see the adopted Moline Building Code (
Chapter 8 of the Moline Code of Ordinance); and
   (4)   Validity . The effective period of a building permit shall be
determined by the building official consistent with
Chapter 8 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SEC. 35–2104.   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/FINAL INSPECTION.
   (a)   PURPOSE . A certificate of occupancy/final inspection is needed to
ensure that all structures and uses comply with the provisions of this Code and
all preceding development permit approvals.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . Once a use is established pursuant to a development
permit, the use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy/final inspection. After
issuance of a building permit, the portion of the structure for which the
building permit was issued shall not be occupied or used until a certificate of
occupancy/final inspection has been approved.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The structure/use shall comply with all adopted
Codes and all conditions of approval of precedent development permits.
   (d)   APPLICATIONS, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES . The applicant
shall contact the zoning administrator and/or building official to obtain
required intermittent and final inspections. For certain types of building
permits, the building official may issue a certificate of occupancy upon
passage of a final inspection; however, the certificate of occupancy shall not
be valid until approved by the zoning administrator.
SEC. 35-2105.   SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The site plan review provisions are intended to promote the
safe, functional and aesthetic development of property and to ensure that new
structures, utilities, streets, parking, circulation systems, setbacks,
landscaping and open spaces are developed in conformance with the standards of
this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and consistent with any adopted overlay
district standards. The site plan review shall consider the siting of
structures and related site improvements to promote harmonious relationships
with each other and adjacent development.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . Site plan review and approval shall be required for
all of the following, prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate and a
building permit:
   (1)   All site development on a nonconforming lot as per Sec.
35-3110;
   (2)   A change from one nonconforming nonresidential use to another as per
Sec.
35-3111(c);
   (3)   Rebuilding a nonconforming residential use to the previous density as
per Sec.
35-3111(d);
   (4)   Remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming site or structure as per
Sec.
35-3112;
   (5)   All residential infill development not requiring a special use permit
as per Sec.
35-3211;
   (6)   All site development in the “O-1” district as per Sec.
35-3304;
   (7)   All site development in the “ORT” district as per Sec.
35-3305;
   (8)   All site development in the “B-1” District as per Sec.
35-3307;
   (9)   All site development in the “NC” district as per Sec.
35-3308;
   (10)   All site development in the “B-2” district as per Sec.
35-3309;
   (11)   All uses in Division 4 of Article III for which a site plan review is
explicitly required; and
   (12)   All site development on a property containing a protected natural
resource as per Division 1 of Article IV.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The application shall demonstrate that the proposed
development complies with all of the following:
   (1)   Adopted plans and policies , such as:
      a.   The Comprehensive Plan and any applicable corridor, special area or
neighborhood plans; and
      b.   The Official Map, trails plan, parks plan and other applicable plans
and policies of the City.
   (2)   Other adopted codes and regulations applicable to the site.
   (3)   Applicable previous approvals granted to the project site.
   (4)   Applicable purposes and intents and all development standards of this
Code, such as:
      a.   The underlying zoning district; including all building and site
design requirements;
      b.   The land use regulations as provided in Division 4 of Article III;
      c.   The site development standards provided in Article IV; and
      d.   The site improvement and performance standards provided in Article
V.
   (5)   Quality site design practices, such as:
      a.   Harmonious and efficient organization. All elements of the proposed
plan shall be organized harmoniously and efficiently in relation to topography,
the size and type of the property affected, the character of adjoining
property, and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be developed in a
manner that will not impede the normal and orderly development or improvement
of surrounding property for uses permitted in this Code;
      b.   Preservation of natural conditions. For unutilized portions of the
site, the landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, to the degree
practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by other appropriate site
planning techniques. Terrain and vegetation shall not be disturbed in a manner
likely to significantly increase either wind or water erosion within or
adjacent to the development site;
      c.   Screening and buffering. Fences, walls or vegetative screening shall
be provided as required by this Code and where determined to be needed to
protect on-site residents and users from undesirable views, lighting, noise or
other adverse effects and to protect residents and users of off-site
development from similar adverse effects generated on-site;
      d.   Landscaping. Plant materials shall be in scale with the buildings,
the site, and its various uses and surroundings. Plantings should be arranged
to harmonize in size, color, texture, and year-round characteristics of the
buildings and the development of the site;
      e.   Building location and scale. The scale, character and orientation of
proposed buildings and structures shall be compatible with present and
permitted uses and structures in the surrounding area;
      f.   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall not interfere with the
quiet enjoyment of adjacent properties or the safety of public rights-of-way;
      g.   Underground utilities. In areas served by underground utilities, all
utility service lines shall be underground including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, natural gas, electrical, telephone and cable television lines;
      h.   Parking and Circulation. Parking, loading and vehicular and
pedestrian circulation areas shall be designed to provide safe and efficient
movement on-site and to minimize any negative impacts on adjoining streets and
properties;
      i.   Access to public ways. Safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicular access to public rights-of-way and/or other areas dedicated to common
use shall    be provided. The location, size and number of access drives and
walkways to a    site shall be arranged to minimize any negative impacts on
adjoining streets and properties. Off-site and on-site improvements shall be
provided where they will significantly improve safety for vehicles, bicycles
and pedestrians;
      j.   Emergency access. Structures and other site features shall be
arranged to permit access by emergency vehicles to all buildings; and
      k.   Adequate public facilities and service. Adequate public facilities
and services shall be available concurrent with the projected impacts of the
development.
   (d)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES. Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1. and Sec.
35-2101, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Validity . An approved site plan shall be valid for six months during
which the applicant shall obtain a zoning certificate and a building permit.
Once a building permit is obtained, the site plan approval shall be valid for
as long as the building permit remains valid.
SEC. 35-2106.   ZONING COMPLIANCE LETTER.
   (a)   PURPOSE . A zoning compliance letter is issued by the zoning
administrator, upon written request of an applicant, certifying that a proposed
or existing use or development is or is not in compliance with the provisions
of this Code.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . At any time, a person with an interest in a property
may request a zoning compliance letter from the zoning administrator that a
proposed or existing use or development on a property is in conformance with
the applicable provisions of this Code. Such a request must be submitted in
writing and in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Such requests
are strictly voluntary on the part of the applicant; however, in no case shall
the issuance of zoning compliance letter alleviate an applicant from having to
obtain any other form of development approval otherwise required by this
Article.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
use or development is in conformance with applicable provisions of this Code
and all other adopted codes and policies.
   (d)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES . Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1. and Sec.
35-2102.
SEC. 35-2107.   ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCE.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The administrative variance is intended to permit a
reasonable degree of flexibility in the application and enforcement of all
zoning district bulk standards contained within this Code while ensuring that
the full purposes and intents of this Code and its regulations are fully met.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . An administrative variance may be granted for no more
than two different bulk standards applicable to a lot.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
development complies with all of the following:
   (1)   All of the site plan review criteria provided in Sec.
35-2105;
   (2)   That the variance either increases compliance with the site plan
review criteria or that the    need for the variance resulted from a
measurement error committed prior to or during development;
   (3)   That no bulk standard is varied from by more than 10%;
   (4)   That no more than two bulk standards have/will receive administrative
variances;
   (5)   That no variances requiring review by the zoning hearing officer as
per Sec.
35-2207 have been issued or are required for the same property; and
   (6)   That sufficient mitigation of one or more forms (such as increased
landscaping, improved building design, etc.) is provided;
   (d)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES . Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1. and Sec.
35-2101.
SEC. 35-2108.   MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. The procedures of this section are intended to provide a
streamlined administrative approval process for minor subdivisions. 
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. Only the following are eligible to use the streamlined,
minor subdivision procedures of this section:
   (1)   A land division that results in the creation of 5 or fewer lots,
provided that the land division does not require, under this Code, the
construction or installation of any public improvements or infrastructure other
than individual lot utility service connections and sidewalks;
   (2)   The dedication, acceptance or vacation of a public easement; and
   (3)   The consolidation of lots into a fewer number of lots.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA.  In order to be approved, minor subdivision plats
must be eligible for processing as a minor subdivision, pursuant to the
applicability provisions of Sec.
35-2108b(). The applicant must also demonstrate that the proposed minor
subdivision:
   (1)   Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this
Code;
   (2)   Complies with all applicable regulations of this Code and other laws
and ordinances, unless previously waived or modified by the entity with
jurisdiction;
   (3)   Will not make any existing lot or structure nonconforming;
   (4)   Will not impede motorized or nonmotorized transportation access for
any abutting properties; and
   (5)   Does not require new or upgraded infrastructure and improvements other
than sidewalks or individual lot utility service connections, provided that:
      a.   If existing infrastructure and improvements do not meet the
infrastructure and improvements standards of this Code, the City engineer in
consultation with other affected agencies, is authorized to waive or modify
otherwise applicable requirements to upgrade existing infrastructure and
improvements.
      b.   Sidewalk waivers or modifications are not allowed through the minor
subdivision process. If required sidewalks do not already exist, the developer
shall either immediately construct the required sidewalks in accordance with
the standards of this Code or the developer shall file a performance guarantee
in the amount equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of the required
sidewalks, as estimated by the developer’s engineer and approved by the City
engineer. The Law Department shall approve the form and surety of the required
financial guarantee. The agreement must specify that the sidewalks be
constructed in conformance with the approved plans and specifications within 6
months from the date of the filing of the guarantee.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER. After review by affected City departments and outside
agencies with jurisdiction, the zoning administrator is authorized to approve
or deny a minor subdivision based on the review criteria of Sec.
35-2108(c). The zoning administrator is also authorized to defer final
decision-making authority in specific cases to the plan commission.
   (e)   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING PROCEDURES. Application
requirements, processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1 and Sec.
35-2101, with the following modifications:
   (1)   General Process. The minor subdivision process requires a pre-
application conference in accordance with Sec. Sec.
35-2201(2) and review and approval of a final subdivision plat in accordance
with the procedures of Sec.
35-2110. No preliminary subdivision plat review is required.
   (2)   Validity. See Sec.
35-2110(5)b.
   (3)   Appeals.  See Sec.
35-2110(5)c.
   (4)   Reporting to Plan Commission.  The zoning administrator must provide
regular reports to the plan commission regarding decision-making on minor
subdivision applications submitted during the reporting period. Reporting to
the plan commission must occur at least once each calendar year.
SEC. 35-2109.   IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. Improvement plans are required in order to allow an accurate
determination of whether improvements (e.g., streets, stormwater management,
drainage facilities and retaining walls) that are required for subdivisions or
developments will conform to the layout and design objectives of the approved
preliminary subdivision plat, the standards of this Code and other applicable
standards and specifications.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. Improvement plan approval, in accordance with the
procedures of this section, is required for any subdivision or development in
which infrastructure or improvements are required.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA. In order to be approved, the applicant must
demonstrate that proposed infrastructure and improvements comply with all
applicable regulations of this Code, the City of Moline Supplemental
Specifications and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER. The City engineer is authorized to take final action
to approve or deny all applications for improvement plan approval. If the City
engineer determines that the improvement plans do not comply with applicable
regulations and standards, the City engineer is authorized to require that
modifications be made to bring the improvement plans into compliance with such
regulations and standards.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES. Application requirements,
processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1 and Sec.
35-2101, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Improvement plans may be submitted with a preliminary subdivision plat
or the developer may elect to obtain preliminary subdivision plat approval
before submitting detailed improvement plans, in which case improvement plans
must be submitted before or concurrently with the final subdivision plat
submittal.
   (2)   When conditions warrant, the City engineer may require that
preliminary engineering or improvement plans be submitted during the
preliminary subdivision plat review process in order to determine the land’s
suitability for the preliminary subdivision plat design.
   (3)   If only a single portion or phase of an approved preliminary
subdivision plat will be submitted for final subdivision plat approval and a
phasing plan has been approved at the time of preliminary subdivision plat
approval, improvement plans are required to be submitted for only that phase.
However, the entire area of the proposed development, as well as any additional
area necessary to properly design facilities, must be the basis for design and
must be so indicated.
   (f)   RESPONSIBILITY FOR PREPARATION.  Improvement plans for streets,
utilities, and other required public improvements must be prepared by an
Illinois licensed registered professional engineer retained by the developer.
   (g)   CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. Before approval of the improvement plans, the
applicant must submit a general schedule of the timing and sequence for
construction of all required improvements to:
   (1)   The City engineer;
   (2)   All approving agencies; and
   (3)   All public utility companies that will service the subdivision.
   (h)   TIMING OF IMPROVEMENTS. Except upon the written approval of the City
engineer, no grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling,
construction of improvements, or other material change, except for the purpose
of aiding in preparation of final engineering drawings or plans, may begin on
the subject property until the applicant has obtained necessary approvals and
permits from all affected City, County, State and federal agencies.
SEC. 35-2110.   FINAL SUBDIVISIONS PLATS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. A final subdivision plat is a record of the approved
subdivision, as surveyed in the field. It shows property lines and other
dimensions important to the developer in selling lots and to the public in
maintaining accurate records of street lines, easements, utility locations and
other property information. Review and approval of final subdivision plats is
required in order to determine if lots, dedications and improvements comply
with the approved preliminary subdivision plat (if one was required) and with
all applicable regulations.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. The final subdivision plat approval procedures of this
section must be followed for all proposed land divisions that do not qualify as
exempt subdivisions under the Illinois Plat Act. For subdivisions other than
minor subdivisions (See Sec.
35-2108), review and approval of a preliminary subdivision plat is required
before the filing of an application for final subdivision plat approval.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA. In order to be approved, the applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed final subdivision plat:
   (1)   Is in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary subdivision
plat (if one was required) and with any conditions of approval placed on the
preliminary subdivision plat; and
   (2)   Complies with all applicable regulations of this Code and other laws
and ordinances, unless previously waived or modified by the entity with
jurisdiction.
   (3)   A final subdivision plat may not be approved until an improvement plan
(if one was required) has been approved in accordance with Sec.
35-2109 and:
      a.   All required improvements have been completed; or
      b.   A performance guarantee has been provided in accordance with Sec.
35-4209; and
      c.   Necessary title assurances have been given.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER. The zoning administrator is authorized to take final
action to approve or deny applications for final subdivision plat approval
except those that involve dedications of land or public improvements to the
City. Only the City Council is authorized to take action on final plats that
include offers to dedicate land or improvements to the City. Such action shall
be in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES. Application requirements,
processing procedures and decision-making are described in
Table 35-2100.1 and Sec.
35-2101, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Effect of Approval; Recording.  Once a final plat has been approved,
it must be recorded with the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds. Once the
approved final plat has been recorded, lots may be offered for sale and
conveyed, and permits may be issued for building and construction on such lots.
The Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds may not record any final plat of a
subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of Moline
until that final plat has been approved by the City.
   (2)   Validity. If an approved final plat is not recorded with the Rock
Island County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the date of approval by the
City, the final plat approval shall lapse and be null and void.
   (3)   Appeals. The applicant may appeal a decision of the zoning
administrator to deny final subdivision plat approval by filing a written
appeal with the zoning administrator. Such appeals must be filed within 10 days
of the date of the decision being appealed. If an appeal is filed, the plan
commission shall consider the final plat application as a new matter and take
final action using the same requirements and criteria that apply to final
subdivision plat decisions made by the zoning administrator.
   (4)   Acceptance of Dedications.
      a.   Only the City Council is authorized to accept offers to dedicate
land or improvements to the City.
      b.   All facilities and improvements proposed to be dedicated to the
public must be maintained by the property owner until the offer of dedication
has been officially accepted by the City or other authorized pubic authority.
In order to ensure proper maintenance of streets and other public improvements,
a maintenance guarantee may be required. (See also Sec.
35-4210)
      c.   The City may not accept an offer of dedication of any improvements
until the City engineer or a competent professional approved by City and
retained by the developer has certified to the City, by completing and filing
with the City clerk a document, stating that such improvements have been
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Code and any other
applicable standards.
DIVISION 2. NON-ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
SEC. 35-2200. REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No land development activity requiring review and approval under this
Division shall be initiated without having first received such review and
approval.
   Review procedures differ depending upon the type of proposal. Generally, the
procedures for all applications have three common elements: (1) submittal of a
complete application, including required fee payment along with appropriate
information; (2) review of the submittal by appropriate City staff, agencies
and boards; and (3) action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application. Submittal dates and review time periods are established as part of
the administrative policies and supplemental procedures of the City, copies of
which can be obtained from the zoning administrator.
   
Table 35-2200.1 summarizes the procedures, agencies and review bodies involved
in the non-administrative development review process. Detailed information
about the general procedures and applications and the agencies and review
bodies involved in the process, and methods of appeal, are further discussed in
Sec.
35-2201.
Table 35-2200.1.
Non-Administrative Development Review Procedures Summary
Procedure Pre-app. Conference ZA CE PC CC ZHO Public Notice
Procedure                               Pre-app.   ZA CE PC    CC ZHO  Public
                                        Conference                     Notice
Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment       Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment        Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
Zoning Map Amendment                    Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
Zoning and Land Development Code Text   Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
Amendment
Planned Unit Development (PUD):
   ODP (optional)                    Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
   Preliminary Plan                  Mandatory  RB RB RB/PH DM -    R
   Final Plan                        Mandatory  RB RB DM/PH A  -    R
   Plan Amendment
      Major                       Mandatory  RB RB DM/PH A  -    R
      Minor                       Mandatory  DM RB A     -  -    -
Special Use Permit                      Mandatory  RB RB DM/PH A  -    R
Special Use Permit-Adult Use Cannabis   Mandatory  RB RB PH    DM -    R
Variance                                Mandatory  (See Sec.           R
                                                   35-2207)
                                                   (See
Appeal of Administrative Decision       Optional   Table 35-2100.1 and -
                                                   Sec.
                                                   35-2208)
Major Subdivision:
Preliminary Subdivision Plat
   Consistent w/ Plan; No Waivers or Mandatory  RB RB DM    A  -    -
Modifications
   Requires Plan Amend; Waivers/     Mandatory  RB RB RB    DM -    -
Modifications
Final Subdivision Plat
With Dedication of Land or Improvements Mandatory  RB RB -     DM -    -
No Dedication of Land or Improvements   See
                                        Table 35-2100.1
Waiver or Modification                  Mandatory  RB RB -     DM -    -
 
Table Legend:
 
A = Appeal Body           CC = City Council   DM = Decision-Making Body
PC = Plan Commission      PH = Public Hearing RB = Review Body
ZA = Zoning Administrator CE = City Engineer  ZHO = Zoning Hearing Officer
R = Required              - = Not applicable
 
(Ord. No. 3034-2006; deleted in its entirety “Notices Mailed” column; 8/15/06;
Ord. No. 3036-2016; new row entitled “Waiver or Modification;” 12/20/16; Ord.
No. 3004-2020; new row entitled "Special Use Permit-Adult Use Cannabis;" 02/11/
20)
SEC. 35-2201.   COMMON ELEMENTS OF PROCEDURES.
   The following elements are common to all procedures unless otherwise
modified by more specific provisions.
   (1)   TIME FRAMES . The time frames for action on the part of the City are
established as part of the administrative policies of the City, a copy of which
can be obtained from the zoning administrator.
   (2)   PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE .
      a.   Purposes.  The general purposes of a pre-application are to:
         1.   Obtain a complete understanding of the proposed project and the
applicant’s specific objectives;
         2.   Identify all of the approvals necessary to construct the proposed
development;
         3.   Identify all of the documents plans, drawings, fees and other
materials necessary for a complete application;
         4.   Identify the most significant issues that the development will
need to address in order to gain approval; and
         5.   Provide the applicant with direction on how to meet the
requirements of this Code and other applicable codes, regulations and policies.
      b.   Applicability .
Table 35-2200.1. indicates the development permits for which a pre-application
conference is required or recommended. The zoning administrator may waive the
pre-application conference when in such administrator’s discretion there is
substantial evidence to show that the purposes of the Code can be met without
having to conduct such a conference.
      c.   Application Submittal Requirements . Submittal requirements for
various types of development permits are available from the planning and
development department. These requirements are typical for the type of approval
required; however, the scope of any specific development application may
require different types or levels of information. At the pre-application
conference, the zoning administrator shall determine what information shall be
submitted in order to provide for an adequate assessment of the project. At any
time during the processing of any application, additional information may be
required to address issues or concerns that may not have been evident at the
pre-application conference. Requirements and information from the pre-
application conference shall be recorded on a form supplied by the department
and made part of the development file upon submittal of the application.
   (3)   NOTICE.  
      a.   Purpose . Public hearings under this Division 2 and notice thereof
provide the opportunity for input in decisions that may affect the community.
Public participation ensures that decisions reflect consideration of the
community interest and ensure that the applicant and other interested parties
are given due process – the opportunity to be heard. Accordingly, nothing
herein shall prohibit the zoning administrator from providing public notice
that meets or exceeds those requirements for any type of development permit,
whenever such notice will further the purposes and intent of this Code.
      b.   Published Notice .
         1.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, in any
instance in which a public hearing is required, a notice setting forth the
date, time, place and purpose of such hearing, the general nature of the
request or matter to be heard, the name of the applicant and property owner,
and identification of the subject property must be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in that city; and
         2.   With all other required application material, the applicant shall
either provide the information for the notice, or bear the cost of collection,
to the zoning administrator who shall be responsible for preparing notice for
publication.
      c.   Mailed Notice. Notice, containing at a minimum the same information
as paragragh (b) above, shall be mailed to property owners within 250 feet of
the subject property, including the subject property, not more than 30 days nor
less than 15 days before a public hearing related to the subject property. If
less than 20 unique adjacent property owners are identified, the surrounding
distance shall be increased until a minimum of 20 such owners are identified.
   (4)   REQUEST FOR A CONTINUANCE PRIOR TO HEARING.  
      a.   An applicant shall have the right to one continuance before the plan
commission, zoning hearing officer or City Council, provided that a written
request is filed with the zoning administrator at least five business days
prior to the date of the hearing being continued. If an application is not
continued in this manner, the right to a continuance shall be waived. There is
no taking of rights from application to another. Additional continuances shall
be per (6)(d) of this section.
      b.   An applicant requesting a continuance shall make reasonable efforts
to notify all persons previously advised of the hearing that a continuance has
been requested. Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to,
personal notice, broadcast or print media notice and any other form of notice
determined by the zoning administrator to be reasonable. The applicant shall
reimburse the City and provide all materials necessary to provide published and
mailed notice of the rescheduled public hearing date to surrounding property
owners in the same manner and in accordance with the same time schedule as for
the original date.
      c.   The review body scheduled to conduct the hearing shall, upon
compliance with this section, grant the continuance to a time and date certain,
to be decided at its discretion. The hearing may be continued without being
opened for public testimony. Requests for    additional continuances shall be
heard as per (6)(d)of this section.
   (5)   WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION. At any time prior to the hearing on an
application, the applicant may request in writing that the application be
withdrawn from consideration, subject to forfeiture of fees. After a hearing is
opened an applicant may request a withdrawal; however, the body conducting a
hearing shall decide whether or not to approve the request and may approve the
request either with or without prejudice.
   (6)   PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES.   
      a.   Timing . When the zoning administrator determines that a development
permit application is sufficient to be scheduled for a public hearing, notice
of such hearing shall be made pursuant to (3) above.
      b.   Purpose of Hearing . The purpose of a public hearing is to allow the
applicant and all    other parties a reasonable and fair opportunity to be
heard, to present evidence relevant to the application, to rebut evidence
presented by others, and for interested parties, the additional opportunity to
cross-examine as permitted by law.
      c.   Conduct of Hearing .
         1.   Any person or persons may appear at a public hearing and submit
evidence, either individually or via a representative. Each person who appears
at a public hearing shall state, for the record, his or her name, address, and
if appearing on behalf of an organization or group, the name and mailing
address of the organization or group. Persons claiming “interested party”
status shall so qualify and register with the City as per adopted
administrative policies, a copy of which can be obtained from the zoning
administrator.
         2.   The zoning administrator’s report and recommendations shall be
made available prior to the public hearing. The chair may direct that the
zoning administrator provide a summary presentation of the report and
recommendations.
         3.   The chair shall exclude testimony or evidence that is irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious. Cross examination of witnesses shall be
permitted as per the adopted administrative policies of the review body. At any
point, members of the body conducting the hearing may ask questions of the
applicant, staff or public.
      d.   Continuance .
         1.   Request for a continuance at the hearing. At any time prior to a
final    decision, an applicant may request an application be continued for
further proceedings. In so doing, the applicant shall state the reasons of the
request. The granting or denial of a request for a continuance at this stage of
the process    shall be at the sole discretion of the body conducting the
hearing. A majority vote of those members in attendance shall be required to
grant a continuance. The record shall reflect the reason(s) such continuance
was granted, any stipulations or conditions placed upon the continuance, and
the date and time at which the matter will be heard.
         2.   Directed continuance. At any time prior to a final decision on a
request for a development permit, the zoning hearing officer, plan commission
or City Council may on its own motion continue a hearing. A majority vote of
those members in attendance shall be required to direct a continuance of an
item. The record shall reflect the reason(s) such continuance was granted, any
stipulations or conditions placed upon the continuance, and the date and time
at which the matter will be heard.
         3.   Rules of construction. The provisions concerning requests for
continuances at a hearing and directed continuances shall be liberally
construed by the public body when the purpose or expected result of the
continuance is:
            a.   Increased efficiency in the development review process;
            b.   A reassessment of a design or a position;
            c.   Consideration or re-consideration of evidence in favor or
opposed to an    application; and /or
            d.   Any other opportunity for the process to work toward the goal
of guiding and accomplishing coordinated and harmonious development of the City
and its environs.
         4.   Purpose. The purpose of the section is to generally encourage
efficiency and to that end the legal issues of formality shall be de-emphasized
but not to the point of compromising fundamental fairness and due process.
      e.   Record of Proceedings .
         1.   The body conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings by
any appropriate means and according to such procedures as the City may, from
time to time, prescribe by administrative policies.
         2.   The record of all proceedings, including testimony and statements
of personal opinions, the minutes of the secretary, all application, exhibits
and papers submitted, all staff and advisory body or commission reports and
recommendations, and the decision and report(s) of the body before which the
hearing is heard shall constitute the record.
      f.   Additional Rules . The body conducting the hearing may adopt rules
of procedure to limit the number of applications for development approval which
may be considered per meeting and to limit the time for each presentation, or
each speaker.
   (7)   DECISION-MAKING.
      a.   Action. Following a public hearing as described in (6) of this
section, the appropriate acting body shall (as indicated in
Table 35-2200.1.) decide or recommend to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny applications. The acting bodies shall base decisions or recommendations on
consideration of evidence and analysis presented including, but not limited to,
the following:
         1.   conformance with the Code, the adopted Comprehensive Plan and
other    adopted plans, overlay districts, standards and policies;
         2.   recommendations of staff and recommending bodies as applicable;
         3.   review agency input;
         4.   public input and testimony received at the hearing; and
         5.   effects of the proposal on the neighborhood, area, and community-
at-large.
      b.   Authority to Condition Development Approvals . After review of the
application, other pertinent documents and any evidence made part of the public
record, the recommending and decision-making bodies may impose conditions as
are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with applicable general or
specific standards stated in the Code. The zoning administrator shall include a
copy of the conditions with the record of the decision. The applicant shall be
notified of any conditions imposed on the application.
      c.   Plan Commission as Recommending Body to City Council . For items
that the plan commission is the recommending body pursuant to
Table 35-2200.1., a recommendation for denial shall require a two-thirds (2/3)
affirmative vote of the City Council to be approved.
      d.   Plan Commission as Decision-Making Body . The plan commission shall
conduct hearings and render final decision for items that the plan commission
is the decision-making body pursuant to
Table 35-2200.1.
      e.   City Council . The City Council shall act upon applications pursuant
to
Table 35-2200.1.
      f.   Review and Decision by Zoning Hearing Officer (ZHO) . The ZHO shall
conduct hearings and render final decision for items that the ZHO is the
decision-making body pursuant to
Table 35-2200.1.
   (8)   SCOPE OF ACTION.  The review body may take any action on an
application that is consistent with the notice given, including approval of the
application, conditional approval of the application or denial of the
application. The reviewing body may allow amendments to the application if the
effect of the amendments is to reduce the density or intensity of the original
application, reduce the impact of the development, or reduce the amount of land
involved from that indicated in the notices of the hearing. The reviewing body
may not, in any case, permit a greater amount of development, a more intensive
use, a larger land area than indicated in the original application, or a
greater variance than was indicated in the notice.
   (9)   POST-DECISION PROCEEDINGS.
      a.   Appeals . Any interested party aggrieved by a final decision by any
decision-maker may    appeal the final action in accordance with the provisions
of Sec.
35-2208.
      b.   Amendments and Revisions to Approval .
         1.   Unless provided otherwise by this Code, the zoning administrator
may approve minor revisions to an approved application. Minor revisions must be
authorized in writing by the zoning administrator and are subject to appeal to
the original final decision-maker. Authorized minor revisions are those that
are necessary in light of technical considerations that do not substantively
change the character of the development approval; and
         2.   If the zoning administrator determines that a requested revision
is not minor, approval of the revision by the original final decision-maker is
required in accordance with the procedures established for the original
consideration of the application.
   (10)   VALIDITY .
      a.   Time of Expiration . Unless otherwise specifically provided for in
this Code, development approvals shall expire and become null and void, all
activities taken pursuant to such approved development applications shall
cease, and all activities    pursuant to such approval thereafter shall be
deemed in violation of this Code, when:
         1.   The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed as
part of the original or revised approval of the development application, or
that was made pursuant to the terms of any development agreement application,
including the failure to abide by specified time limits established therein; or
         2.    The applicant fails to present a subsequent development
application as required by this Code within the time so required or as may be
required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. If no time limit for satisfaction
of conditions is specified in the original or revised approval of the
development application, the time shall be presumed to be one year from the
date of approval.
      b.   Extension Procedures.
         1.   Considerations. Unless otherwise prohibited by Illinois law or
this Code, an extension of the effective period of the development approval
and/or    development phasing schedule may be granted by the decision-making
body granting the original approval. In deciding a request for an extension,
the    decision-making body shall consider: whether the applicant has
demonstrated sufficient cause as to why the original effective period or
development phasing schedule cannot be met; and whether development regulations
applicable to the project have not or are not proposed to be materially changed
so as to render the project inconsistent with the regulations prevailing at the
time the extension would expire.
         2.   Requests. Requests for an extension of the effective period of
the development approval or development phasing schedule shall be submitted in
writing to the zoning administrator prior to the expiration of the original
approval. Upon receipt of the request, the zoning administrator shall schedule
the matter before the decision-making body.
   (11)   CONTINUED COMPLIANCE . Once constructed and occupied, a development
shall continue to provide all necessary maintenance and/or replacement in order
to remain in substantial compliance with all approved plans and conditions of
approval. Failure to remain in substantial compliance, including the
replacement of required plant materials that have died or are diseased, shall
constitute a violation of this Code.
   (12)   REVOCATION OF PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
      a.   Duties of Zoning Administrator . If the zoning administrator
determines that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of a development
permit or approval, other than those provided in (10)(a) above, the zoning
administrator shall set a hearing before the final decision-maker. If the
decision was made by the zoning administrator, the hearing shall be conducted
by the zoning hearing officer. If the City Council was the original decision-
maker, it may refer the proposed revocation to the plan commission for a
recommendation prior to the hearing.
      b.   Notice and Public Hearing . Notice of the revocation hearing shall
be given in the same manner as required for the original application. A public
hearing shall be conducted in    accordance with the procedures of this
Section.
      c.   Notification of Appeal or Revocation . Whenever an appeal is taken
from a final decision, or whenever the City determines to revoke a development
permit which was    obtained following a public hearing, mailed notice of the
appeal or revocation shall be    prepared and made in the manner prescribed for
the original action. If no public hearing    was held prior to obtaining the
development permit, mailed notice of revocation shall be    given to the holder
of the permit only.
      d.   Decision and Notice . After the conclusion of the hearing, the
decision-maker shall render a decision to revoke the permit, to allow the
applicant to retain the development permit, or reconsider the permit and shall
notify the holder of the permit and any other person who has filed a written
request for such notice.
      e.   Effect and Appeals . Unless specified otherwise at the time of the
decision, a decision to revoke a development permit shall become final
immediately at the time the decision is rendered, unless appealed. After such
effective date of revocation, any activities continuing pursuant to such permit
shall be deemed to be in violation of the Code.
      f.   Right Cumulative . The City’s right to revoke a development permit,
as provided in this    section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed
by law.
   (13)   CITY INITIATED REQUESTS . The City administrator, zoning
administrator, plan commission, or City Council may initiate a request for any
development permit on behalf of the City. Such requests shall not be subject to
fees, but shall otherwise follow the same procedures established in this Code.
(Ord. No. 3041-2025; 9/23/25)
SEC. 35-2202.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The City of Moline’s Comprehensive Plan provides for the
guidance, direction and control of growth and development or redevelopment of
the City and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond
the corporation limits of the City. In order to maintain internal consistency
within the Comprehensive Plan, all proposed amendments must be evaluated in
light of the entire Comprehensive Plan text, goals, policies and maps.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . All proposed amendments to the text of the
Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map shall comply with the provisions of
this section. Any proposed development that is inconsistent with the existing
goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map shall
receive approval of a Comprehensive Plan amendment prior to approval of any
other development permit.
   (1)   Concurrent Review . The applicant may propose that the amendment be
considered concurrently with any development review process (e.g., a rezoning
or subdivision), or that the Plan amendment be considered separately.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA .  The City shall amend the Plan only if it finds that
the specific amendment is consistent with the overall purpose and intent of the
adopted Plan. Keeping in mind the broad legislative and other authorities of
the City to consider all relevant factors, the decision whether or not to amend
the Plan shall consider, at a minimum, whether:
   (1)   There was an error in the original Plan such then existing facts,
projects, or trends (that were reasonably foreseeable) were not accounted for;
   (2)   Events subsequent to the adoption of the Plan have invalidated the
original premises and findings;
   (3)   The character and/or condition of the area has changed enough that the
amendment is acceptable;
   (4)   Public and community facilities are adequate to serve the type and
scope of land use proposed;
   (5)   An inadequate supply of suitably designated land is available in the
community, as defined by the presiding body, to accommodate the proposed land
use;
   (6)   The community or area, as defined by the presiding body, will derive
benefits from the proposed amendment; and
   (7)   The change is consistent with all other goals and policies of the
Plan, including applicable special area, neighborhood, and corridor plans that
are not the subject of the amendment.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER . For a plan amendment request concerning property
within the City, or which is expected to be annexed, the zoning administrator
and plan commission shall make recommendations and the City Council shall take
final action.
   (1)   Failure of Amendment . If an amendment request fails, any related
proposed development must be changed until it is consistent with the Plan.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Application Limitations . There shall be no limit on the number of
public hearings for Comprehensive Plan amendments as well as no limit to the
number of amendments that can be made to the Comprehensive Plan on an annual
basis.
(Ord. No. 3014-2007; Sec.
35-2202(e)(1) deleted; new Sec.
35-2202(e)(1) enacted; 04/10/07)
   (2)   Application Requirements .
      a.   Minimum Requirements. In making a request for a plan amendment the
applicant shall, at a minimum, provide a written response to each of the
criteria provided in paragraph (c) of this section.
      b.   Optional Materials. In addition to the written descriptions,
justifications and responses required above, the City Council, plan commission,
or staff may request additional documents, reposts, studies, plans, and
drawings as deemed necessary to fully evaluate and decide upon the request.
Applicants are encouraged to comply with all such requests; however, it shall
remain the applicant’s right to provide all, part, or none of the requested
additional materials. In addition, the applicant may submit whatever additional
materials the applicant believes are relevant to the request.
   (3)   Notice; Mailed Notice. A map amendment request relating to more than
five (5) percent of the entire incorporated area of the City and all text
amendment requests shall not require mailed notice to any property owner.
Instead, the zoning administrator shall cause a notice to be published in the
legal notices section of a local newspaper of general circulation. The content
and timing of said advertisement shall follow the published notice provisions
of Sec.
35-2201(3).
(Ord. No. 3041-2025; 9/23/25)
SEC. 35-2203.   ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENT AND REZONING.
   (a)   PURPOSE . In order to maintain internal consistency within this Code
and on the Zoning Map, proposed amendments to the text and Zoning Map must be
consistent with the purposes stated herein.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . All proposed amendments to the text of this Code and
Zoning Map shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   APPROVAL CRITERIA . In determining whether the proposed amendment
shall be approved, the following factors shall be considered:
   (1)   Whether the existing text or zoning designation was in error at the
time of adoption;
   (2)   Whether there has been a change of character in the area or throughout
the City due to installation of public facilities, other zone changes, new
growth trends, deterioration, development transitions, etc.;
   (3)   Whether the proposed rezoning is compatible with the surrounding area
and defining characteristics of the proposed zoning district or whether there
may be adverse impacts on the capacity or safety of the portion of street
network influenced by the rezoning, parking problems, or environmental impacts
that the new zone may generate such as excessive storm water runoff, water, air
or noise pollution, excessive nighttime lighting, or other nuisances;
   (4)   Whether the proposal is in conformance with and in furtherance of the
implementation of the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, other
adopted plans, and the policies, intents and requirements of this Code, and
other City regulations and guidelines;
   (5)   Whether adequate public facilities and services are available or will
be made available concurrent with the projected impacts of development in the
proposed zone;
   (6)   Whether there is an adequate supply of land available in the subject
area and the surrounding community to accommodate the zoning and community
needs; or
   (7)   Whether there is a need in the community for the proposal and whether
there will be benefits derived by the community or area by the proposed
rezoning.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER . The zoning administrator and plan commission shall
make recommendations and the City Council shall take final action.
   (1)   When the plan commission or City Council deems it necessary or
expedient, additional property in the zoning district may be considered for a
zoning change provided that this additional property is also addressed in the
public hearing notice, in accordance with Sec.
35-2201(6).
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES . Application requirements and
processing procedures are those described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201 with the following modifications:
   (1)   Applicant Requirements . An application for a text amendment to this
Code or rezoning shall include a written report that addresses each criteria as
listed in paragraph (c) of this section.
   (2)   Notice; Mailed Notice . A rezoning request relating to more than five
(5) percent of the entire incorporated area of the City and all text amendment
requests shall not require mailed notice to any property owner. Instead, the
zoning administrator shall cause a notice to be published in the legal notices
section of a local newspaper of general circulation. The content and timing of
said advertisement shall follow the published notice provisions of Sec.
35-2201(3).
(Ord. No. 3041-2025; 9/23/25)
SEC. 35-2204.   CONCEPT PLAN.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The concept plan review is an optional process that may
provide an applicant with a general, non-binding direction from the plan
commission prior to submittal of a development application. Although it is the
intent of this process to be as helpful as possible to an applicant in
designing a proposed project, applicants should not rely on the direction as an
indication of any future decision-making by the plan commission on any
subsequent requests for development permits and the City expressly disclaims
any direction or the outcome of any future decision-making.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . A concept plan review may be requested for any type of
development that requires a recommendation or final action by the plan
commission.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA . The concept plan shall be evaluated using the
criteria required for the type of development. The ability of the plan
commission to apply the criteria may be limited based on the amount of
information provided with the application.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER . The individual members of the plan commission may
provide any and all comments, questions, critiques and direction they deem
appropriate to assist the applicant with preparing a subsequent application for
a development permit. These comments are strictly advisory and should not be
taken as an indication of how the individual members or plan commission as a
whole may vote on any subsequent application for a development permit. The plan
commission shall not take a formal vote on any portion of the concept plan.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES . Application requirements and
processing procedures are those described in
Table 35-2200.1 and Sec.
35-2201 with the following modifications:
   (1)   Staff Review, Report and Recommendations . The zoning administrator
shall not be required to review the plan, circulate the plan to other agencies,
produce a report, or make recommendations but may do any or all of these at
said Administrator’s discretion.
   (2)   Notice . Notice is not required unless requested by the applicant.
Requested notice shall be the same as that required for the development permits
necessary to allow the proposed type of development.
   (3)   Appeal . Because there is no decision, there is no appeal of any
direction given by the plan commission; however, in its discretion, City
Council may elect to provide direction of its own on any concept plan.
SEC. 35-2205.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The Planned Unit Development (PUD) district is intended to
apply to mixed-use or unique single use projects to provide design flexibility
not available through strict application and interpretation of the standards
established in Divisions 2 and 3 of Article III. The purpose of the PUD zone is
to provide design flexibility as described in Division 6 of Article III.
Planned unit development rezonings should be used only when long-term community
benefits that may be achieved through high quality development will be derived.
Long term community benefits include without limitation:
   (1)   More efficient infrastructure;
   (2)   Reduced traffic demands;
   (3)   A greater quality and quantity of public and/or private open space;
   (4)   Other recreational amenities;
   (5)   Needed housing types and/or mix;
   (6)   Innovative designs; and/or
   (7)   Protection and/or preservation of natural resources.
   (b)   OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ODP).   
   (1)   Applicability. An Outline Development Plan is an optional, but
encouraged first step prior to an application for a preliminary development
plan for a parcel of at least 20 acres. The purpose of an ODP is to demonstrate
conformance with the Comprehensive    Plan, compatibility of land use and
coordination of improvements within and among individually platted parcels,
sections or phases of a development prior to the approval of a preliminary
plan. At ODP, zoning for the entire property or for each “pod” designated for
development on the plan is established. This step is recommended for larger,
more diverse projects that are expected to be developed over a long period of
time. Through this process, the general pattern of development is established
with a range of densities and intensities assigned to individual “pods” that
will be the subject of future, more detailed planning.
   (2)   Approval Criteria . An ODP application shall demonstrate conformance
with all of the following:
      a.   The Comprehensive Plan, Major Street Plan and other adopted plans
and policies;
      b.   The rezoning criteria provided in Sec.
35-2203(c);
      c.   The PUD requirements of Division 6 of Article III;
      d.   The applicable corridor guidelines and other overlay districts;
      e.   Adequate public services and facilities being provided concurrent
with the projected impacts of the development;
      f.   Adequate circulation and access being provided to serve all
development pods/areas to be developed;
      g.   Appropriate screening and buffering of adjacent property and uses
being provided;
      h.   An appropriate range of intensity/density of uses for the entire
property or for each development pod/area to be developed;
      i.   An appropriate set of “default” or minimum standards for the entire
property or for each development pod/area to be developed; and
      j.   An appropriate phasing or development schedule for the entire
property or for each development pod/area to be developed.
   (3)   Decision-Maker . The zoning administrator and plan commission shall
make recommendations and the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve,
or deny all applications for an ODP.
   (4)   Application and Review Procedures . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modifications:
      a.   Simultaneous Review of Other Plans. An applicant may file an ODP
with a preliminary development plan, as determined by the zoning administrator
at the pre-application conference.
      b.   Validity. The effective period of the ODP/phasing schedule shall be
determined concurrent with ODP approval.
      c.   Required Subsequent Approvals. Following approval of an ODP, a
preliminary development plan approval and a subsequent final development plan
approval shall be required before any development activity can occur.
   (c)   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (1)   Applicability.
      a.   Approved ODP. If the property has an approved ODP, the purpose of
the preliminary development plan is to ensure consistency with the uses,
density/intensity, bulk, performance, and other standards of the approved ODP
and proposed PUD rezoning ordinance for the specific area included in the
preliminary plan. Unless specified otherwise with the ODP, the applicant shall
   have the option of proposing either a planned unit development district or
planned unit development site. Typically, the PUD rezoning ordinance is acted
upon at this stage concurrent with action on the preliminary plan. However,
should the City Council find that a proposed planned unit development district
or site lacks sufficient detail to ensure that future development will be of
the intensity and quality proposed by the applicant and envisioned by the City
Council, it may defer action on the PUD rezoning ordinance until the final plan
stage.
      b.   No Approved ODP. If the property has no approved ODP, the purpose of
this stage is to answer the question, “Should this use, with this specific
intensity/density, designed in this particular manner, be constructed on this
site?” In designing the plan, the applicant shall have the option of proposing
either a planned unit development district or planned unit development site.
Typically, the PUD rezoning ordinance is acted upon at this stage concurrent
with action on the preliminary plan. However, should the City Council find that
a proposed planned unit development district or site lacks sufficient detail to
ensure that future development will be of the intensity and quality proposed by
the applicant and envisioned by the City Council, it may defer action on the
PUD rezoning ordinance until the final plan stage.
   (2)   Review Criteria . A preliminary development plan application shall
demonstrate conformance with all of the following:
      a.   The ODP review criteria in (b)(2) of this section;
      b.   The applicable preliminary subdivision plat approval of Sec.
35-2210(3);
      c.   The applicable site plan review criteria in Sec.
35-2105;
      d.   The approved ODP, if applicable;
      e.   An appropriate, specific density/intensity of uses for all areas
included in the preliminary plan approval; and
      f.   For a PUD District the area of the plan is at least five acres in
size or as specified in an applicable approved ODP, or as identified in Sec.
35-3703.
   (3)   Decision-maker . The zoning administrator and plan commission shall
make recommendations and the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve,
or deny all applications for a preliminary development plan and, at its
discretion, the accompanying PUD rezoning ordinance.
   (4)   Application and Review Procedures . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modifications:
      a.   Concurrent Review of PUD Rezoning Ordinance. The PUD rezoning
ordinance shall be considered concurrently with the preliminary plan. However,
should the City Council find that a proposed planned unit district or site
lacks sufficient detail to ensure that future development will be of the
intensity and quality proposed by the applicant and envisioned by the City
Council, it may defer action on the PUD rezoning ordinance until the final plan
stage.
      b.   Required Concurrent Review of Subdivision. A preliminary plat shall
be submitted and reviewed concurrently with a preliminary development plan.
      c.   Density/Intensity Transfer. If the property has an approved ODP,
density/intensity of uses may not be transferred between development pods/areas
to be developed unless explicitly provided for with the ODP approval or by
amending the OPD in the same manner as originally approved.
      d.   Validity. The effective period of the preliminary development plan
shall be as determined by the ODP approval, if applicable, or at the time of
preliminary plan approval.
      e.   Required Subsequent Approvals. Following approval of a preliminary
development plan, final development plan approval shall be required before any
development activity can occur, except that permitted with approval of
preliminary plat.
   (d)   FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (1)   Applicability . The final development plan and final subdivision plat
act as the blueprint for development of a PUD project. The plan and the plat
ensure consistency with the approved preliminary development plan and specific
development and constructions requirements of various adopted codes. No
building permits shall be issued until final    plan approval is obtained.
   (2)   Review Criteria . A final development plan application shall
demonstrate conformance with all of the following:
      a.   The approved ODP, if applicable;
      b.   The approved preliminary development plan;
      c.   The approved preliminary plat;
      d.   The approved PUD rezoning ordinance;
      e.   All other applicable development and construction codes, ordinances,
and policies;
      f.   The applicable site plan review criteria in Sec.
35-2105; and
      g.   The applicable final subdivision plat approval criteria of Sec.
35-2110(3).
   (3)   Decision-maker . The zoning administrator shall make a recommendation
and the plan commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny all
applications for a final development plan, unless the City Council in its
discretion required the final plan be returned to it for final action. In such
cases, the zoning administrator and plan commission shall provide
recommendations concerning the final plan.
   (4)   Application and Review Procedures . Application requirements and
processing procedures shall comply with those described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modifications:
      a.   Concurrent Review of PUD Rezoning Ordinance. If the PUD rezoning
ordinance was not acted upon at the preliminary stage, it shall be acted upon
concurrently with the final plan review. A final plan shall not be valid unless
and until a corresponding PUD rezoning ordinance has been approved.
      b.   Required Concurrent Review of Subdivision. Unless specified
otherwise at    the time of preliminary plan approval, if the form of
preliminary plan approval was a site development plan, a final plat (if
required by Sec.
35-2110) shall be submitted and reviewed concurrently with a final development
plan; if the form of preliminary plan approval was a subdivision plan, a final
plat may be approved and recorded prior to final plan approval.
      c.   Review of covenants. The City attorney shall review and approve all
covenants and restrictions in the best interests of the City, as determined in
the City attorney’s exercise of independent professional judgment prior to
final development plan approval.
      d.   Form of Final Action. If the final development plan is approved by
the plan commission, the surveyor or engineer shall then make any changes
necessary or required to comply with final approval conditions.
      e.   Recording. Upon final approval, the plan and plat shall be recorded.
The final plat shall, at a minimum, contain all of the following information
which is pertinent to the PUD: the setbacks; a list of approved and/or
specifically excluded uses; and any pertinent conditions or stipulations which
were previously made or imposed.
   (e)   GUARANTEES FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.   Except as provided herein,
before the plan and plat are recorded, all applicants shall be required to
complete, to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator and City engineer,
all street, sanitary, and other public improvements, as well as lot
improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required by this
Code. The required improvements shall be those specified in the approved
construction plans as per the final subdivision approval. As a condition of
final plan and plat approval, the City may permit the applicant to enter into a
development improvements agreement and post a guarantee for the completion of
all required improvements in accordance with Sec.
35-4209.
   (f)   AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS.
   (1)   Planned Unit Development Rezoning Ordinance . The use, density/
intensity, bulk performance and default standards contained in an approved PUD
rezoning ordinance may be amended only as follows, unless specified otherwise
in the rezoning ordinance:
      a.   No use may be established that is not permitted in the PUD without
amending the rezoning ordinance through the rezoning process. Uses may be
transferred between development pods/areas to be developed through an amendment
to the ODP and/or preliminary development plan, as applicable, provided the
overall density/intensity for the entire PUD is not exceeded.
      b.   The maximum and minimum density/intensity for the entire PUD shall
not be exceeded without amending the rezoning ordinance through the rezoning
process. Density/intensity may be transferred between development pods/areas to
be developed through an amendment to the ODP and/or preliminary development
plan, as applicable, provided the overall density/intensity for the entire PUD
is not exceeded.
      c.   The bulk, performance and default standards may not be amended for
the entire    PUD or an entire development pod/area to be developed without
amending the PUD rezoning ordinance through the rezoning process. The bulk
default standards may be varied on individual lots within the PUD through an
amendment to the preliminary development plan.
   (2)   Outline Development Plan . The approved outline development plan may
be amended only by the City Council through the same process by which it was
approved, unless the adopted PUD rezoning ordinance provides otherwise. All
subsequent preliminary development plans and final development plans must be
consistent with the approved outline development plan and rezoning ordinance.
   (3)   Preliminary Development Plan . Unless the adopted PUD rezoning
ordinance provides otherwise, the approved preliminary development plan may be
amended as follows:
      a.   Minor amendments. The zoning administrator may approve the following
amendments for individual lots within the area covered by a preliminary
development plan provided all standards in the adopted PUD rezoning ordinance
are met:
         1.   Decreases in density and/or intensity so long as the character of
the site is maintained;
         2.   Increases in gross floor area of up to 10% so long as the
character of the site is maintained;
         3.   Changes in the location and type of landscaping and/or screening
so long as the character and intent of the original design are maintained;
         4.   Changes in the orientation or location of parking areas and
vehicular and pedestrian circulation areas so long as the effectiveness and
character of the overall site circulation, parking and parking lot screening
are maintained;
         5.   The reorientation, but not complete relocation, of major
structures so long as the character of the site is maintained; and
         6.   Changes in building design and materials so long as the character
and intent of the original design are maintained.
      b.   Major Amendments Applicable to Only One Lot. Any change not listed
above as a minor amendment to an individual lot shall be deemed a major
amendment. Such amendments shall be reviewed by the plan commission using
   the same process as the preliminary development plan but with the following
review criteria:
         1.   Only the bulk or performance standards may be varied;
         2.   The applicable variance review criteria in Sec.
35-2200; and
         3.   The amendment shall not represent a significant unilateral change
in any of the agreed upon deviations from the default standards.
      c.   Major Amendments Applicable to More Than One Lot. All other
amendments to the preliminary development plan shall be reviewed by the plan
commission using the same process and criteria used for preliminary plan review
and approval.
   (4)   Final Development Plan . Amendments to the final development plan may
be approved by the plan commission using the same process and criteria used for
final development plan and review and approval.
   (g)   LAPSE OF PLAN AND REZONE.
   (1)   If a planned unit development, or any portion thereof, has not been
completed in accordance with the approved development schedule, a “lapse” shall
have occurred and the terms of all approved plans for incomplete portions of
the PUD shall be null and void. If a lapse occurs, the property shall be
governed by the zoning district applied to the property immediately before the
rezoning to PUD, or an applicant may request a hearing before the plan
commission at which time a revocation of all prior approvals shall be
considered. If the plan commission determines that a lapse has occurred, the
zoning administrator shall publish an appropriate legal notice notifying the
public of the plan commission’s finding and revise the Official Zoning Map
accordingly. The zoning administrator may, if the zoning administrator deems
appropriate, initiate, without owner consent, a zoning change on a lapsed PUD
to another zone district.
   (2)   The above notwithstanding, the zoning administrator may, in said
administrator’s discretion, permit a single six month extension to any part of,
or the entire, approved development schedule.
   (h)   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (1)   Binding Approval . Approval of a PUD allows the development and use of
a parcel of land under certain, specific conditions. No use of the parcel, nor
construction, modification, or alteration of any use or structures within a PUD
project shall be permitted unless such construction, modification or use
complies with the terms and conditions of an approved final development plan.
Each subsequent owner and entity created by the developer, such as property
owners’ associations or an architectural review committee, shall comply with
the terms and conditions of approval. The developer shall set forth the
conditions of approval within the subdivision covenants. Such covenants shall
be recorded with the final approved plan and plat.
   (2)   Transfer of Ownership . No person shall sell, convey, or transfer
ownership of any property or any portion thereof within a planned unit
development zone until such person has informed the buyer of the property’s
status with respect to the planned unit development process and conditions of
approval. The City shall bear no liability for any person’s misrepresentation
of terms and conditions of an existing approval.
   (3)   Planned Unit Development Zone Designation . The zoning administrator
shall designate each approved PUD on the Official Zoning Map.
SEC. 35-2206.   SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The purpose of a special use review is to provide an
opportunity to utilize property for an activity, which under usual
circumstances, could be detrimental to other permitted uses and which normally
is not permitted within the same district. A special use may be permitted under
circumstances particular to the proposed location and subject to conditions
that provide protection to adjacent land uses. A special use is not a use by-
right and one that is otherwise prohibited without approval of a special use
permit.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . A special use permit shall be required prior to the
establishment of any special use identified in Division 4 of Article III or
elsewhere in this Code.
   (c)   REVIEW CRITERIA .   The application shall demonstrate that the
proposed development will comply with the following:
   (1)   Site Plan Review Standards . All applicable site plan review criteria
in Sec.
35-2105(c).
   (2)   District Standards . The underlying zoning district standards
established in Article III, including the defining characteristics of the
district.
   (3)   Specific Standards . The land use regulations established in Division
4 of Article III.
   (4)   Availability of complementary uses . Other uses complementary to, and
supportive of, the proposed project shall be available including, but not
limited to: schools, parks, hospitals, business and commercial facilities, and
transportation facilities.
   (5)   Compatibility with adjoining properties . Compatibility with and
protection of neighboring properties through measures such as:
      a.   Protection of privacy. The proposed plan shall provide reasonable
visual and auditory privacy for all dwelling units located within and adjacent
to the site. Fences, walls, barriers and/or vegetation shall be arranged to
protect and enhance the property and to enhance the privacy of on-site and
neighboring occupants;
      b.   Protection of use and enjoyment. All elements of the proposed plan
shall be designed and arranged to have a minimal negative impact on the use and
enjoyment of adjoining property; and
      c.   Compatible design and integration. All elements of a plan shall
coexist in a harmonious manner with nearby existing and anticipated
development. Elements to consider include: buildings, outdoor storage areas and
equipment, utility structures, building and paving coverage, landscaping,
lighting, glare, dust, signage, views, noise, and odors. The plan must ensure
that noxious emissions and conditions not typical of land uses in the same
zoning district will be effectively confined so as not to be injurious or
detrimental to nearby properties.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER . The zoning administrator shall make recommendations
and the plan commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny all
applications for a special use permit.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modification:
   (1)   Validity. Once established, a special use permit approval shall run
with the land and remain valid until the property changes use or the use is
abandoned and non-operational for a period of 12 consecutive months.
SEC. 35-2207.   VARIANCES.
   (a)   PURPOSE. A variance is a departure from the dimensional or numerical
requirements of this Code where such variance will not be contrary to the
public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not
as a result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Code
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Variances are permitted only to
those portions of this Code as specified herein.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY.
   (1)   As per Sec.
35-2107, the zoning administrator shall decide all requests for variances of up
to 10% for certain bulk standards included on
Tables 35-3201.1,
35-3201.2,
35-3201.3,
35-3301.1, and
35-3301.2.
   (2)   The zoning hearing officer shall hear and decide all requests for
variances of greater than 10% for bulk standards included on
Tables 35-3201.1,
35-3201.2,
35-3201.3,
35-3301.1, and
35-3301.2, except for:
      a.   Maximum units per lot, minimum lot dimensions, and maximum floor
area ratio on
Table 35-3201.1; and
      b.   Minimum lot dimensions and maximum building size on
Table 35-3301.1.
   (3)   The zoning hearing officer shall hear and decide all requests for
variances to the nonconforming lot, use, site, and structure regulations of
Article III, provided that no nonconforming use shall be changed or expanded
beyond the limits imposed in Sec.
35-3111.
   (4)   The City Council shall hear and decide all requests for variances to
minimum lot dimensions on
Tables 35-3201.1. and
35-3301.1. as part of preliminary plat approval.
   (5)   As per the special use review procedures and criteria of Sec.
35-2206, the plan commission shall hear and decide all requests for variances
to the maximum building size requirements on
Table 35-3301.1.
   (6)   As per this section, the plan commission shall hear and decide
variance to all other provisions of this Code, unless otherwise specified.
   (7)   Under no circumstances shall variances be heard or granted for the
following:
      a.   The establishment of a use in a district in which such use is not
permitted by this Code;
      b.   Residential development which would result in an increase in density
greater than that permitted in the applicable zoning district;
      c.   Changes or modifications to any definition contained in this Code;
and
      d.   Changes in use of or expansion of a nonconforming use beyond those
permitted in Section
35-3111.
   (c)   APPROVAL CRITERIA . A variance is not a right. It may be granted to an
applicant only if the applicant establishes that strict adherence to this Code
will result in undue hardship because of site characteristics that are not
applicable to most properties in the same zoning district. Such variances shall
be granted only when the applicant establishes that all of the following
criteria are satisfied:
   (1)   Hardship Unique to Property, Not Self-Inflicted . There are
exceptional conditions creating an undue hardship, applicable only to the
property involved or the intended use thereof, which do not apply generally to
the other land areas or uses within the same zone district, and such
exceptional conditions or undue hardship was not created by the action or
inaction of the applicant or the owner of the property, or any previous
property owner;
   (2)   Special Privilege . The variance will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied to other lands or structures in the same
zoning district;
   (3)   Literal Interpretation . The literal interpretation of the provisions
of the regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same zoning district and would work unnecessary and
undue hardship only on the applicant;
   (4)   Reasonable Use . The applicant and the owner of the property cannot
derive a reasonable use of the property without the requested variance;
   (5)   Minimum Necessary . The variance is the minimum necessary to make
possible the reasonable use of land or structures;
   (6)   Compatible with Adjacent Properties . The variance will not be
injurious to, or reduce the value of, the adjacent properties or improvements
or be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. In granting a
variance, the decision-maker may impose conditions deemed necessary to protect
affected property owners and to protect the intent of this Code. The decision-
maker may consider prospective financial loss or gain to applicant but
consideration shall not be sole reason for granting a variance;
   (7)   Conformance with the Purposes of this Code . The granting of a
variance will not conflict with the purposes and intents expressed or implied
in this Code; and
   (8)   Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan . The granting of a variance
will not conflict with the goals and principles in the Comprehensive Plan.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER. The zoning administrator shall make recommendations
and the decision-maker shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny requests
for variances.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES. Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201.
SEC. 35-2208.   APPEALS.
   (a)   PURPOSE . The purpose of this section is to provide for appeals by
interested parties of decisions and actions by the zoning administrator and
plan commission.
   (b)   APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS . Any interested party,
aggrieved or claimed to be aggrieved by an interpretation of this Code rendered
by the zoning administrator may request an appeal of the interpretation in
accordance with this section.
   (1)   Approval Criteria . In granting an appeal from an administrative
interpretation, the zoning hearing officer shall determine whether the
interpretation by the zoning administrator was in accordance with the intent
and requirements of this Code.
   (2)   Decision-maker . The zoning hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or
remand the interpretation. In reversing or remanding the interpretation back to
the zoning administrator, the zoning hearing officer shall state the rationale
for his/her decision.
   (3)   Application and Review Procedures . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201, with the following deviations:
      a.   Application Materials. The appellant shall provide a written
statement citing the specific provision(s) of this Code the appellant believes
the zoning administrator has incorrectly interpreted and the appellant’s own
interpretation of the provision(s).
      b.   Notice. Notice of the hearing is not required to anyone other than
the appellant.
      c.   Zoning Administrator’s Report. The zoning administrator shall
prepare a report detailing the specific provision(s) of this Code that are in
question, said administrator’s interpretation of the provision(s) and the
general basis of the interpretation. (Ord. No. 3026-2007(2); new Sec.
35-2208(e) enacted; 09/18/07)
   (c)   APPEAL OF FINAL ACTION ON ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT PERMITS . Any
interested party, aggrieved or claimed to be aggrieved by a final action of the
zoning administrator on an administrative development permit may request an
appeal of the action in accordance with
Table 35-2100.1 and this section, and the Illinois Administrative Review Law,
found generally at 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et al.
   (1)   Approval Criteria . In granting an appeal to final action on an
administrative development permit, the appellate body shall find the zoning
administrator:
      a.   Has acted in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Code
or other applicable local, state, or federal law; or
      b.   Has made clearly erroneous findings of fact based on the evidence
and testimony on the record; or
      c.   Has failed to fully consider mitigating measures or revisions
offered by the applicant that would have brought the proposed project into
compliance; or
      d.   Has acted arbitrarily, capriciously and/or abused his/her
discretion; in which case such arbitrarily, caprice or abuse shall be detailed
in written findings and forwarded to the director of planning and development
and City administrator.
   (2)   Decision-maker . The appellate body for a particular administrative
development permit    shall be as specified on
Table 35-2100.1. The appellate body shall affirm, reverse or remand the
decision. In reversing or remanding the decision back to the zoning
administrator, the appellate body shall state the rationale for its decision. A
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership of the appellate body shall be
required to reverse the zoning administrator’s action.
   (3)   Application and Review Procedures . Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1. and Sec.
35-2201 with the following deviations:
      a.   Application Materials. The appellant shall provide a written request
that explains the rationale of the appeal based on the criteria provided in (c)
(1) of this section.
      b.   Notice to Applicant. If the appellant is not the applicant, the
zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the request and the
applicant shall provide a written response.
      c.   Preparation of the Record. The zoning administrator shall compile
all materials made a part of the record of the zoning administrator’s action.
As may be requested by the appellate body, the zoning administrator also may
provide a summary report of the record.
      d.   Notice. No notice of the appeal is required.
      e.   Conduct of Hearing. The appellate body may hold a full evidentiary
hearing to make a finding regarding the zoning administrator’s action in
accordance with the criteria provided in (c)(1) of this section. However, the
appellate body also may limit testimony and evidence to that contained on the
record at the time the zoning administrator took final action, or place any
other limits on additional testimony and evidence it deems appropriate.
   (d)   APPEAL OF PLAN COMMISSION ACTION . Any interested party, aggrieved by
or claimed to be aggrieved by a decision or final action of the plan commission
may request an appeal of the action in accordance with
Table 35-2100.1. and this section. Appeals of denials made by the plan
commission on items for which they make a recommendation and are not the final
decision-maker, shall be heard by the City Council in accordance with these
provisions.
   (1)   Approval Criteria.
      a.   Findings. In granting an appeal to action on a non-administrative
development permit,    the City Council shall find:
         1.   The plan commission has acted in a manner inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code or other applicable local, state, or federal law; or   
         2.   The plan commission has made erroneous findings of fact based on
the evidence and testimony on the record; or
         3.   The plan commission has failed to fully consider mitigating
measures or revisions offered by the applicant that would have brought the
proposed project into compliance; or
         4.   The plan commission has acted arbitrarily, capriciously and/or
abused its discretion; in which case such arbitrariness, caprice and abuse
shall be detailed in written findings along with other relevant information;
and
         5.   In addition to one or more of the above findings, the City
Council shall find the appellant was present in person or by lawful
representative at the hearing during which the original decision was made or
was otherwise on the official record concerning the development application.
      b.   Facts on Record. In considering a request for appeal, the City
Council shall consider only those facts, evidence, testimony and witnesses that
were part of the official record of the plan commission’s action. No new
evidence or testimony may be considered, except City staff may be asked to
interpret materials contained in the record. If the City Council finds that
pertinent facts were not considered or made a part of the record, they shall
remand the item back to the plan commission for a rehearing and direct that
such facts be included in the record.
   (2)   Decision-maker . The City Council shall affirm, reverse, or remand the
decision. In reversing or remanding the decision back to the plan commission,
the City Council shall state the rationale for its decision. A two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the entire membership of the City Council shall be required to reverse
the plan commission’s action.
   (3)   Application and Review Procedures . Requests for an appeal shall be
submitted to the zoning administrator in accordance with the following:
      a.   Application Materials. The appellant shall provide a written request
that explains the rationale of the appeal based on the criteria provided in (d)
(1) of this section. The appellant also shall submit evidence of his/her
attendance in person or by lawful representative at the original hearing or
other testimony or correspondence from him/her that was in the official record
at the time of the original hearing.
      b.   Application Fees. The appropriate fee, as may be approved by the
City Council, shall be submitted with the request.
      c.   Notice to Applicant. If the appellant is not the applicant, the
zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the request and the
applicant shall review the request and provide a written response.
      d.   Preparation of Record. The zoning administrator shall compile all
material made a part of the official record of the plan commission’s action. As
may be requested by the City Council, the zoning administrator also may provide
a summary report of the record.
      e.   Notice. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be provided in the same
manner as was required with the original action.
      f.   Hearing. The zoning administrator shall schedule the appeal before
the City Council. The City Council shall hold a hearing and render a decision.
      g.   Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, the City Council shall review
the record of the plan commission’s action. No new evidence or testimony may be
presented, except that City staff may be asked to interpret materials contained
in the record.
   (e)   Appeal of amendment to zoning map. [Reserved].
(Ord. No. 3026-2007; new Sec. 35-2208(3) enacted; 09/18/07; Ord. 3003-2024, 2/
26/24)
SEC. 35-2209.   MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   APPLICABILITY. All subdivisions that that do not qualify as exempt
subdivisions under the Illinois Plat Act or as minor subdivisions under Sec.
35-2108 must be processed as “major subdivisions.”
   (b)   GENERAL PROCESS. The major subdivision process is a multi-step process
requiring a pre-application conference in accordance with Sec.
35-2201(2) and approval of all of the following:
   (1)   Preliminary subdivision plat (see Sec.
35-2210);
   (2)   Improvement plan (see Sec.
35-2109); and
   (3)   Final subdivision plat (see Sec.
35-2110).
SEC. 35-2210.   PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. Preliminary subdivision plats establish the overall layout
and design of a proposed development, including lot and utility layout and
street and intersection design. Preliminary subdivision plat review is required
in order to allow, at an early development planning stage, a competent
determination by City departments and affected agencies of whether the proposed
development is consistent with adopted plans and with applicable regulations.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. The preliminary subdivision plat approval procedures of
this section must be followed for all proposed land divisions that do not
qualify as exempt subdivisions under the Illinois Plat Act or as minor
subdivisions under Sec.
35-2108.
   (c)   APPROVAL CRITERIA. In order to be approved, the applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed preliminary subdivision plat:
   (1)   Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this
Code;
   (2)   Complies with all applicable regulations of this Code and other laws
and ordinances, unless previously waived or modified by the entity with
jurisdiction;
   (3)   Will not make any existing lot or structure nonconforming; and
   (4)   Will not impede motorized or nonmotorized transportation access for
any abutting properties.
   (d)   DECISION-MAKER.
   (1)   The zoning administrator shall make recommendations and the plan
commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny all applications for
preliminary subdivision plat approval, in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8,
except in cases where approval of the preliminary plat requires approval of an
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or the approval of waivers or modifications
of the infrastructure and public improvement standards of Article IV, Division
2.
   (2)   If an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or waivers or modifications
of infrastructure and improvement standards is required, the City Council shall
be the final decision-making body on the preliminary subdivision plat. In such
cases, the zoning administrator and plan commission serve as review bodies.
City Council action is not required on preliminary subdivision plats that do
not require plan amendments or code waivers or modifications.
   (e)   APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES. Application requirements and
processing procedures are described in
Table 35-2200.1 and Sec.
35-2201, with the following modifications:
   (1)   Effect of Approval. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat,
the applicant may proceed with installation of or the posting of financial
guarantees covering required infrastructure and improvements in accordance with
the approved preliminary subdivision plat and the requirements of this Code.
The applicant may also proceed with the preparation and submittal of the
required final subdivision plat. Preliminary subdivision plat approval does not
qualify a plat for recording.
   (2)   Validity. An approved preliminary subdivision plat remains valid and
effective for a period of 2 years from the date of approval. If a phasing plan
was expressly approved as part of the preliminary subdivision plat approval the
validity of the preliminary plat is governed by the approved phasing plan. The
plan commission is authorized to grant a one-time extension of the period of
validity, provided the extension request is filed before the preliminary plat’s
expiration date. Extensions may not exceed one year in duration. Once a
preliminary plat expires, no final plat application may be accepted until a new
preliminary plan is approved.
SEC. 35-2211.   WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. The waiver and modification procedures of this section
establish the process and review criteria for approval of waivers and
modifications of infrastructure and public improvement standards, as distinct
from “Variances.”
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. All property owner requests for relief from strict
compliance with the infrastructure and public improvement standards of Article
IV, Division 2, must be processed as waiver or modification requests in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (c)   PROCESS. Preliminary subdivision plats that include requests for
waivers or modifications must be processed in accordance with Sec.
35-2210(e), including review and recommendation by zoning administrator, city
engineer and Plan Commission and final decision by the City Council. If
preliminary subdivision plat approval is not required for the proposed
infrastructure or public improvement, the waiver or modification request shall
be decided by the City Council after application and review and recommendation
by zoning administrator and/or city engineer, as determined by adopted policy
or procedures in place.
   (d)   APPROVAL CRITERIA. In order to be approved, the applicant must
demonstrate that the requested waiver or modification:
   (1)   Will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the
subject property is located;
   (2)   Is the result of conditions that are unique to the subject property,
and that these conditions are not self-created, and that the applicant had no
knowledge of the impact of the regulations on the development of the property
at the time of the property’s purchase.
(Ord. No. 3009-2015; Article II repealed in its entirety; new Article II
enacted; 03/24/15)
(Ord. No. 3036-2016; Sec.
35-2211(c) repealed; new Sec.
35-2211(c) enacted; 12/20/16)
ARTICLE III. ZONING
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
SEC. 35-3100.   PURPOSE.
   The area located within the jurisdiction of this Code (See Sec.
35-1109) is hereby divided into zoning districts of such number and community
character as are necessary to achieve compatibility of land uses within each
district, to implement the officially adopted City of Moline Comprehensive
Plan, and to achieve the other purposes of this Code (See Sec.
35-1104).
SEC. 35-3101.   RELATIONSHIP TO ILLINOIS QUAD CITIES UNIFIED ZONING CODE.
All but one of the zoning districts used in this Code are contained in the
Illinois Quad Cities Unified Zoning Code (ILQCUZC); however, several of the
districts found in the ILQCUZC are not included in this Code as they were found
to be inconsistent with the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. Likewise, of
those districts that are included some modifications have been made to the
standards as necessary to achieve consistency with and fully implement the
adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. In some instances, these modifications are
noted in this Code to assist readers who have familiarity with the ILQCUZC.
Nevertheless, in every instance where there are differences between the codes,
whether noted or not, the provisions of the Moline Zoning and Land Development
Code shall prevail.
SEC. 35-3102.   STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS AND STANDARD ZONING DISTRICT
CATEGORIES.
   For the purpose of this Code, all areas within the jurisdiction of this Code
are hereby divided into the following standard zoning categories, and standard
zoning districts. The categories are listed in increasing order of intensity.
Likewise, the districts within the categories are also listed in increasing
order of intensity.
   (1)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
      a.   “R-2” One-Family Residence District
      b.   “R-4” One to Six Family Dwelling District
      c.   “R-6” Multi-Family Residence District
      d.   “R-7” Mobile Home/Park District
   (2)   RESOURCE DISTRICTS:
      a.   “C-2” Conservation District
      b.   “AG-2” General Agricultural District
   (3)   NON-RESIDENTIAL/RESOURCE DISTRICTS:
      a.   Office Districts:
         1.   “O-1” Office District
         2.   “ORT” Office/Research Park and Technology District
      b.   Business Districts:
         1.   “B-1” Neighborhood Business District
         2.   “NC” Neighborhood Center District
         3.   “B-2” Central Business District
         4.   “B-3” Community Business District
         5.   “B-4” Highway/Intensive Business District
      c.   Industrial Districts:
         1.   “I-1” Light Industrial District
         2.   “I-2” General Industrial District
SEC. 35-3103.   MAP OF STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Standard zoning districts established by this Code are shown on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Moline, which together with all explanatory materials
thereon, is hereby made part of this Code.
   The Official Zoning Map shall be published in pamphlet form in the City
Clerk’s office on or before March 31 of each year. No prosecution or other
legal action may be maintained by the City for a violation of the Zoning and
Land Development Code under a change to said Official Zoning Map after March 31
of the year following said change unless or until the publication requirement
contained herein has been met. If in any calendar year there are no changes in
zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations and classifications within
the City, publication shall not be necessary for that calendar year.
(Ord. No. 3013-2007; Sec.
35-3103 repealed; new Sec.
35-3103 enacted; 03/27/07)
SEC. 35-3104.   INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The following rules shall be used to determine the precise location of any
zoning district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of
Moline:
   (1)   Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the limits of any City, Township or County boundary shall be
construed as following such limits;
   (2)   Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following streets or railroad lines shall be construed as following the
centerline of such streets or railroad lines;
   (3)   Zoning district boundary lines shown as following or approximately
following platted lot lines or other property lines as shown on the Rock Island
County Supervisor’s Assessment Maps (“tax maps”) shall be construed as
following such lines;
   (4)   Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing
watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerlines of such
watercourses, and, in the event of a natural change in the location of such
streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be
construed as moving with the channel centerline;
   (5)   Zoning district boundaries shown as following or approximately
following ridgelines or watershed boundaries shall be construed as following
such lines; and
   (6)   Zoning district boundaries shown as separated from any of the features
listed in paragraphs (1) through (5) above shall be construed to be at such
distances therefrom as are shown on the Official Zoning Map. Where any
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line,
as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the location of the line shall be
determined by the zoning administrator.
SEC. 35-3105.   NEW OR ANNEXED LANDS.
   Submerged land heretofore reclaimed, or which may be reclaimed hereafter,
and which is not shown on the Official Zoning Map, shall be classified as the
zoning district of the land immediately adjacent thereto. Land heretofore
annexed or which may be annexed to the City of Moline hereafter, and which is
vacant or used for agriculture and is not shown on the Official Zoning Map,
shall be classified as AG-2, General Agriculture District (see Sec.
35-3210); and land which is used for residential and is not shown on the
Official Zoning Map shall be classified as R-2, One-Family Residential
District.
SEC. 35-3106.   PRINCIPLE AND MAJOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE BULK STANDARDS.
   The following terms and symbols are used on the principle and major
accessory structure bulk standards
Tables 35-3201.1,
35-3201.2 and
35-3301.1 contained in this Code. Unless otherwise noted, dimensions are
measured in feet and areas are measured in square feet. The following provides
summary definitions of those terms. For complete definitions of each term,
please consult Article I, Division 2 of this Code.
   (1)   ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
      a.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Lot Area – Lot size for newly created lots.
      b.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Width – Width at the front building line of
a lot.
      c.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Street Frontage – Lot width adjacent to a
street.
      d.   Minimum Yard Setback: Front – Distance between street right-of-way
and structure.
      e.   Minimum Yard Setback: Least Side – Distance between side property
line and    structure.
      f.   Minimum Yard Setback: Sum Side – Combined distance between side
property line    and structure on both sides.
      g.   Minimum Yard Setback: Rear – Distance between rear property line and
structure.
      h.   Maximum Building Height - Height of structure measured in feet and
stories.
      i.   Minimum On-Site Building Separation - Minimum distance between the
principal    structure and major accessory structures, and between major
accessory structures on the    same lot.
      j.   Maximum Building Coverage - Gross ground floor area of all buildings
measured as a    percentage of total lot area.
   (2)   RESIDENTIAL AND RESOURCE DISTRICTS.
      a.   Minimum Lot Dimensions: Area Per Unit – Area of land required for
each dwelling    unit located on the lot.
      b.   Maximum Floor Area Ratio – Ration of gross floor area of a building
to the size of the    lot. In Residential and Resource Districts, applies only
to non-residential uses.
      c.   Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio: Front Setback – Ratio of landscaped
area    required within the front yard setback to the total area of the front
yard setback.   Landscape area includes walkways but excludes patios, decks,
driveways and other paved    surfaces.
   (3)   NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
      a.   Maximum Building Size – Total Gross floor area of the principle
structure permitted    without special use approval. May be measured in square
feet or as a floor area ratio.
      b.   Minimum Landscape Surface Area Ratio – Ratio of landscaped area to
the total lot    area.
   (4)   SYMBOLS. The following symbols are used on the bulk standard tables in
all zoning districts:
      a.   Shading – Bulk Standards not included in ILQC Unified Zoning Code.
      b.   Bold – Bulk Standards that are different than those in the ILQC
Unified Zoning Code.
SEC. 35-3107.   MINOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS PERMITTED IN
SETBACKS.
   The following terms are used on the Minor Accessory Structures and
Obstruction Permitted in Required Yard Setback Tables 35-3201.3. and 35-3301.2.
for all zoning districts. The following provides summary definitions for these
terms. For complete definitions of each term, please consult Article I,
Division 2 of this Code.
   (1)   TERMS.
      a.   All Yards – Principal structure front, side and rear yard setbacks.
      b.   Front Yard – Principal structure front yard setback.
      c.   Side Yard – Principal structure side yard setback.
      d.   Rear Yard – Principal structure rear yard setback.
      e.   Limitations – Limitations on size and location of structures within
setbacks.
SEC. 35-3108.   PRINCIPLE AND MAJOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE BULK STANDARD
EXCEPTIONS.
   (a)   MINIMUM FRONT YARD SETBACK . The following Minimum Setbacks shall be
applied to lots of record created prior to 1991 that do not meet all of the
Bulk Standards for Minimum Lot Dimension contained in Table 35-3201.1 or Table
35-3301.1:
   (1)   Minimum corner lot side street setback : 10 feet.
   (2)   Minimum reverse corner lot side street setback : 50% of the minimum
front yard setback of the lot to the rear or 15 feet, whichever is less.
   (b)   ESTABLISHED FRONT YARD SETBACK EXCEPTION.  For single-family
residential principal structures on streets with established front yard
setbacks differing from the Minimum Front Yard Setback requirements in Tables
35-3201.1 and 35-3301.1, exceptions to the required front yard setback can be
applied under the following conditions:
   (1)   On block faces with five or more lots fronting on the public right of
way, if 40% or more of the lots on one side of a street between two
intersecting public streets have a front setback less than the required front
yard setback listed in Tables 35-3201.1 or 35-3301.1, the established setback
line shall establish the required front yard setback for the entire block face.
   (2)   If there is no established setback line, the average front yard
setback of those lots shall establish the required front yard setback for the
entire block face.
   (3)   This exception only applies to the principal structure of single-
family residential land uses, i.e., new construction, additions, porches, etc.
   (4)   This exception does not apply to accessory structures, decks or other
obstructions.
   (c)   MAXIMUM HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS . The Maximum Height Requirements shall not
apply to the following. However, if in the opinion of the building official
such structures would adversely affect abutting or adjacent properties, such
greater height shall not be authorized except by approval of a variance by the
zoning hearing officer as per Sec.
35-2207 of this Code.
   (1)   Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water Towers,
fire and hose Towers, masts and aerials.
   (2)   Indoor institutional uses such as churches, schools and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six 6 stories or 75
feet, provided that for each foot over the maximum height otherwise permitted
in the district, the minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be increased in
width and depth by an additional foot.
   (3)   Barns, silos or other farm buildings provided they are not less than
50 feet from every lot line.
   (4)   Bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, monitors,
scenery lofts, cooling Towers, grain elevators, gas holders, or other
structures where the permitted industrial use requires a greater height.
   (5)   Generators, heating, cooling, ventilation, communications, utility and
related equipment, provided that such equipment meets all other applicable
standards in this Code including but not limited to screening, visibility,
height, or placement.
(Ord. No. 3008-2009; Sec.
35-3108(a) repealed; new Sec.
35-3108(a) enacted; 03/24/09) (Ord. No. 3007-2017; new Sec.
35-3108(b)(5) enacted; 06/13/17) (Ord. No. 3007-2019; new Sec.
35-3108(b) enacted and current subsection (b) consecutively renamed as
subsection (c); 03/12/19)
SEC. 35-3109.   LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   Land Use regulations for all zoning districts are provided in Division 4 of
this Article.
SEC. 35-3110.   NONCONFORMING LOT REGULATIONS.
   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage under common ownership were of record at the time of
passage of this Code, and if all of the lots do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to
be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Code, and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot
width and area requirements established by this Code, nor shall any division of
any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this Code, except in the following situations:
   (1)   One vacant, nonconforming lot of record, adjacent to and held in
common ownership with a lot occupied by a permitted use, may be used for a
permitted use, not withstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
Code, provided that the vacant lot is not more than 10% smaller in area or
width than the average lot size of all developed lots within the block in which
it is located. This provision is intended to apply to single nonconforming lots
located on both sides of a developed lot (a maximum of three contiguous lots).
   (2)   Two vacant lots under the same ownership with continuous frontage
which were of record at the time of passage of this Code, and which,
individually, do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area,
may be used individually provided each lot is not less than 90% of the average
width and area of the lots within the block.
   Any single lot or parcel of land that does not adjoin another lot held in
common ownership, which was of record at the time of adoption of this Code,
that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width or area may be
utilized for a permitted use. With the approval of the zoning administrator,
one or more of the other bulk standards of the district may be reduced by an
amount proportional to the lot's failure to comply with the minimum width or
area requirements; provided however, that no bulk standard shall be reduced by
more than 25%.
(Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-3110 amended; passed 2/4/25)
SEC. 35-3111.   NONCONFORMING USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   DEFINITION. “Nonconforming use” shall have the meaning ascribed in
Section
35-1203(243) of this Code.
   (b)   CONTINUATION . A lawful use made nonconforming by the adoption of this
Code or ordinances of the City may continue only for so long as such use
continues unabated subject to the requirements of this section. This section
shall not prohibit normal maintenance or minor repair of any nonconforming use.
   (c)   NON-RESIDENTIAL USES . Nonconforming non-residential uses shall be
regulated in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Maintenance . The normal maintenance of a structure or land
containing or related to a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
repairs and incidental alterations which do not exacerbate the adverse impacts
of the nonconforming use in relation to the purpose of this Code. In no
instance shall said repairs exceed over the life of the structure, 50% of the
present assessed market value of said structure or property prior to said
repairs.
      (2)   Expansion . In all Non-Residential/Resource Districts, expansion of
up to 20% of the total existing floor area or 20% of any outdoor operations/
storage area may be permitted with an approved site plan review in any
continuous five year period, provided all other provisions of this Code are
met. Expansion of a non-residential use in a Residential District shall be
limited to no more than 10% and only with the approval of a special use permit.
      (3)   Change of use . Any nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use upon the approval of the zoning administrator, provided that:
         a.   The proposed use is equally or more appropriate and less
intensive than the existing use, but may not thereafter be returned to the
previous nonconforming use or changed to any more intensive use;
         b.   The change will not increase congestion in the streets;
         c.   The change will not endanger the health, safety, morals, or
general welfare of the district in which it is located;
         d.   The amount of land devoted to the nonconforming use shall not be
increased;
         e.   The zoning administrator may require whatever conditions and
safeguards deemed necessary in granting the change; and
         f.   Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this Code shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
nonconforming use.
      (4)   Abandonment . A nonconforming use that has been discontinued for a
continuous period of 12 months, for whatever reason, shall be considered to be
abandoned and shall not be re-established. Any further use on the property
shall be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this Code. Evidence
of intent to abandon the nonconforming use is not required.
      (5)   Destruction . A nonconforming use damaged to less than 50% of its
fair market value, based on the valuation of the township assessor or a market
appraisal performed by a certified appraiser, may be restored provided that:
all portions of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a
property line; all construction is in compliance with current construction
codes, such as the Fire and Building Codes; a building permit is obtained
within six months from the date of the damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy
(or other final inspection) is issued within one year of the issuance of the
building permit. If damage exceeds 50% or more of the fair market value,
restoration or improvement shall not be permitted unless the restoration
results in a use conforming to all applicable provisions of this Code.
   (d)   RESIDENTIAL USES . Nonconforming residential uses shall be regulated
in accordance with the following provisions. As used in this paragraph,
nonconforming residential uses are those uses which are nonconforming due to
the number of dwelling units they contain or their location in a zoning
district that does not permit residential uses.
      (1)   Maintenance . The normal maintenance of a structure or land
containing or related to a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary
repairs and incidental alterations which do not exacerbate the adverse impacts
of the nonconforming use in relation to the purpose of this Code.
      (2)   Expansion . In all zoning districts, nonconforming single family
homes may expand by the greater of either 20% of the existing gross floor area
or 20% of the value of the existing structure, based on the valuation of the
township assessor or a market appraisal performed by a certified appraiser, in
any continuous five year period provided that: an addition of up to 150 square
feet shall be permitted regardless of existing size or value of the structure;
no additional dwelling units are created; and all other provisions of this Code
are met. Expansion of residential structures other than single family homes
shall be strictly limited to common areas only and limited to 300 square feet
in any continuous five year period.
      (3)   Abandonment . A nonconforming residential use, other than a single
family home, that has not been occupied for a continuous period of 12 months,
for whatever reason, shall be considered to be abandoned and shall not be re-
occupied. Any further use on the property shall be in conformance with all
applicable provisions of this Code. Evidence of intent to abandon the
nonconforming use is not required.
         a.   A nonconforming single family home that has not been occupied for
a continuous period 12 months or longer shall not be considered to be abandoned
and may be re-occupied at any time provided the structure has not been changed,
legally or illegally, to a non-residential use or multiple-unit residential
use.
         b.   Removal of a nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home not
in a mobile home park, from its foundation or pad for a continuous period of 12
months shall constitute abandonment of the use and placement of a new unit must
comply with the provisions of this Code. Evidence of intent to abandon the
nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home use is not required.
         c.   Failure to correct code violations that have been adjudicated and
so ordered in the manner and time frame so ordered shall constitute an intent
to abandon a nonconforming residential use.
      (4)   Destruction . Nonconforming residential uses that are damaged may
be rebuilt in accordance with the following:
         a.   A structure damaged to less than 50% of its fair market value,
based on the valuation of the township assessor or a market appraisal performed
by a certified appraiser, may be restored provided that: all portions of the
structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; the
number of dwelling units does not increase; all construction is in compliance
with current construction codes, such as the Fire and Building Codes; a
building permit is obtained within six months from the date of the damage; and
the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final inspection) is issued within one
year of the issuance of the building permit.
         b.   A structure damaged to 50% or greater of its fair market value,
based on the valuation of the township assessor or a market appraisal performed
by a certified appraiser, may be rebuilt to its existing number of units
provided that: the units were legally created at the time they were built; all
portions of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a
property line; the number of dwelling units does not increase; the structure
and property are in compliance with all other regulations of this Code, other
than the number of units; all construction is in compliance with current
construction codes, such as the Fire and Building Codes; a building permit is
obtained within six months from the date of the damage; and the Certificate of
Occupancy (or other final inspection) is issued within one year of the issuance
of the building permit.
            1.   Single family homes which are damaged by more than 50% may be
restored within the existing footprint provided that; all portions of the
structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; all
construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire
and Building Codes, a building permit is obtained within six months from the
date of the damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final
inspection) is issued within one year of the issuance of the building permit.
      (5)   Density Acceptance . Owners who are unable to prove to the
satisfaction of the zoning administrator that the density (number of units) on
their property was legally established may appeal to the zoning hearing officer
to be granted rebuilding rights under this section. In deciding such appeals,
the zoning hearing officer shall hold a public hearing and consider the
following: any and all documentation available regarding the development
history of the property, both permitted and unpermitted; the number, type and
disposition of Code violations and criminal infractions on the property; the
length of time the current owner has had the property and whether the density
or violations preceded that ownership; the degree of non-conformity of density;
the number and extent of any site non-conformities; and the potential impact
granting indefinite rebuilding rights would have on surrounding properties and
general neighborhood. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same
manner as required for a variance before the zoning hearing officer.
      (6)   Rebuilding . All structures damaged to 50% or greater of their fair
market value, that are reconstructed, shall comply with all provisions of this
Code, other than density, including, but not limited to: setbacks; building
height; parking; landscaping and open space. Although the property shall retain
the right to re-establish the same number of dwelling units, changes may be
required to the size and type of units and the configuration of the structure
(s) in order to meet other Code requirements. If the property does not conform
with all requirements of this Code, other than density, approval of a special
use permit shall be required in order to vary from the requirements. In
addition to complying with the special use permit criteria, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed redevelopment of the property complies with the
Code requirements to the maximum extent practical given it is the intent of
this Code that the property be permitted to retain its density and remain
viable.
(Ord. No. 3006-2023; Sec. 35-3111 (a) amended; 03-07-23)
SEC. 35-3112.   NONCONFORMING SITES AND STRUCTURES REGULATIONS.
   (a)   DEFINITIONS.
      (1)   “Nonconforming building or structure” shall have the meaning
ascribed in Section
35-1203(239) of this Code.
      (2)   “Nonconforming site” shall have the meaning ascribed in Section
35-1203(241) of this Code.
      (3)   “Nonconforming site development element” shall have the meaning
ascribed in Section
35-1203(242) of this Code.
   (b)   CONTINUATION.
      (1)   A nonconforming building or structure may be used for any purposes
permitted in the zoning district so long as the use is in conformance with the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   A nonconforming site may be used for any purposes permitted in the
zoning district so long as the use is in conformance with the provisions of
this section.
   (c)   STRUCTURE MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION IMPACT ON NONCONFORMING SITE
COMPLIANCE. In any continuous 12 month period, interior or exterior remodeling
of a structure situated on a nonconforming site that requires a building permit
shall require correction of existing nonconforming site development elements
that do not conform with the nonconforming site development element standards
set forth in Article V of this Code, in accordance with this section. The cost
of the structure remodeling shall be as shown on the approved building permit
application and the current fair market value of the existing structure,
exclusive of the fair market value of the land, shall be based on a market
appraisal performed by a certified appraiser or as determined by the township
assessor.
      (1)   Remodeling projects that cost 25% or less of the current fair
market value of the structure shall not require any correction of nonconforming
site development elements, other than as may be required by Fire and Building
Codes.
      (2)   Remodeling projects that cost more than 25%, but less than 75% of
the current fair market value of the structure shall require a corresponding
percentage increase in compliance of the nonconforming site development
elements with the nonconforming site development element standards set forth in
Article V of this Code, until the site achieves 100% compliance. (For example,
if a site has only 2000 of the 3000 required landscape points and the cost of
the remodeling is 30% of the value of the building, then 30% of the required
landscape points shall be provided, or 900 points.)
      (3)   Remodeling projects that cost 75% or greater of the current fair
market value of the structure shall require nonconforming site development
elements to achieve 100% compliance with the nonconforming site development
element standards set forth in Article V of this Code.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, structure remodeling projects of any
size that do not expand the footprint of the subject building shall not require
changes in the number of parking spaces required by Division 1 of Article V, as
provided in Sec.
35-5100(b).
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, structure remodeling projects that
cost less than 75% of the current fair market value of the structure shall not
require changes to nonconforming site development elements that deviate from
the performance standards and requirements set forth in Division 4 of Article V
pertaining to operational nuisances, such as noise, vibration, odors, heat,
glare and smoke. Remodeling projects that cost 75% or greater of the current
fair market value of the structure shall require nonconforming site development
elements that deviate from the performance standards and requirements set forth
in Division 4 of Article V to achieve 100% compliance with said standards.
      (6)   Properties that are physically constrained from complying with
these provisions shall comply to the maximum extent practicable as determined
by the zoning administrator.
      (7)   Structure remodeling projects of any size that only renovate the
interior of a structure and do not impact the exterior of the building, other
than identifying signage affixed to such building, shall not require changes to
nonconforming site development elements that deviate from the standards and
requirements set forth in Division 5 of Article V pertaining to façade
appearance, building materials, screening of mechanical elements, and
undergrounding or screening of utility facilities.
   (d)   ALTERATIONS TO NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
      (1)   Routine maintenance and repair may be performed on any
nonconforming structure without eliminating nonconformities therein, provided
that no such maintenance or repairs are permissible that would create any new
nonconformities, increase the degree of any previously existing nonconformity,
or otherwise increase the bulk of the building or structure. Any maintenance or
repairs involving structural alterations shall not be deemed “routine
maintenance and repair” for purposes of this subsection (d).
      (2)   Structural alterations to nonconforming structures are permitted
only in the following situations:
         a.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting public safety; or
         b.   When the alteration will eliminate the nonconformity; or
         c.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity or
increase the degree of any existing nonconformity.
      (3)   Destruction. A nonconforming structure which is damaged to 50% or
less of its fair market value, based on a valuation of the township assessor or
a market appraisal performed by a certified appraiser, may be restored within
the existing footprint provided that: all portions of the structure being
restored are not and were not on or over a property line; all construction is
in compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire and Building
Codes; a building permit is obtained within six months from the date of the
damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final inspection) is issued
within one year of the issuance of the building permit. If damage exceeds 50%,
restoration or improvement shall not be permitted unless the restoration
results in a structure and site conforming to all applicable requirements of
this Code, except for the following:
         a.   Nonconforming single family homes which are damaged by more than
50% may be restored within the existing footprint provided that; all portions
of the structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property
line; all construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such
as the Fire and Building Codes, a building permit is obtained within six months
from the date of the damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final
inspection) is issued within one year of the issuance of the building permit.
   (e)   EXPANSION. In any continuous five year period, additions to structures
on nonconforming sites shall require correction of nonconforming site
development elements in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Expansions that would result in less than a 35% increase of the
total gross square footage of the existing structure(s) shall require a
corresponding percentage increase in compliance with the substantive
nonconforming site development elements set forth in Article V of this Code
until the site achieves 100% compliance. The same requirements also shall apply
to the addition of new or increased areas for outdoor operations/storage. (For
example, if the addition is 20% of the size of the existing building and the
site contains only 50% of the required landscaping, 20% of the required
landscaping for the entire site must be provided thereby bringing the site to
70% of the total required.
      (2)   Complete replacement of existing structures or expansions that
result in a 35% or greater increase of the total gross square footage of the
existing structure(s) require the nonconforming site development elements to
meet all of the substantive nonconforming site development elements of Article
V of this Code. The same requirements applicable to structure expansion also
shall apply to the addition of new or increased areas for outdoor operations/
storage.
      (3)   Expansions that necessitate an increase in the number of parking
spaces shall be required to provide 100% of the required parking spaces for the
use as applied only to the area of addition or expansion in accordance with
Section
35-5100(b)(2) of this Code. The additional parking area shall comply with all
associated landscaping and drainage requirements of this Code, although the
previously-existing parking area only needs to be brought into compliance with
the applicable standards of Article V to an extent proportionate to the scope
of expansion as set forth in Subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) above.
      (4)   Structures with wall lines that fail to meet the setbacks
established in this Code may be expanded horizontally or vertically at the
existing setback dimension provided that the setback dimension is 75% or
greater of the required setback and all other applicable bulk standards are
met.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, expansions shall require Article V-
compliant lighting for such addition as set forth in Section
35-5303(5).
   (f)   CHANGE OF USE. Changes of use within an existing structure shall be
exempt from complying with the standards of Article V, Division 1, provided
that the change in use within an existing structure does not include any new
structures or additions to existing structures. Where a change in use occurs
that necessitates an increase in the number of parking spaces in conjunction
with new construction or the expansion of an existing building, additional
parking spaces shall be required in accordance with Sec.
35-5100.
   (g)   CHANGES TO NONCONFORMING SITE DEVELOPMENT ELEMENTS. Remodeling
projects involving alterations to nonconforming site development elements,
either exclusively or in conjunction with the renovation of a structure, shall
be conducted in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Nonconforming Site Development Elements Maintenance. Normal
maintenance and incidental repair to a nonconforming site development element
may be performed without bringing such elements into compliance with
nonconforming site development element standards set forth in Article V of this
Code, provided that no such maintenance or repairs are permissible that would
create any new site development element nonconformity or increase the degree of
the previously existing site development nonconformity. For purposes of this
subsection, resealing or re-striping of an existing parking lot, which does not
entail paving, resurfacing, or replacement of the asphalt, concrete, or other
paving material, shall be considered normal maintenance and incidental repair
not triggering compliance of the nonconforming site development element with
Article V of this Code.
      (2)   Nonconforming Site Development Elements Wholesale Replacement. Any
nonconforming Site Development Element that is removed, demolished, or
destroyed shall not be re-established, but instead must be replaced or restored
only in conformance with nonconforming site development element standards set
forth in Article V of this Code.
      (3)   Nonconforming Site Development Elements Partial Replacement.
         a.   Nonconforming Parking Lot Landscaping: When a parking lot of ten
(10) or more spaces does not conform to the landscape requirements pertaining
to such parking lots, it must be brought into conformance pursuant to the
following requirements when such parking lot is reconstructed or expanded by:
            1.   25% of its total off-street parking surface area or less this
shall not require any correction of nonconforming landscaping requirements;
            2.   More than 25%, but less than 75% of its total off-street
parking surface area, this shall require a corresponding percentage increase in
compliance of the nonconforming landscaping requirements; or
            3.   75% or greater of its total off-street parking surface area,
this shall require 100% compliance with the nonconforming landscaping
requirements.
            For purposes of this subsection, resealing or re-striping of an
existing parking lot, which does not entail paving, resurfacing, or replacement
of the asphalt, concrete, or other paving material, is not considered
reconstruction.
         b.   Nonconforming Exterior Lighting: For exterior lighting, when
twenty-five percent (25%) or more of exterior lighting fixtures are replaced,
all exterior lighting on the site must be brought into conformance with
Division 3 of Article V. This is calculated as installation of new lighting
posts and/or non-post mounted lighting fixtures based on the total lighting
installed by the type of mounting. For example, if over twenty-five percent
(25%) of the wall-mounted fixtures are to be replaced, all wall-mounted
fixtures must be brought into conformance while nonconforming freestanding
fixtures may remain.ed within six months from the date of the damage; and the
Certificate of Occupancy (or other final inspection) is issued within one year
of the issuance of the building permit.
   (h)   DESTRUCTION. A nonconforming structure which is damaged to 50% or less
of its fair market value, based on a valuation of the township assessor or a
market appraisal performed by a certified appraiser, may be restored within the
existing footprint provided that: all portions of the structure being restored
are not and were not on or over a property line; all construction is in
compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire and Building
Codes; a building permit is obtained within six months from the date of the
damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final inspection) is issued
within one year of the issuance of the building permit. If damage exceeds 50%,
restoration or improvement shall not be permitted unless the restoration
results in a structure and site conforming to all applicable requirements of
this Code, except for the following:.
      (1)   Single family homes which are damaged by more than 50% may be
restored within the existing footprint provided that; all portions of the
structure being restored are not and were not on or over a property line; all
construction is in compliance with current construction codes, such as the Fire
and Building Codes, a building permit is obtained within six months from the
date of the damage; and the Certificate of Occupancy (or other final
inspection) is issued within one year of the issuance of the building permit.
(Ord. No. 3006-2023; Sec.
35-3112(a)-(e) amended; Sec.
35-3112(g) enacted; 03/07/23)
SEC. 35-3113.   NONCONFORMING USE, SITES AND STRUCTURES TIME EXTENSIONS.
   The zoning hearing officer may permit one extension of up to 12 additional
months to the time periods for abandonment, obtaining a building permit, and/or
completing construction provided the applicant can demonstrate circumstances
out of his control have prevented a good faith attempt to re-establish or
rebuild the nonconforming use and/or structure. Such circumstances may include
the health of the applicant, court proceedings, failure to reach an insurance
settlement, acts of god, or similar difficulties.
SEC. 35-3114.   VARIANCES FOR NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, SITES AND STRUCTURES.
   The zoning hearing officer may vary the nonconforming use, site and
structure provisions of this Article. Application and processing shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Sec.
35-2207.
SEC. 35-3115.   NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, SITES AND STRUCTURES EVIDENCE OF
STATUS.
   The nonconforming regulations of this Article apply only to legally
established, nonconforming lots, uses, sites or structures, and evidence of the
legal status of a nonconforming lot, use, site or structure shall be supplied
by the owner of the property upon request of the zoning administrator. Owners
who fail to present sufficient evidence that the lot, use, site, or structure
was legally established under a previous Code may be denied the rights and
privileges granted by this article and may subject the owner to enforcement
proceedings by the City in order to obtain full compliance with this Code.
DIVISION 2. RESIDENTIAL AND RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS
SEC. 35-3200.   RELATIONSHIP TO ILLINOIS QUAD CITIES UNIFIED ZONING CODE AND
MOLINE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. 
   (a)   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS FROM ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE . The
Moline Zoning and Land Development Code includes the following Residential
Districts from the ILQC Unified Zoning Code as these districts have been found
to be the most consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the
adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan:
   (1)   “R-2” One-Family Residence District;
   (2)   “R-4” One to Six Family Dwelling District;
   (3)   “R-6” Multi-family Residence District;
   (4)   “R-7” Mobile Home Park District.
   (b)   RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS FROM ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE . The Moline
Zoning and Land Development Code includes the following Resource Districts from
the ILQC Unified Zoning Code as these districts have been found to be the most
consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Moline Comprehensive
Plan:
   (1)   “C-2” Conservation District;
   (2)   “AG-2” General Agricultural District.
   (c)   MODIFICATIONS TO ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE DISTRICTS . In order to
fully implement the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan, modifications have been made to the Residential and
Resource Districts selected from the Unified Code. In some instances, these
modifications are noted in this Code to assist readers of this Code who have
familiarity with the Unified Code. However, in every instance where there are
differences between the codes, whether highlighted or not, the provisions of
the Moline Zoning and Land Development Code shall prevail.
SEC. 35-3201.   BULK STANDARDS.
   (a)   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES .
Table 35-3201.1. lists the bulk standards for principal structures in all
Residential and Resource Districts.
   (1)   Terms . Please see Sec.
35-3106 for an explanation of the terms used on
Table 35-3201.1.
   (2)   Exceptions. Please see Sec.
35-3108 for exceptions to the bulk standards on
Table 35-3201.1.
Table 35-3201.1
Residential and Resource Districts
Principal Structure Bulk Standards(1)(2)
                                        Minimum Yard
                 Minimum Lot Dimensions Setbacks (ft)                                                                                                                                                                             Minimum
                                        Side                                                                                                                                                                                      Landscape Max.
Zoning   Maximum Area                                                                                                                                                                                                             Surface   Floor
District Density Per  Lot        Street                      Maximum Building                                                                           Ratio    �Area t (feet/ stories)
         (du/Ac) Unit Area Width front  Front Least Sum Rear                                                                                                                                                                      Front     Ratio
                      (sq  (ft)  (ft)   (9)                                                                                                                                                                                       Setback   (4)
                 (sq  ft)        (3)
                 ft)
Table 35-3201.1
Residential and Resource Districts
Principal Structure Bulk Standards(1)(2)
                                          Minimum Yard
                 Minimum Lot Dimensions   Setbacks (ft)                                                                                                                                                                             Minimum
                                          Side                                                                                                                                                                                      Landscape Max.
Zoning   Maximum Area                                                                                                                                                                                                               Surface   Floor
District Density Per   Lot         Street                      Maximum Building                                                                           Ratio    �Area t (feet/ stories)
         (du/Ac) Unit  Area  Width front  Front Least Sum Rear                                                                                                                                                                      Front     Ratio
                 (sq   (sq   (ft)  (ft)   (9)                                                                                                                                                                                       Setback   (4)
                 ft)   ft)         (3)

R-2(5)   6       6,000 6,000 60    20     25    5     12  30   35/2 1/2                                                                                                                                                             0.50      0.25
R-2
(<6,000  N/A     2,000 2,000 20    20     5     5     12  10   35/2 1/2                                                                                                                                                             0.25      1.00
sq/ft)
R-4      14      3,000 5,000 50    20     25    5     12  30   35/2 1/2                                                                                                                                                             0.50      0.50
R-6 (6) 34      1,250 5,000 50    20     25    5+    15+ 25+  150/12                                                                                                                                                               0.50      1.00
R-7(7)   34      1,250 5,000 50          25    5+    15+ 25+  150/12                                                                                                                                                               0.50      1.00
C-2 (8)  0.07    15    15    165   50     40    15    30  40   35/2 1/2                                                                                                                                                             0.85      0.10
                 acres acres
AG-2     0.07    15    15    165   50     40    15    30  40   35/2 1/2                                                                                                                                                             0.85      0.10
                 acres acres
 
Footnotes:
(1) See Sec.
35-3106 for a summary of terms used on the table.
(2) See Sections
35-3107 and 35-3108 for a list of permissible obstructions and exceptions to
these standards.
(3) The requirements may be waived if the City Engineer instead approves, and
the applicant records, an irrevocable access easement.
(4) Applies to non-residential uses only.
(5) See Sec.
35-3211 for alternative standards applicable to residential infill development.
(6) For each story above the second, add 2 feet to least side setback, 4 feet
to sum side setback, and 5 feet to rear setback.
(7) For mobile home parks, the standard in
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances shall apply. The standards shown on
this table shall apply to other land uses.
(8) For residential uses on existing lots of record of less than 2 acres, the
R-2 standards shall apply.
(9) The required front yard setbacks apply to all sides of a corner lot that
have street frontage. (See Section
35-3108 for exceptions.)
Standards in bold indicate difference between Moline Zoning and Land
Development Code and ILQC Unified Zoning Code.
Standards that are shaded indicate those not included in ILQC Unified Zoning
Code.
 
(Ord. No. 3008-2009; Table 35-3201.1 amended by inserting footnote (9) to
Minimum Yard Setbacks, “Front;” 03/24/09; Ord. No. 3039-2025; Table 35-3201.1
amended by inserting row “R-2 (<6,000 sq/ft);” 9/9/25)
   (b)   MAJOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES .
Table 35-3201.2 lists the bulk standards for major accessory structures in all
Residential and Resource Districts. In general, major accessory structures are
those that exceed 120 square feet in area and that are not otherwise defined as
principal or minor accessory structures. No major accessory structure can have
more lot coverage than the principal structure. Multiple structures are
permitted.
   (1)   Terms . Please see Sec.
35-3106 for an explanation of the terms used on
Table 35-3201.2.
   (2)   Exceptions . Please see Sec.
35-3108 for exceptions to the bulk standards on
Table 35-3201.2.
Table 35-3201.2.
Residential and Resource Districts
Major Accessory Structure Bulk Standards (1)
          Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet)            Minimum Onsite
Zoning                                            Building       Maximum Height
District  Front(6) Single Side  Sum Sides(3) Rear Separation     (ft.)
                   (3)                            (ft)(4)
Table 35-3201.2.
Residential and Resource Districts
Major Accessory Structure Bulk Standards (1)
                    Minimum Yard Setbacks (feet)        Minimum
                                                        Onsite      Maximum
Zoning                       Single Side Sum Sides      Building    Height
District            Front(6) (3)         (3)       Rear Separation  (ft.)
                                                        (ft)(4)

R-2                 25       3           25% lot   5    6           15
                                         width
R-4                 25       3           25% lot   5    6           15
                                         width
R-6                 20       3           25% lot   5    6           15
                                         width
R-7(5)              20       3           25% lot   5    6           15
                                         width
(See
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances)
C-2      10,000 sq. 40       15          30        15   20          35
         ft.
AG-2     10,000 sq. 40       15          30        15   20          35
         ft.
Footnotes:
(1) The Zoning Administrator, Building Official or Fire Marshall may
increase any of the standards and/or impose additional restrictions on any
major accessory structure as may be necessary to comply with other codes
and/or to protect the health and safety of persons on the subject property
or adjoining properties.
(2)    Major accessory structures must be located behind the rear building
line of the principal structure or must meet the principle structure side
setbacks.
(3)   One major accessory structure may be connected to the principle
structure with a breezeway that is: covered but has no walls; is less than
6 feet in width; and complies with all other major accessory structure
standards and requirements.
(4)   For mobile home parks, the standards in Chapter 19 of the Moline Code
of Ordinances shall apply. The standards shown on this table apply to all
other land uses.
(5)   The required front yard setbacks apply to all sides of a corner lot
that have street frontage. (See Section 35-3108 for exceptions)
Dimensions in bold indicate difference between requirements of Moline Land
Development Code and ILQC Unified Zoning Code. 
Standards that are shaded are those not included in Unified Code.
 
Table 3201.2.1
Residential and Resource Districts Building Lot Coverage(1)
 
Zoning District    % of Lot Coverage
R-2                35%
R-2 (<6,000 sq/ft) 80%
R-4                35%
R-6                40%
R-7                40%
 
(1)   Includes principal and all major and minor accessory structure square
footage. Does not apply to swimming pools.
(Ord. No. 3022-2019; 9/17/19; Ord. No. 3008-2009; Table 35-3201.2 amended by
inserting footnote (6) to Minimum Yard Setbacks, "Front;" 03/24/09; Ord. No.
3039-2025; Table 35-3201.2.1 amended by inserting row “R-2 (<6,000 sq/ft);” 9/
9/25)
   (c)   MINOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS PERMITTED WITHIN SETBACKS
.
Table 35-3201.3. lists the minor accessory structures and obstructions
permitted within required principal structure yard setbacks in all Residential
and Resource Districts.
   (1)   Terms .   Please see Sec.
35-3107 for an explanation of the terms used on
Table 35-3201.3.
Table 35-3201.3
Residential and Resource Districts
Minor Accessory Structures and Obstructions Permitted in Required Yard Setbacks
 All Setbacks Front Setbacks Side Setbacks Rear Setbacks Limitations (1)
              All Setbacks Front    Side Setbacks Rear Setbacks Limitations
                           Setbacks                             (1)
Fences, walls & hedges (2)
                                                                Agricultural
                                                                and
                                                                Conservation
Barbed Wire   T                                                 Districts
                                                                only, 5 feet
                                                                from right-of-
                                                                way.
                                                                Agricultural
                                                                District only
                                                                for enclosure
                                                                of livestock;
                                                                charge should
                                                                not be greater
                                                                than 25
                                                                milliamperes
                                                                nor a
Electric      T                                                 pulsating
Fence                                                           current larger
                                                                than 1/10
                                                                second in a
                                                                one second
                                                                cycle; fence
                                                                to carry the
                                                                seal of an
                                                                approved
                                                                testing
                                                                laboratory.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                42 inches in
                                                                height and not
                                                                less than one
Fence Wall                 T                                    foot from
                                                                front property
                                                                line when
                                                                constructed in
                                                                the required
                                                                front yard.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                6 feet in
                                                                height when
Fence Wall                          T             T             constructed
                                                                out of the
                                                                required front
                                                                yard.
                                                                Not more than
Hedge         T                                                 16 feet in
                                                                height.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                6 feet in
                                                                height,
                                                                terraced
Retaining     T                                                 slopes to have
Wall                                                            a minimum of 3
                                                                feet
                                                                horizontal
                                                                distance
                                                                between walls.
Minor Accessory Structures (3)
                                                                Not more than
Arbor/                                                          16 feet in
Trellis/                   T                                    height
Pergola                                                         covering less
                                                                than 10% of
                                                                front setback.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Arbor/                                                          height
Trellis/                            T             T             covering less
Pergola                                                         than 50% of
                                                                required
                                                                setback.
                                                                Dumpsters
                                                                placed at any
                                                                location on
                                                                the property
                                                                must be
Dumpster                                                        screened on
Enclosure (2)                       T             T             four sides
                                                                (including a
                                                                gate for
                                                                access) with a
                                                                solid fence or
                                                                wall 6 feet in
                                                                height.
Basketball    T                                                  
Hoop
                                                                Not more than
Clothes Line                        T             T             6 feet in
                                                                height.
                                                                Not more than
Flag Pole     T                                                 20 feet in
                                                                height.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                5 feet in
                                                                height, no
                                                                closer than 3
Fountain      T                                                 feet to any
                                                                property line
                                                                and no more
                                                                than 20 square
                                                                feet.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Gazebo/Picnic                       T             T             height and no
Shelters                                                        larger than
                                                                120 square
                                                                feet.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                1 foot above
Patio/                                                          grade and in
Freestanding  T                                                 compliance
Deck                                                            with minimum
                                                                landscape area
                                                                ratio.
Seasonal                                                        Not displayed
Decorations   T                                                 longer than 90
                                                                days.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Shed/Storage                        T             T             height and no
Building                                                        larger than
                                                                120 square
                                                                feet.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                5 feet in
Statuary/Art  T                                                 height with a
Objects                                                         footprint no
                                                                larger than 20
                                                                square feet.
                                                                Edge of water/
                                                                playing
                                                                structure or
                                                                surface to be
Swimming                                                        3 feet from
Pools/                              T             T             all property
Recreation                                                      lines; all
Courts                                                          permanent
                                                                equipment to
                                                                be not more
                                                                than 16 feet
                                                                in height.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Swingset/Play T                                                 height and
Equipment                                                       covering no
                                                                more than 120
                                                                square feet.
Walkways/                                                       Not more than
Steps         T                                                 1 foot above
                                                                grade.
Obstructions (4)
                                                                Projections
Awning/Canopy T                                                 into setback
                                                                not more than
                                                                3 feet.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                1/3 of wall
Bay Window/                                                     area and
Balcony       T                                                 projecting not
                                                                more than 3
                                                                feet into
                                                                setback.
Chimney,
Flue, Belt                                                      Projecting not
Courses,                                                        more than 18
Cornice,      T                                                 inches into
Leader,                                                         setback.
Lentil, Sil,
Pilaster
                                                                Projecting not
Eaves and                  T        T                           more than 18
Gutter                                                          inches into
                                                                setback.
                                                                Not covered
Elevated                                                        and not closer
Deck/Porch                          T             T             than 3 feet to
                                                                any property
                                                                line.
                                                                Projecting not
Fire Escape   T                                                 more than 3
                                                                feet into
                                                                setback.
                                                                Not closer
Mechanical                          T             T             than 3 feet to
Equipment                                                       any property
                                                                line.
                                                                Not higher
                                                                than ground
                                                                floor of
                                                                building and
Stoop/Landing T                                                 not larger
                                                                than 25 sq.
                                                                ft. (not
                                                                including
                                                                steps).
                                                                Generally, no
                                                                larger than
Wheelchair                                                      minimum
Ramp          T                                                 requirements
                                                                to meet
                                                                accessibility
                                                                codes.
 
Footnotes:
(1)   The following shall apply to all items on this table.
   a. All items shall comply with visibility triangle requirements of Sec.
35-5210.
   b. The Zoning Administrator, Building Official and Fire Marshall may alter
any of these standards and/or impose additional requirements as necessary to
achieve compliance with other codes and/or to protect the health and safety of
persons on the subject property or adjoining properties.
(2)   Please see Sec.
35-5209 for complete requirements pertaining to fences and walls.
(3)   Minor accessory structures are those that are generally less than 18 feet
in height and less than 120 square feet and which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, are similar in size, character and function to those listed
here. Minor accessory structures which do not comply with the limitations on
this table shall be considered to be major accessory structures and shall
comply with all major accessory structure requirements and standards.
(4)   Obstructions are features that are integral to or otherwise permanently
attached to the principal structure. Other integral or attached features, which
in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator are not similar to those listed in
this table, shall comply with the principal buildings setbacks.
(Ord. No. 3008-2009; Table 35-3201.3 amended by adding "Wheelchair Ramp" to
"Obstructions"; 03/24/09; Ord. No. 3035-2020; Table 35-3201.3 repealed; Table
35-3201.3 added; 12/01/2020; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Table 35-3201.3 amended by
adding “Minor Accessory Structures” and “Obstructions”; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-3202.   LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   Land use regulations for all Residential and Resource zoning districts are
provided in Division 4 of this Article.
SEC. 35-3203.   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The Residential Districts (R-2, R-4, R-6, R-7)
are established in order to protect public health and promote public safety,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and welfare. These general goals
include, but are not limited to, the following specific purposes:
   (1)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other
objectionable factors.
   (2)   To protect residential areas to the greatest extent possible and as
appropriate in each area    against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic,
especially through-traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street
parking.
   (3)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other    public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulations of the bulk    of buildings.
   (4)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
   (5)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development.
   (6)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
   (7)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character of desirable development, and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the City.
   (8)   To preserve and enhance existing neighborhoods and development and
promote new development consistent with the stated purpose and intent of each
residential district.
   (9)   To ensure adequate public facilities and services are available with
capacity to serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of the magnitude
of development planned for each residential district.
SEC. 35-3204.   “R-2” ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (a)   Purpose and Intent. The R-2 District is intended to provide areas for
low density residential development (6 or less dwelling units per gross acre)
consistent with the Low Density Future Land Use Category of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan. The District standards and regulations have been crafted,
and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new development
projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the District. In
recognition of the evolving housing needs and to support housing diversity and
attainability, the R-2 District may also accomodate smaller residential lots.
   (b)   Defining Characteristics. The R-2 District in Moline is characterized
by a predominance of single family detached homes facing local streets. Streets
typically are on a continuous grid network with some areas also served by
alleys. Individual developments within the District have lot sizes that are
uniform or at least have uniform widths and orientations to the street creating
identifiable and distinct "neighborhoods". Typically, permissible non-
residential developments within the District (such as churches and schools) are
scattered and tend to occur on large lots with ample open space with site
layouts and building orientations designed to achieve compatibility with
neighboring residences. Where areas in the District adjoin deep ravines or
other natural features, lot sizes are larger than the minimums specified for
the District as a whole in order to protect these natural features and
resources in accordance with Article IV of this Code. Likewise, the street
network meanders to follow the topography of an area. This District is mapped
in areas that have adequate public facilities and services with capacity to
serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this
magnitude. As per the provisions in Sec.
35-3211 of this Article, residential infill development of higher densities and
different unit configurations may be appropriate for larger undeveloped or
under-developed tracts within the District.
   (c)   Bulk Standards. Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. list bulk
standards for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND Use REGULATIONs. Division 4 of this Article provides all land use
regulations for this District.
   (e)   Site Development Standards. Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   Site Improvement and Performance Standards. Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All non-residential land uses
in this District shall, in addition to Division 1 through 4, comply with the
quality building and site standards contained in Division 5 of Article V.
(Ord. No. 3039-2025; Sec. 35-3204(a) amended; 9/9/25)
SEC. 35-3205.   “R-4” ONE TO SIX FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The R-4 District is intended to provide areas for
medium density residential development (7 to 14 dwelling units per gross acre)
consistent with the Medium Density Future Land Use Category of the adopted
Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards and regulations have been
crafted, and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new
development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the
District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The R-4 District in Moline is characterized
by a mix of residential unit types including; detached single family homes,
attached single family homes, duplexes, townhomes, and garden apartments, among
others, facing local or collector streets. Streets typically are on a
continuous grid network with some areas also served by alleys. In some
instances, several units share access to the streets and may share parking as
well. Individual developments within the District have lot sizes and building
types that are somewhat uniform with similar orientations to the street. In
many cases, this District serves as a transition between lower density
residential areas and higher density residential or non-residential areas. In
such instances, site layouts and building orientations are designed to achieve
compatibility with the adjoining lower density district while also providing
appropriate screening and buffering from the adjoining, more intensive
development. Typically, permissible non-residential developments within the
District (such as churches and schools) are scattered and tend to occur on
large lots with ample open space with site layouts and building orientations
designed to achieve compatibility with neighboring residences. Where areas in
the District adjoin deep ravines or other natural features, lot sizes are
larger than the minimums specified for the District as a whole or buildings and
improvements clustered in order to protect these natural features and resources
in accordance with Article IV of this Code. Likewise, the street network
meanders to follow the topography of an area. This District is mapped in areas
that have adequate public facilities and services with capacity to serve the
existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude. In
order to maximize the city’s investment in these facilities and services, and
given the limited area zoned R-4, development densities should be within the
specified range, with lower density development discouraged.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS. Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. list bulk
standards for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Division 1 through 4,
of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards applicable to
development within this District. All non-residential land uses in this
District shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through 4, comply with the quality
building and site standards contained in Division 5 of Article V.
SEC. 35-3206.   “R-6” MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The R-6 District is intended to provide areas for
high density residential development (over 14 dwelling units per gross acre)
consistent with the High Density Future Land Use Category of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan. The District standards and regulations have been crafted,
and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new development
projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS. The R-6 District in Moline is characterized
by a wide range of residential unit types including; attached single family
homes, duplexes, townhomes, and multi-level apartment buildings, among others,
facing local, collector or arterial streets. Streets typically are on a
continuous grid network with several units sharing access and parking as well.
Individual developments within the District have lot sizes and building types
that are somewhat uniform with similar orientations to the street; however,
larger developments may include a variety of building and unit types. In many
cases, this District serves as a transition between lower density residential
areas and non-residential areas. In such instances, site layouts and building
orientations are designed to achieve compatibility with the adjoining
residential district while also providing appropriate screening and buffering
from the adjoining non-residential development. Typically, permissible non-
residential developments within the District (such as churches and schools)
tend to be of a similar size and scale with the residential development. Where
areas in the District adjoin deep ravines or other natural features, lot sizes
are larger than the minimums specified for the District as a whole or buildings
and improvements clustered in order to protect these natural features and
resources in accordance with Article IV of this Code. Likewise, the street
network meanders to follow the topography of an area. This District is mapped
in areas that have adequate public facilities and services with capacity to
serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this
magnitude. In order to maximize the city’s investment in these facilities and
services, and given the very limited area zoned R-6, development densities
should be within the specified range, with lower density development
discouraged.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. list
bulk standards for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Article V, Divisions 1 through 4,
of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards applicable to
development within this
   District. All non-residential land uses in this District shall, in addition
to Division 1 through 4, comply with the quality building and site standards
contained in Division 5 of Article V.
SEC. 35-3207.   “R-7” MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The R-7 District is intended to provide areas for
mobile home parks in accordance with
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, and well as other residential and
institutional uses that are consistent with residential districts.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS.  The R-7 District in Moline is characterized
by mobile home park development but also permits other residential uses and
non-residential uses (such as schools and churches) that are of a similar size
and scale. For mobile home parks, the pattern of development is that described
in
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances. For all other development, the
pattern and quality of development is similar to that described for the R-
6 District.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. list
bulk standards for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District, except
for mobile home parks which also shall be regulated by the standards in
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, divisions 1 through 4,
of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards applicable to
development within this District, except for mobile home parks which also shall
be regulated by the standards in
Chapter 19 of the Moline Code of Ordinances. All non-residential land uses in
this District shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through 4, comply with the
quality building and site standards in Division 5 of Article V.
SEC. 35-3208.   RESOURCE DISTRICTS.
   The Resource Districts (C-2 and AG-2) are established to protect natural
resources from indiscriminate and untimely development consistent with the
goals and objectives of the Moline Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 35-3209.   “C-2” CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT. The C-2 District is intended to limit development
in areas requiring environmental protection and preservation, while allowing
some uses for the enjoyment of their natural beauty. Consistent with the Parks
and Conservation Future Land Use Category of the adopted Moline Comprehensive
Plan residential development is limited to one dwelling unit per 15 acres in
order to adequately protect the natural features and resources. The District
standards and regulations have been crafted, and are intended to be
implemented, so that redevelopment and new development projects preserve and
enhance the defining characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS. The C-2 District in Moline is characterized
by significant natural features and resources that may include; wetlands,
marshes, swamps, scenic areas, hillsides of excessive slopes, water courses,
aquifer recharge areas, watershed protection areas, wildlife habitat, rough
terrain, areas subject to siltation and erosion, and/or similar natural
features and resources that limit the density and intensity of development. Due
to these constraints, the predominate form of development in the District is
open space and developed park facilities. The primary exceptions are the
several smaller residential lots located along the shore of the Rock River. For
those properties, the District provides a relaxed set of bulk and development
standards, but new subdivisions within the District are strongly discouraged
and must comply with the gross density requirement. Non-residential and non-
park/recreation uses are limited to those that typically require large expanses
of land but have minimal impacts on natural features and resources and which
are not subject to damage from periodic flooding and other natural occurrences.
On individual lots, buildings and site improvements typically are clustered in
order to protect the natural features and resources in accordance with Article
IV of this Code. Because this District is mapped in areas that have limited or
no public facilities and services, and where extensions of such facilities and
services are not contemplated, development is further limited to those uses
with minimal needs for such facilities and services.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS .
   (1)   Lots of record 2 acres or larger . The bulk standards listed for the
C-2 District on Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. for principal and
accessory structures shall apply to all existing lots of record of 2 acres or
larger, and to all lots created after adoption of this Code.
   (2)   Lots of record less than 2 acres . The bulk standards listed for the
R-2 District on Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. for principal and
accessory structures shall    apply to all lots of record of less than 2 acres
that were recorded prior to the adoption of this Code.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District.
SEC. 35-3210.   “AG-2” GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The AG-2 District is intended to serve as a
holding zone for larger, newly annexed properties prior to approval of
appropriate development plans. Consistent with the Agriculture Future Land Use
Category of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan, residential densities are
limited to one dwelling unit per 15 acres. The District standards and
regulations have been crafted, and are intended to be implemented, to ensure
redevelopment and new development projects preserve and enhance the defining
characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The AG-2 District in Moline is
characterized by open space, woodlands and agricultural lands, which due to
their location, soils, and use for agricultural activities, warrant protection
from indiscriminate development. However, their proximity to existing
development, combined with pressures for new development, makes most of these
lands unsuitable for permanent preservation. The District, then, acts as a
holding zone to deter inappropriate and untimely development prior to approval
of master development plans. Accordingly non-residential development is
restricted primarily to agricultural uses. Because this District is mapped in
areas that have limited or no public facilities and services, development is
further limited to those uses with minimal needs for such facilities and
services.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3201.1., 35-3201.2. and 35-3201.3. list
bulk standards for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District.
SEC. 35-3211.   RESIDENTIAL INFILL STANDARDS.
   (a)   PURPOSE .   Throughout many neighborhoods in Moline north of the Rock
River, there are large vacant or underutilized parcels with existing
infrastructure that can support more compact and dense development than would
otherwise be permitted in the R-2 district. Most of these parcels are too small
to re-zone to R-4, and the R-4 district standards do not necessarily ensure
that newer, more dense development would be compatible with the existing,
predominately detached single-family homes in the area. The purpose of these
residential infill standards, then, is to provide for a more efficient use of
larger vacant and underutilized parcels located in the R-2 district, while
still maintaining compatibility with surrounding existing development.
Residential infill development as described in this section may be permitted
by-right or with a special use permit, as indicated herein.
   (1)   By-Right Infill Development . Twin House and Zero Lot Development as
described in this section shall be permitted by-right, subject to approval of a
corresponding final subdivision plat as per
Chapter 29 of the Moline Code of Ordinances and a site plan review as described
in Sec.
35-2105, except that final action on the site plan review shall be taken by the
decision making body taking action on the final plat.
   (2)   Special Use Permit . Town House Development and Multiplex Development
as described in this section shall require approval of a special use permit as
per Sec.
35-2206 and a corresponding final subdivision plat as per
Chapter 29 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (3)   Major and Minor Accessory Structures . Major and minor accessory
structures within all residential infill developments described in this section
shall be governed by the applicable regulations of the R-2 zoning district,
unless more restrictive standards are required as part of the site plan review
or special use permit approval. In no case shall the regulations of the R-
2 zoning district applicable to major and minor accessory structures be
reduced.
   (b)   TWIN HOUSE DEVELOPMENT .   A “Twin House” is a structure with two
single family homes that have a common wall. Each unit is on a separate platted
lot, or a condominium, with covenants that control the maintenance of the
common wall. For purposes of this section, the term ”structure” applies to the
entire structure housing both units. The term “unit” applies to individual
dwelling units located within the “structure.” The term “development” applies
to the land area and all of the structures that are constructed as part of the
same infill project.
   (1)   All Twin House Developments . The following regulations apply to all
Twin House developments:
      a.   Structure Design :
         1.   Each structure shall have a maximum of two units.
         2.   For developments with three to nine structures, a minimum of two
different front and rear building elevations and two color pallets is required,
which should be distributed throughout the development.   Structures with the
same elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next to one
another.
         3.   For developments with more than nine structures, a minimum of
three different front and rear building elevations and three color pallets is
required, which should be distributed throughout the development.   Structures
with the same front elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next
to one another. Wherever possible, locating structures with the same front
elevation next to one another should be avoided, regardless of differences in
color pallets.
         4.   The main entry to each unit shall be located on the front
elevation, with a walkway leading to it from either the driveway or,
preferably, from the sidewalk/street.
         5.   The main front entries to the units shall be a minimum of 10 feet
apart. The distance may be reduced by one foot for each foot of setback one
entry has from the other, down to a minimum separation of 3 feet.
         6.   Each building elevation shall have a minimum of two windows and/
or    doors.
         7.   Within a Twin House structure, the gross floor area of the units
may not vary by more than 20%.
         8.   Regardless of differences in unit size, one unit should not
appear to be subordinate to the other.
         9.   Within a Twin House development, different structure sizes are
encouraged.
      b.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Each unit shall have an attached or detached garage suitable for
at least    one car.
         2.   For each unit, garages wider than 24 feet or with more than two
overhead doors are prohibited.
         3.   Where alleys are present or can be extended, driveways, parking
areas and garages are prohibited in the front.
         4.   Two-car garages on alleys may be attached to each other if the
combined width of both is less than 45 feet and: four doors are used, or; the
face of one garage is setback from the other a minimum of 3 feet,    or; there
is break in the roof line between the garages.
         5.   Where permitted in the front, the face of the garage shall not
project beyond the main portion of the front wall of the house and shall be
five feet behind the furthest front projecting portion of the structure (e.g.
   front porch, bay window, etc.).
         6.   Driveways in the front shall be at least 5 feet from properties
not in the development.
   (2)   Twin House Developments on Parcels of Less Than 20,000 sq. ft. In
addition to the regulations applicable to all Twin House developments, the
following regulations shall apply to developments on parcels of less than
20,000 sq. ft.:
      a.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Single-car garages in the front may be attached to each other if
the combined width of both is less than 30 feet.
         2.   Two-car garages in the front may not be attached to each other.
      b.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 5,000
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 50 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line: If located on a through
street, the average of existing houses on the same side of the street on the
same block or 25 feet, whichever is less. If located at the end of dead end
street, 20 feet.
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: If located on a through street,
20 feet for a covered or enclosed front entry of no more than 60 sq. ft. of
floor area and no more than 15 feet in height. If located at the end of a dead
end street, 15 feet.
         5.   Min. Corner Lot Side Street Setback: The average of existing
houses on the same side of the street on the same block, or 20 feet, whichever
is less.
         6.   Min. Side Setback – Unattached Side: 6 feet adjacent to property
not in the development, 5 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         7.   Min. Rear Setback: 30 feet adjacent to property not in the
development or an alley, 25 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         8.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
   (3)   Twin House Developments on Parcels of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater . In
addition to the regulations applicable to all Twin House developments, the
following regulations shall apply to developments on parcels of 20,000 sq. ft.
or greater:
      a.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Two-car garages in the front may be attached to each other if the
combined width of both is less than 45 feet and: four doors are used, or; the
face of one garage is setback from the other a minimum of 3 feet, or; there is
break in the roof line between the garages.
      b.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 4,500
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 45 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line: 20 feet
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: 15 feet for a covered or
enclosed front entry    of no more than 60 sq. ft. of floor area and no more
than 15 feet in height.
         5.   Min. Corner Lot Sidestreet Setback: 15 feet
         6.   Min. Side Setback-unattached side: 6 feet adjacent to property
not in the development, 5 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         7.   Min. Rear Setback: 30 feet adjacent to property not in the
development or an alley, 20 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         8.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
   (c)   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT .   A “Zero Lot Line Development” is
comprised of detached, single family homes where the area (side yards) between
the homes is reserved for use by only one of the homes, thereby providing for
greater use and enjoyment of the side yard area. Each house is on a separate
platted lot or condominium. In the case of platted lots, each home is located 5
feet from each side property line as necessary to comply with all fire and
building code requirements regarding building separation. However, on one side
of the home a five-foot easement is created running the entire depth of the
lot. Under the provisions of the easement, the neighboring (receiving) property
is granted full use rights of the area, and the granting property maintains
limited use rights as needed only for maintenance and emergency access. In the
case of a condominium, one of the homes is granted exclusive use of the area
between the homes, with exceptions for maintenance and emergency access to the
other home. To enhance the privacy of the receiving property in using the
easement area, no windows or doors typically are located on the adjoining wall
of the home of the granting property. For purposes of this section, the term
“home” applies to a single detached dwelling unit located within the
development. The term “development” applies to the land area and of the homes
that are constructed as part of the same residential infill project. The term
“zero lot line side” applies to that side of a lot or home for which a use
easement has been granted to the neighboring property.
   (1)   All Zero Lot Line Developments . The following regulations apply to
all Zero Lot Line developments:
      a.   Structure Design :
         1.   For developments with two to nine homes, a minimum of two
different front and rear building elevations and two color pallets is required,
   which should be distributed throughout the development. Structures    with
the same elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next to one
another.
         2.   For developments with more than nine homes, a minimum of three
different front and rear building elevations and three color pallets is
required, which should be distributed throughout the development.   Structures
with the same front elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next
to one another. Where ever possible, locating structures with the same front
elevation next to one another should be avoided, regardless of differences in
color pallets.
         3.   The main entry to the house shall be located on the front
elevation, with a walkway leading to it either from the driveway or,
preferably, from the sidewalk/street.
         4.   Each building elevation shall have a minimum of two windows and/
or doors, except the zero lot line side. The zero lot line side wall may not be
higher than 22 feet, unless it is a gable end. No openings are required in zero
lot line walls, although some form of wall articulation (such as the use of
different materials at first and second levels, banding, etc.) must be
provided.
      b.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Each unit shall have an attached or detached garage suitable for
at least    one car.
         2.   Where alleys are present or can be extended, driveways, parking
areas and garages are prohibited in the front.
         3.   Where permitted in the front, the face of the garage shall not
project beyond the main portion of the front wall of the house and shall be
five feet behind the furthest front projecting portion of the structure (e.g.
front porch, bay window, etc.).
         4.   Driveways in the front shall be at least 5 feet from properties
not in the development.
      c.   Lot Restrictions :
         1.   A five foot easement shall be recorded on the zero lot line side,
granting    exclusive use of the area to the neighboring property except as
needed for maintenance and emergency access to the granting property.
         2.   The zero lot line side shall not be adjacent to a parcel that is
not a part of the development
   (2)   Zero Lot Line Developments on Parcels of Less Than 20,000 sq. ft.  In
addition to the regulations applicable to all Zero Lot Line developments, the
following regulations shall apply to developments on parcels of less than
20,000 sq. ft.:
      a.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 5,000
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 50 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line: If located on a through
street, the    average of existing houses on the same side of the street on the
same block or 25 feet, whichever is less. If located at the end of a dead end
street, 20 feet.
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: If located on a through street,
20 feet for a covered or enclosed front entry of no more than 60 sq. ft. of
floor area and no more than 15 feet in height. If located at the end of dead
end street, 15 feet.
         5.   Min. Corner Lot Side Street Setback: The average of existing
houses on the same side of the street on the same block, or 20 feet, whichever
is less.
         6.   Min. Side Setback: 10 feet adjacent to property not in the
development, 5 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         7.   Min. Rear Setback: 30 feet adjacent to property not in the
development or an alley, 25 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         8.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
   (3)   Zero Lot Line Developments on Parcels of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater
.   In addition to the regulations applicable to all Zero Lot Line
developments, the following regulations shall apply to developments on parcels
of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater:
      a.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 4,500
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 45 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line: 20 feet
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: 15 feet for a covered or
enclosed front entry of no more than 60 sq. ft. in floor area and no more than
15 feet in height.
         5.   Min. Corner Lot Side Street Setback: 15 feet
         6.   Min. Side Setback: 10 feet adjacent to property not in the
development, 5 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         7.   Min. Rear Setback: 30 feet adjacent to property not in the
development or an alley, 20 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         8.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
   (d)   TOWN HOUSE DEVELOPMENT .   A “Town House” is a structure with a
maximum of four, attached single-family homes. The units are located side by
side within the structure and not above or below each other. Each unit is on a
separate platted lot, or a condominium, with covenants that control the
maintenance of the common walls. For purposes of this section, the term
“structure” applies to the entire structure housing the units. The term “unit”
applies to individual dwelling units located within the “structure.” The term
“development” applies to the land area and all of the structures that are
constructed as part of the same infill project.
   (1)   All Town House Developments .  The following regulations apply to all
Town House developments:
      a.   Eligible Development Parcels . Parcels eligible to apply for Town
House infill    development include those with:
         1.   A minimum area of 20,000 sq. ft.; or
         2.   Three or more residential units, or
         3.   An existing non-residential use or, if vacant, where the last use
was not    residential
      b.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 4,500 per unit
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 30 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line: 10 feet
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: 5 feet for a covered or
enclosed front entry of    no more than 60 sq. ft. of floor area and no more
than 15 feet in height
         5.   Min. Front Setback – Garage: 20 feet
         6.   Min. Corner Lot Side Street Setback: 10 feet
         7.   Min. Side Setback: 10 feet adjacent to property not in the
development, 5 feet adjacent to property in the development.
         8.   Min. Rear Setback: 20 feet
         9.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
      c.   Structure Design :
         1.   The front and rear elevations shall include a wall break between
each unit.
         2.   The front and rear elevations shall include at least one roof
break for every two units.
         3.   Exterior wall and roof materials shall be the same or similar to
the predominate materials of existing single family homes located within one
block on the same street.
         4.   Roof design shall be consistent with the predominate design of
existing single family homes located within one block on the same the street.
         5.   For developments with three to five structures, a minimum of two
different front and rear building elevations and two color pallets is required,
which should be distributed throughout the development. Structures with the
same elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next to one
another.
         6.   For developments with more than five structures, a minimum of
three different front and rear building elevations and three color pallets are
required, which should be distributed throughout the development. Where ever
possible, locating structure with the same front and rear elevation next to one
another should be avoided regardless of difference of color pallets. Structure
with the same front elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next
to one another.
         7.   All units shall be accessed directly from the exterior of the
structure. Internal hallways serving multiple units are prohibited although
shared porches between two units are permitted.
         8.   At least one unit in each structure shall have its main entry
located on the front elevation, with a walkway leading to it from either the
driveway or, preferably, from the sidewalk/street.
         9.   Entries for different units may be paired, with 20 feet provided
between pairs or between pairs and single entries. There is no minimum
separation between entries to the same unit.
         10.   Each building elevation shall have a minimum of two windows and/
or doors.
         11.   The floor area of the units within a structure may not vary by
more than 50%.
         12.   Exterior stairways to the second floor are prohibited on the
front and side elevations.
         13.   Each building elevation shall have a minimum of two windows and/
or doors.
      d.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Each unit shall have an attached or detached garage suitable for
at least    one car.
         2.   Where alleys are present or can be extended driveways, parking
areas and garages are prohibited in the front.
         3.   Regardless of location, garages serving one or more units may not
exceed a width of 45 feet and shall have at least one wall break and one
   roof break for    every 24 feet of width.
         4.   Where permitted in the front, the face of the garage shall not
project beyond the    main portion of the front wall of the structure and shall
be five feet behind the furthest front projecting portion of the structure
(e.g. front porch, bay window, etc.).
         5.   Driveways in the front shall be at least 5 feet from properties
not in the development.
         6.   For each unit, garages wider than 24 feet or with more than two
overhead doors are prohibited.
         7.   All surface parking (other than driveways leading to private
garages) shall have the same minimum front setback as the garage.
   (e)   MULTIPLEX DEVELOPMENT .  A Multiplex structure may take several forms
including attached town houses, tri-plexes, quad-plexes, or flats with units
located on different levels. Regardless of configuration, each structure
contains a maximum of four units and is on a separate platted lot or a
condominium and all units have separate exterior entrances. For purposes of
this section, the term “structure” applies to the entire structure housing the
units. The term “unit” applies to individual dwelling units located within a
“structure.” The term “development” applies to the land area and all of the
structures that are constructed as part of the same infill project.
   (1)   All Developments with Multiplex Structures . The following regulations
apply to all Multiplex developments:
      a.   Eligible Developable Parcels . Parcels eligible to apply for
Multiplex development include those with:
         1.   A minimum area of 20,000 sq. ft.; or
         2.   Three or more residential units, or
         3.   An existing non-residential use or, if vacant, where the last use
was not residential
      b.   Lot Dimensions and Setbacks :
         1.   Min. Lot Area: 4,500 per unit
         2.   Min. Lot Width: 30 feet
         3.   Min. Front Setback – Front Wall Line and Garage: 20 feet
         4.   Min. Front Setback – Front Entry: 15 feet for a covered or
enclosed front    entry of no more than 60 sq. ft. of floor area and no more
than 15 feet in height.
         5.   Min. Corner Lot Side Street Setback: 15 feet
         6.   Min. Side Setback: 10 feet adjacent to property not in the
development, 5 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         7.   Min. Rear Setback: 30 feet adjacent to property not in the
development or an alley, 20 feet adjacent to property within the development.
         8.   Min. Building Separation: 10 feet
      c .   Structure Design :
         1.   Front building elevations shall not exceed 120 feet in length and
shall have a minimum of one wall break for every 30 feet.
         2.   All other building elevations shall not exceed 125 in length and
shall a minimum of one wall break for every 50 feet.
         3.   Exterior wall and roof materials shall be the same or similar to
the predominate materials of existing single family homes located within one
block on the same street.
         4.   Roof design shall be consistent with the predominate design of
existing single family homes located within one block on the same street.
         5.   For developments with three to five structures, a minimum of two
different front and rear building elevations and two color pallets is required,
which should be distributed throughout the development. Structures with the
same elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next to one
another.
         6.   For developments with more than five structures, a minimum of
three different front and rear building elevations and three color pallets is
required, which should be distributed throughout the development.   Structures
with the same elevation and the same color pallet may not be located next to
one another. Wherever possible, locating structures with the same elevation
next to one another should be avoided, regardless of differences in color
pallets.
         7.   All units shall be directly accessed from the exterior of the
structure. Internal hallways serving Multiplex units are prohibited, although
shared porches between two units are permitted.
         8.   At least one unit in each structure shall have its main entry
located on the front elevation, with a walkway leading to it from either the
driveway or, preferably, from the sidewalk/street.
         9.   Entries for different units may be paired, with 20 feet provided
between pairs or between pairs and single entries. There is no minimum
separation between entries to the same unit.
         10.   Each building elevation shall have a minimum of two windows and/
or doors.
         11.   The floor area of the units within a structure may not vary by
more than 50%.
         12.   Structures with units on different levels shall have elevation
designs that suggest the first and second floors are part of the same unit.
         13.   Exterior stairways to the second floor are prohibited on the
front and side elevations.
      d.   Garages and Driveways :
         1.   Each unit shall have an attached or detached garage suitable for
at least    one car.
         2.   Where alleys are present or can be extended, driveways, parking
areas and garages are prohibited in the front.
         3.   Regardless of location, garages serving one or more units may not
exceed a width of 45 feet and shall have at least one wall break and one roof
break for every 24 feet of width
         4.   Where permitted in the front, the face of the garage shall not
project beyond main portion of the front wall of the structure and shall be
five behind the furthest front projecting portion of the structure (e.g. front
porch, bay window, etc.).
         5.   Driveways in the front shall be at least 5 feet from properties
not in the development.
         6.   All surface parking (other than driveways leading to private
garages) shall have the same minimum front setback as the garage.
         7.   All surface parking (other than driveways leading to private
garages) that are adjacent to property not in the development shall provide a
landscape bufferyard.
DIVISION 3. NON-RESIDENTIAL/NON-RESOURCE ZONING DISTRICTS
SEC. 35-3300.   RELATIONSHIP TO ILLINOIS QUAD CITIES UNIFIED ZONING CODE AND
MOLINE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (a)   ZONING DISTRICTS FROM ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE . The Moline Zoning and
Land Development Code includes the following Non-Residential/Resource Districts
from the ILQC Unified Zoning Code as these districts have been found to be the
most consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan:
   (1)   “O-1” Office District
   (2)   “ORT” Office/Research Park and Technology District
   (3)   “B-1” Neighborhood Business District
   (4)   “B-2” Central Business District
   (5)   “B-3” Community Business District
   (6)   “B-4” Highway/Intensive Business District
   (7)   “I-1” Light Industrial District
   (8)   “I-2” General Industrial District
   (b)   MODIFICATIONS TO ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE DISTRICTS . In order to
fully implement the goals, objectives and policies of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan, some modifications have been made to the Non-Residential/
Resource Districts selected from the ILQC Unified Zoning Code. In some
instances, these modifications are noted in this Article to assist readers of
this Code who have familiarity with the ILQC Unified Zoning Code. However, in
every instance where there are differences between the codes, whether
highlighted or not, the provisions of the Moline Zoning and Land Development
Code shall prevail.
   (c)   ADDITIONAL ZONING DISTRICTS . To further the goals, objectives and
policies of the Moline Comprehensive Plan, the Moline Land Development Code
also includes the following Non-Residential/Resource District, which is not a
part of the ILQC Unified Zoning Code:
   (1)   “NC” Neighborhood Center District (The permitted uses within the NC
District are similar to those permitted in the “B-1” Neighborhood Business
District of the ILQC Unified Code, but the bulk standards are significantly
different as necessary to reflect the unique and desired character of those
areas in Moline where the NC District is mapped.)
SEC. 35-3301.   BULK STANDARDS.
   (a)   PRINCIPAL AND MAJOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES .
Table 35-3301.1. lists the bulk standards for principal and major accessory
structures in all Non-Residential/Resource Districts.
   (1)   Terms . Please see Sec.
35-3106 for an explanation of the terms used on
Table 35-3301.1.
   (2)   Exceptions . Please see Sec.
35-3108 for exceptions to the bulk standards on
Table 35-3301.1.
Table 35-3301.1.
Non-Residential/Resource Districts
Principal and Major Accessory Structure Bulk Standards
                            Minimum Yard
Minimum Lot Dimensions      Setbacks(2) (ft)                       Maximum
                            Side                 Maximum  Maximum  Building Minimum   Minimum
                                                 Building Building Size (3) Landscape On-Site
         Lot         Street                      Height   Coverage          Surface   Building
Zoning   Area Width  Front  Front Least Sum Rear (ft/     (4) (%)  (sq ft/  Ratio     Separation
District (sq  (feet) (feet) (8)                  stories           FAR)               (5) (ft)
         ft)         (1)
                              Minimum Yard
Minimum Lot Dimensions        Setbacks(2) (ft)                       Maximum
                              Side                 Maximum  Maximum  Building Minimum   Minimum
                                                   Building Building Size (3) Landscape On-Site
         Lot           Street                      Height   Coverage          Surface   Building
Zoning   Area   Width  Front  Front Least Sum Rear (ft/     (4) (%)  (sq ft/  Ratio     Separation
District (sq    (feet) (feet) (8)                  stories           FAR)               (5) (ft)
         ft)           (1)

O-1(6)   5,000  50     20     15    0     15  15   35/2 1/2 50       20,000   0.25      20
B-1(6)   5,000  50     20     20    0     0   10   35       70       10,000   0.20      0/20
NC(6)    5,000  50     20     0     0     0   0    35       100      10,000   0.00      0/10
B-2(6)   5,000  50     20     0     0     0   0    None     100      5.0 FAR  0.00      0/10
B-3(6)   5,000  50     20     20    0     0   10   45       60       100,000  0.10      0/20
B-4(7)   20,000 50     20     20    0     0   20   70       50       500,000  0.20      0/20
ORT      20,000 50     20     50    15    30  20   45       50       250,000  0.30      40
I-1      20,000 50     20     20    15    30  20   45       60       250,000  0.10      0/10
I-2(7)   20,000 50     20     20+   15    30  20+  75       70       2.0 FAR  0.10      0/10
 
Footnotes:
   The requirements may be waived if the City engineer instead approves, and
the applicant records, an irrevocable access easement.
   Yards adjoining Residential Districts shall have minimum setbacks equal to
the adjoining Residential District. Required bufferyards (see Sec.
35-5207) may also require larger setbacks.
   Maximum size of building permitted by right. Larger buildings require
approval of a special use permit (see Sec.
35-2206).
   Combined coverage of all principal and major accessory structures.
   Where “0” and another dimension are indicated, buildings must be attached or
have the minimum separation indicated.
   For residential development, refer to the R-6 District standards.
   For buildings higher than 50 feet, the minimum front yard setback shall be
40% of building height and the minimum rear yard setback shall be 30 feet.
   The required front yard setbacks apply to all sides of a corner lot that
have street frontage (See Section
35-3108 for exceptions).
(Ord. No. 3008-2009; Table 35-3301.1 amended by inserting footnote (8) to
Minimum Yard Setbacks, “Front”; 03/24/09; Ord. No. 3007-2017; Table 35-3301.1
repealed in entirety; new Table 35-3301.1 enacted; 06/13/17)
Standards in bold indicate difference between Moline Zoning and Land
Development Code and ILQC Unified Zoning Code.
   Standards that are shaded indicate those not included in ILQC Unified
Building Code.
   (b)   Minor Accessory Structures and Obstructions Permitted in Setbacks.
Table 35-3301.2. lists the minor accessory structures and obstructions
permitted within required principal structure yard setbacks in all Non-
Residential/Resource Districts.
   (1)   Terms . Please see Sec.
35-3107 for an explanation of the terms used on
Table 35-3301.2.
Table 35-3301.2
Non-Residential and Resource Districts
Minor Accessory Structures and Obstructions Permitted in Required Yard Setbacks
 
 All Setbacks Front Setbacks Side Setbacks Rear Setbacks Limitations (1)
              All Setbacks Front    Side Setbacks Rear Setbacks Limitations
                           Setbacks                             (1)
Fences, walls & hedges (2)
                                                                Industrial
                                                                Districts
                                                                only, no less
                                                                than 8 feet
                                                                above grade
Barbed Wire   T                                                 and 5 feet
                                                                from right-of-
                                                                way. All other
                                                                districts by
                                                                special use
                                                                permit only.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                42 inches in
                                                                height and not
                                                                less than one
Fence Wall                 T                                    foot from
                                                                front property
                                                                line when
                                                                constructed in
                                                                the required
                                                                front yard.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                6 feet in
                                                                height when
                                                                constructed
                                                                out of the
                                                                required front
Fence Wall                          T             T             yard. Fences
                                                                in Industrial
                                                                districts may
                                                                exceed 6 feet
                                                                if they meet
                                                                building
                                                                setbacks.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                6 feet in
                                                                height,
                                                                terraced
Retaining     T                                                 slopes to have
Wall                                                            a minimum of 3
                                                                feet
                                                                horizontal
                                                                distance
                                                                between walls.
Minor Accessory Structures (3)
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Arbor/Trellis              T                                    height
                                                                covering less
                                                                than 10% of
                                                                front setback.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
                                                                height
Arbor/Trellis                       T             T             covering less
                                                                than 50% of
                                                                required
                                                                setback.
                                                                Dumpsters
                                                                placed at any
                                                                location on
                                                                the property
                                                                must be
Dumpster                                                        screened on
Enclosure(2)                        T             T             four sides
                                                                (including a
                                                                gate for
                                                                access) with a
                                                                solid fence or
                                                                wall 6 feet in
                                                                height.
                                                                Not higher
                                                                than 30 feet
Flag Pole     T                                                 or principal
                                                                structure,
                                                                whichever is
                                                                greater.
                                                                Not more than
Fountain      T                                                 5 feet in
                                                                height.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Gazebo/Picnic                       T             T             height and no
Shelters                                                        larger than
                                                                120 square
                                                                feet.
                                                                Not more than
Patio/Plaza   T                                                 1 foot above
                                                                grade.
Seasonal                                                        Not displayed
Decorations   T                                                 longer than 90
                                                                days.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                16 feet in
Shed/Storage                        T             T             height and no
Building                                                        larger than
                                                                120 square
                                                                feet.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                5 feet in
Statutory/Art T                                                 height with a
Objects                                                         footprint no
                                                                larger than 20
                                                                square feet.
                                                                Edge of water/
                                                                playing
                                                                structure to
Swimming                                                        be 3 feet from
Pools/                                                          all property
Recreation                          T             T             lines; all
Courts (4)                                                      permanent
                                                                equipment to
                                                                be not more
                                                                than 16 feet
                                                                in height.
Walkways/                                                       Not more than
Steps         T                                                 1 foot above
                                                                grade.
Obstructions (5)
                                                                Projecting not
Awning/Canopy T                                                 more than 3
                                                                feet into
                                                                setback.
                                                                Not more than
                                                                1/3 of wall
Bay Window/                                                     area and
Balcony       T                                                 projecting not
                                                                more than 3
                                                                feet into
                                                                setback.
Chimney,
Flue, Belt                                                      Projecting not
Courses,                                                        more than 18
Cornice,      T                                                 inches into
Leader,                                                         setback.
Lentil, Sil,
Pilaster
                                                                Projecting not
Eaves and                  T        T                           more than 18
Gutter                                                          inches into
                                                                setback.
                                                                Not covered
Elevated                                                        and not closer
Deck/Porch                          T             T             than 3 feet to
                                                                any property
                                                                line.
                                                                Projecting not
Fire Escape   T                                                 more than 3
                                                                feet into
                                                                setback.
                                                                Not closer
Mechanical                          T             T             than 3 feet to
Equipment                                                       any property
                                                                line.
                                                                Not higher
                                                                than ground
                                                                floor of
                                                                building and
Stoop/Landing T                                                 not larger
                                                                than 25 sq.
                                                                ft. (not
                                                                including
                                                                steps).
                                                                Generally, no
                                                                larger than
Wheelchair                                                      minimum
Ramp          T                                                 requirements
                                                                to meet
                                                                accessibility
                                                                codes.
 
Footnotes:
(1)   The following shall apply to all items on this table.
   a. All items shall comply with visibility triangle requirements of Sec.
35-5210.
   b. The Zoning Administrator, Building Official and Fire Marshall may alter
any of these standards and/or impose additional requirements as necessary to
achieve compliance with other codes and/or to protect the health and safety of
persons on the subject property or adjoining properties.
(2)   Please see Sec.
35-5209 for complete requirements pertaining to fences and walls.
(3)   Minor accessory structures are those that are generally less than 16 feet
in height and less than 120 square feet and which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, are similar in size, character and function to those listed
here. Minor accessory structures which do not comply with the limitations on
this table shall be considered to be major accessory structures and shall
comply with all major accessory structure requirements and standards.
(4)   Applies only to pools and courts provided by employer for use by their
employees strictly for enjoyment, not as a part of business operation.
(5)   Obstructions are features that are intregal to or otherwise permanently
attached to the principal structure. Other integral or attached features, which
in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator are not similar to those listed in
this table, shall comply with the principal buildings setbacks.
(Ord. No. 3007-2009; Table 35-3301.2 amended by deleting Row 11, "Dumpster
Enclosure;" new Row 11, "Dumpster Enclosure" enacted; 03/17/09; Ord. No. 3008-
2009; Table 35-3301.2 amended by repealing "Fences, walls & hedges;" new
"Fences, walls & hedges enacted;" and by adding "Wheelchair Ramp" to
"Obstructions;" 03/24/09; Ord. No. 3035-2020; Table 35-3301.2 repealed; Table
35-3301.2 added; 12/01/20; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Table 35-3301.2 amended by
adding “Minor Accessory Structure” and “Obstructions”; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-3302.   LAND USE REQUIREMENTS.
   Land use regulations for all Non-Residential / Resource Districts are
provided in Division 4 of this Article.
SEC. 35-3303.   OFFICE DISTRICTS.
   The Office Districts (O-1 and ORT) are established to provide sufficient
areas for office and/or research uses consistent with goals and objectives of
the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 35-3304.   “O-1” OFFICE DISTRICTS.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The O-1 District is intended to provide areas for
office, institutional and residential uses consistent with the Mixed Use,
Office, Commercial and Business Park Overlay Future Land Use Categories of the
adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. In special or unique circumstances, the O-
1 District may also accommodate personal or small business services where
consistent with the defining characteristics of the District. The District
standards have been crafted, and are intended to be implemented, so that
redevelopment and new development projects preserve and enhance the defining
characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The O-1 District in Moline is primarily
characterized by professional office, institutional and residential uses housed
in smaller buildings (20,000 square feet or less) with low building heights (30
feet or less) and low lot coverages (50% or less). The District may also
include secondary business establishments with accessory or specialty retail
sales on a limited basis where the development focus is more on design rather
than use to ensure compatibility with the surrounding development. Some
developments within the District have two or more buildings/lots arranged in a
campus-type setting, while others entail single buildings on single lots lined
up along prominent collector and minor arterial roads that bi-sect residential
areas. Accordingly, the District can serve as a transition between residential
development and higher traffic roadways or, in some instances, more intensive
non-residential development. All parking needs are provided on-site. Off-site
impacts from traffic generation, noise, odors lights and vibrations are minimal
in this District. Site layouts and building orientations are designed to
achieve compatibility with the adjoining residential districts, while also
providing appropriate screening and buffering from the adjoining, more
intensive non-residential development. Where areas in the District adjoin deep
ravines or other natural features, lot sizes are larger than the minimums
specified for the District as a whole or buildings and improvements clustered
in order to protect these natural features and resources in accordance with
Article IV of this Code. This District is mapped in areas that have adequate
public facilities and services with capacity to serve the existing and
projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude.
(Ord. No. 3019-2018; Sec.
35-3304 repealed; new Sec.
35-3304 enacted; 06/12/18)
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (1)   Residential Uses . For all principle residential uses, the R-
6 District bulk standards shall apply (see
Table 35-3201.1.).
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Division 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site design and materials standards
contained in Division 5 of Article V.
SEC. 35-3305.   “ORT” OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK AND TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT. The ORT District is intended to provide for major
office, research and technology-based light industrial uses primarily located
along expressways or arterial roads consistent with the Office, Commercial,
Commercial/Industrial, and Business Park Overlay Future Land Use Categories of
the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards have been
crafted, and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new
development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the
District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The ORT District in Moline is characterized
by large, attractively landscaped, low-density, office and research uses and
some specialized unobjectionable light industrial activities. These uses take
advantage of the adjoining transportation corridors but are sufficiently
restricted to be compatible with adjacent residential and commercial
development. These may include manufacturing, processing, packaging, assembly
or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared
materials. No outdoor storage is allowed in this District, and all operations
must be in an enclosed building. Areas within the District typically are the
subject of a master development plan that includes multiple lots in a campus
like setting. All parking needs are provided on-site, and off-site impacts from
traffic generation, noise, odors, lights, and vibrations are minimized through
site layouts and building orientations designed to achieve compatibility with
the adjoining lower intensity districts, while also providing appropriate
screening and buffering from the adjoining, more intensive non-residential
development. This District is intended to have a green/open space atmosphere
conducive to quality development with the preservation of significant natural
features. Thus, where areas in the District adjoin deep ravines or other
natural features, lot sizes are larger than the minimums specified for the
district as a whole or buildings and improvements clustered in order to protect
these natural features and resources in accordance with Article IV of this
Code. This District is mapped in areas that have adequate public facilities and
services with capacity to serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of
development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V.
SEC. 35-3306.   BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   The Business Districts (B-1, NC, B-2, B-3 and B-4) are established to
provide sufficient areas for commercial uses as necessary to enhance the
economic health of the community without negatively impacting residential
areas, consistent with the goals and objectives of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 35-3307.   “B-1” NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The B-1 District is intended to provide areas for
small scale commercial uses generally serving the needs of the surrounding
residential areas consistent with the Mixed Use and Commercial Future Land Use
Categories of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards
have been crafted, and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment
and new development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics
of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The B-1 District in Moline is mapped in
smaller, neighborhood-oriented business districts. These areas are
characterized by a limited range of retail, professional office, personal and
business services, and food and drink establishments housed in small buildings
(10,000 square feet or less) with low building heights (35 feet or less). Some
buildings may also contain a mix of uses with ground floor retail and second
story offices or residential units. Sites and buildings tend to have pedestrian
orientations, but also provide on-site parking. Typical building design
elements include front awnings, display windows and projecting, flush wall-
mounted and window signage. The District is mapped in small, discrete locations
on a collector or minor arterial that bi-sects residential areas. Accordingly,
the District serves as an activity center and as a transition between
residential development and higher traffic roadways or, in some instances, more
intensive non-residential development. Off-site impacts from traffic
generation, noise, odors, lights and vibrations are minimized through site
layouts and building orientations designed to achieve compatibility with the
adjoining residential districts. This District is mapped in areas that have
adequate public facilities and services with capacity to serve the existing and
projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS. Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V.
SEC. 35-3308.   “NC” NEIGHBORHOOD CENTER DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The NC District is intended to provide areas for
small scale commercial uses generally serving the needs of the surrounding
residential areas consistent with the Mixed Use and Commercial Future Land Use
Categories of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards
have been crafted and are intended to be implemented so that redevelopment and
new development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of
the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The NC District in Moline is mapped in
identifiable neighborhood business districts, such as Olde Towne and portions
of Uptown and Avenue of the Cities. These areas are characterized by a limited
range of retail, professional office, personal and business services, and food
and drink establishments housed in small buildings (10,000 square feet or less)
with low building heights (35 feet or less). Many buildings also contain a mix
of uses with ground floor retail and second story offices or residential units.
Buildings tend to have pedestrian orientations characterized by a lack of front
and side setbacks creating continuous block-long façades fronting directly on
public sidewalks. Typical building design elements include front awnings,
display windows and projecting, flush wall-mounted and window signage. Most
parking needs are met on-street, with some additional parking provided in the
rear of the buildings. The District is mapped in short stretches (generally
less than three blocks) in the heart of the identifiable business districts,
most which occur along collector and minor arterials that bi-sect residential
areas. Accordingly, the District serves as an activity center and as a
transition between residential development and higher traffic roadways or, in
some instances, more intensive non-residential development. Off-site impacts
from traffic generation, noise, odors, lights and vibrations are minimized
through site layouts and building orientations designed to achieve
compatibility with the adjoining residential districts. This District is mapped
in areas that have adequate public facilities and services with capacity to
serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this
magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1.and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V.
SEC. 35-3309.   “B-2” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The B-2 District is intended to be a high
density, compact, pedestrian oriented shopping, office, service, residential
and entertainment area generally serving the needs of the entire city and
region consistent with the adopted Moline Centre Plan and other portions of the
Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards have been crafted, and are
intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new development projects
preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The B-2 District in Moline is mapped in the
heart of the downtown and serves as a primary activity center for the city.
However, the District consists of several sub-areas each of which have
different predominate uses and building forms as identified in the adopted
Moline Centre Plan. In general, the District is characterized by retail,
professional office, personal and business services, residential, food and
drink establishments, entertainment, and general commercial uses housed in
buildings of various sizes and heights, some of which are quite tall, and most
of which cover nearly the entire lot. Many buildings contain a mix of uses with
retail on the ground floor and offices or residential units above. Buildings
tend to have pedestrian orientations characterized by a lack of front and side
setbacks creating continuous block-long façades fronting directly on public
sidewalks. Typical building design elements include differentiated façades at
the first floor level with front awnings, display windows, and projecting,
wall-mounted and window signage. Most parking needs are met on-street or in
public lots, with some additional parking provided in the rear of the buildings
or in structures. Given the intensity of use and site development within the
District, off-site impacts from traffic generation, noise, odors, lights and
vibrations can be significant and need to be evaluated on a site-by-site basis
to ensure compatibility with existing and proposed surrounding development
within and adjacent to the District. This District is mapped in an area that
has adequate public facilities and services with capacity to serve the existing
and projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (1)   Residential Uses . For all principle residential uses, the R-
6 District bulk standards shall apply (see
Table 35-3201.1).
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Divisions 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V.
SEC. 35-3310.   “B-3” COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The B-3 District is intended to provide for
general commercial businesses which serve a significant segment of the
population consistent with the Mixed Use and Commercial Future Land Use
Categories of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards
have been crafted, and are intended to be implemented, so that redevelopment
and new development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics
of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The B-3 District in Moline is mapped in
general commercial areas mostly along collector and arterial streets, such as
much of the Avenue of the Cities, 4th Avenue west of the downtown, and portions
of 16th Street. Some of these are included in adopted area plans, each of which
identify and plan for different predominate uses and building forms. In
general, the District is characterized by a variety of commercial uses housed
in buildings of various sizes, but most of which are one or two stories in
height. Buildings may contain either a single use, or several uses in a strip
plaza type setting. The District is dominated by uses with indoor operations,
although some have limited outdoor activities. Buildings typically occupy about
half of the lot area, with the other half devoted to parking and landscape
buffers. Signage consists of limited freestanding monuments or poles in
addition to flush wall-mounted and window signs. Given the intensity of use and
site development within the District, off-site impacts from traffic generation,
noise, odors, lights and vibrations can be significant and need to be minimized
through site layouts and building orientations designed to achieve
compatibility with the adjoining residential districts. Where areas in the
District adjoin deep ravines or other natural features, lot sizes are larger
than the minimums specified for the district as a whole or buildings and
improvements clustered in order to protect these natural features and resources
in accordance with Article IV of this Code. This District is mapped in an area
that has adequate public facilities and services with capacity to serve the
existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Division 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V. (Ord. No. 3034-2006; Section
35-3310(f) repealed in its entirety; new Section
35-3310(f) enacted; 8/15/06)
SEC. 35-3311.   “B-4” HIGHWAY/INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The B-4 District is intended to permit
development of intensive, general commercial uses adjacent to expressways or
along other major arterial thoroughfares consistent with the Commercial and
Commercial/Industrial Future Land Use Categories of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan. The District standards have been crafted, and are intended
to be implemented, so that redevelopment and new development projects preserve
and enhance the defining characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The B-4 District in Moline is mapped in
intensive general commercial areas along major arterial streets, such as John
Deere Road and portions of the Avenue of the Cities, as well as significant
business districts catering to citywide and regional needs, such as the South
Park Mall area. Some of these are included in adopted area plans, each of which
identify and plan for different predominate uses and building forms. In
general, the District is characterized by a variety of intensive commercial
uses housed in large buildings, but most of which are one story or two stories
in height. Buildings may contain either a single use, or several uses in a
strip center type setting. The District is dominated by uses with indoor
operations, but also provides for functions and businesses that may be
characterized by outdoor display, storage and/or sale of merchandise. Although
large, buildings typically occupy less than half of the lot area, with the
other half devoted mostly to parking and some to landscape buffers. Signage
consists of freestanding monuments or poles in addition to flush wall-mounted
signs. Given the intensity of use and site development within the District,
off-site impacts from traffic generation, noise, odors, lights and vibrations
can be significant and need to be minimized through site layouts and building
orientations designed to achieve compatibility with the adjoining lower
intensity districts. Where areas in the District adjoin deep ravines or other
natural features, lot sizes are larger than the minimums specified for the
District as a whole or buildings and improvements clustered in order to protect
these natural features and resources in accordance with Article IV of this
Code. This District is mapped in areas that have adequate public facilities and
services with capacity to serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of
development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REQUIREMENTS .  Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District. All land uses in this district,
except one- and two-family dwellings shall, in addition to Division 1 through
4, comply with the quality building and site standards contained in Division 5
of Article V. (Ord. No. 3007-2009; Sec.
35-3311(f) repealed; new Sec.
35-3311(f) enacted; 03/17/09)
SEC. 35-3312.   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   The Industrial Districts (I-1 and I-2) are established to provide sufficient
area for a range of commercial, industrial, warehousing and storage uses as
necessary to enhance the economic health of the community without negatively
impacting residential and lesser-intensive non-residential areas, consistent
with the goals and objectives of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 35-3313.   “I-1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The I-1 District is intended to provide for less
intensive industrial uses consistent with the Commercial/Industrial and
Industrial Future Land Use Categories of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan.
The District standards have been crafted, and are intended to be implemented,
so that redevelopment and new development projects preserve and enhance the
defining characteristics of the District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The I-1 District in Moline is mapped in
several, smaller, heavy commercial and light industrial areas. The District is
characterized by a variety of commercial, office, assembly, fabrication,
processing, and storage uses housed in buildings of various sizes, most of
which are one story in height on small lots. The District is dominated by uses
with indoor operations, although some have limited outdoor activities.
Buildings typically occupy about half of the lot area, with the other half
devoted to parking and landscape buffers. Signage consists of limited
freestanding monuments or poles in addition to flush wall-mounted signs. Given
the intensity of use and site development within the District, off-site impacts
from traffic generation, noise, odors, lights and vibrations can be significant
and need to be minimized through site layouts and building orientations
designed to achieve compatibility with the adjoining lower intensity districts.
Where areas in the District adjoin deep ravines or other natural features, lot
sizes are larger than the minimums specified for the District as a whole or
buildings and improvements clustered in order to protect these natural features
and resources in accordance with Article IV of this Code. This District is
mapped in an area that has adequate public facilities and services with
capacity to serve the existing and projected impacts and needs of development
of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REQUIREMENTS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District.
SEC. 35-3314.   “I-2” GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (a)   PURPOSE AND INTENT . The I-2 District is intended to provide for large
scale manufacturing uses consistent with the Industrial Future Land Use
Category of the adopted Moline Comprehensive Plan. The District standards have
been crafted and are intended to be implemented so that redevelopment and new
development projects preserve and enhance the defining characteristics of the
District.
   (b)   DEFINING CHARACTERISTICS . The I-2 District in Moline is mapped in a
few, larger industrial areas and is characterized by a variety of assembly,
fabrication, processing, storage and manufacturing uses housed in buildings of
various sizes, most of which are one story in height on larger lots. The
District contains uses with indoor and outdoor operations. Buildings typically
occupy about half of the lot area, with the other half devoted to related
outdoor activities (such as storage and work yards) parking and landscape
buffers. Signage consists of limited freestanding monuments or poles in
addition to flush wall-mounted signs. Given the intensity of uses and site
development within the District, off-site impacts from traffic generation,
noise, odors, lights and vibrations are significant and need to be minimized
through site layouts and building orientations designed to achieve
compatibility with the adjoining lower intensity districts. Where areas in the
District adjoin deep ravines or other natural features, lot sizes are larger
than the minimums specified for the District as a whole or buildings and
improvements clustered in order to protect these natural features and resources
in accordance with Article IV of this Code. This District is mapped in an area
that has adequate public facilities and services with capacity to serve the
existing and projected impacts and needs of development of this magnitude.
   (c)   BULK STANDARDS . Tables 35-3301.1. and 35-3301.2. list bulk standards
for principal and accessory structures.
   (d)   LAND USE REGULATIONS . Division 4 of this Article provides all land
use regulations for this District.
   (e)   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . Article IV of this Code provides site
development standards applicable to development within this District.
   (f)   SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS . Article V, Divisions 1
through 4, of this Code provides site improvement and performance standards
applicable to development within this District.
DIVISION 4. LAND USE REGULATIONS
SEC. 35-3400.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Division is to indicate which land uses may locate in
each zoning district and under what requirements; and which land uses may not
locate therein. A further distinction is made for land uses which may locate in
a given district only upon obtaining a special or temporary use permit to do
so. Finally, certain land uses may locate in a given district as a matter of
right upon compliance with special regulations for such a land use.
SEC. 35-3401.   REGULATION OF ALLOWED USES.
   The land uses listed in
Table 35-3401.1. are specifically designated and refer to the detailed listing
of land uses contained in this Division and are subject to the following:
   (1)   LAND USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT . Land uses permitted by right are
indicated with a “P” on
Table 35-3401.1. These are permitted per the general land use requirement of
this Division; per the general requirements of the specific zoning district in
which they are located; per any additional requirements applicable to that
particular land use as contained in this Division; per any additional
requirements imposed by applicable overlay zoning districts as designated on
the Official Zoning Map; per the general requirements of this Code; and per any
and all other applicable City, County, State, and Federal regulations.
   (2)   LAND USES PERMITTED AS RESIDENTIAL INFILL DEVELOPMENT . Land uses
permitted as Residential Infill Development are indicated with an "I" on
Table 35-3401.1. These are permitted subject to all of the requirements
contained in Sec.
35-3211, and all of the requirements applicable to uses permitted by right,
above, plus any additional requirements imposed as part of the applicable site
plan review or special use permit approval processes.
   (3)   LAND USES PERMITTED AS A SPECIAL USE . Land uses listed as permitted
as a special use are indicated with an “S” on
Table 35-3401.1.
      a.   Special uses are permitted subject to all the requirements
applicable to uses permitted by right as listed in subsection (a), above,
provided the use meets the conditions for a special use listed in Sec.
35-2206, including any additional requirements imposed as part of the special
use process. Each application for, and instance of, a special use shall be
considered a unique situation and shall not be construed as precedent for
similar requests.
      b.   In recommending special uses hereunder for those applications which
are subject to the Fair Housing Act (“FHA”, 42 U.S.C.A. 3601 et seq.) or the
Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”, found generally at 42 U.S.C.A. 12131 et
seq.) or both, the Plan Commission is hereby authorized to waive or vary
provisions of the zoning code when necessary to reasonably accommodate the
statutory rights of the disabled. This authority shall be interpreted and
administered in order to ensure the full exercise and enjoyment of a disabled
person’s right to the residential housing of his or her choosing. The
provisions of this Section
35-3401(c)(2) shall not apply to commercial or business activities or zones;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be interpreted or otherwise
construed as limiting the exercise of a disabled person’s rights by or through
a residential care provider. This Section
35-3401(c)(2) shall be implemented and interpreted in accordance with the ADA
and the FHA.
      c.   When the Plan Commission finds that a reasonable accommodation is
necessary, such reasonable accommodation shall be provided as follows:
         1.   Upon application of a disabled person or individual or entity
providing services to the disabled in a residential facility or other group
living arrangement, the Plan Commission is hereby authorized to vary, modify or
waive the requirements of this zoning code in order to provide a reasonable
accommodation as necessary to provide a disabled person full enjoyment of a
residence.
         2.   The City’s duty to accommodate is an affirmative one, and the
Plan Commission is therefore authorized to provide accommodations in a
proactive manner.
         3.   Review of a request for a special use requiring a reasonable
accommodation may, at the discretion of the Plan Commission, include citizen
input or information as provided for in the Plan Commission’s hearing process.
The Plan Commission shall provide written notice of the proposed accommodation
to the applicant and property owners as required by City policy.
         4.   When applying the reasonable accommodation process required
hereunder, stereotypical assumptions regarding the disabled should be avoided,
and accommodations shall be based upon actual evidence presented to and before
the Plan Commission.
      d.   It shall not be a requirement of this Code to require a waiver or
variance or modification of the provisions of the codes adopted in
Chapter 8 or
Chapter 11 of the Code of Ordinances regarding building, housing and other
technical or trade codes or fire codes, adopted respectively therein, which
does not substantially accomplish the purposes of those Codes and said Chapters
or which would reduce the fire safety of any structure. Modifications, waivers
and variances of the provisions of any uniform code or international code shall
provide at least the same level of safety required by the respective codes. The
applicant shall have the burden of establishing that the proposed modification,
waiver or variance accomplishes substantially the same purpose without the
reduction of fire safety.
      e.   The accommodation provided shall be of a personal nature, personal
to the applicant only and shall not run with the land; provided, however, that
a change in a residential structure necessary to accommodate the operation of a
residential care provider to the disabled may be continued by future operations
of similar facilities at the site who establish the same use within six (6)
months of the date the prior use by the disabled person or residential care
provider ceases. The Plan Commission may therefore direct that any physical
change in the structure permitted as a reasonable accommodation which would
otherwise be illegal under the zoning code shall be immediately held to be a
non-conforming structure and shall be brought into compliance within six (6)
months of the date of sale or transfer of a residential structure to a person
not qualifying for the protections of the ADA or FHA.
      f.   No right other than as required under the ADA or FHA is intended to
be created by this Section
35-3401(c), nor shall any variance, modification or waiver be treated as or
interpreted as a non-conforming use under this zoning code once the reasonable
accommodation is no longer required.
      g.   The decision of the Plan Commission regarding a request for a
reasonable accommodation shall be considered a final decision and appeal
therefrom shall be in accordance with the Administrative Review Law found
generally at 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
(Ord. No. 3034-2006, Section
35-3401(3) repealed; new Section
35-3401(3) enacted; 8/15/06)
   (4)   LAND USES PERMITTED AS AN ACCESSORY USE . Accessory uses are land uses
which are incidental to the principal activity conducted on the subject
property. Only those accessory uses listed with an “P” on
Table 35-3401.1. or those indicated in sections of all divisions and referenced
in
Table 35-3401.1. shall be permitted by right. Those indicated with an “S” shall
be permitted only as a special use. With the exception of a commercial
apartment (see Sec.
35-3414(d)) and a caretaker’s residence (see Sec. 3417(a)), in no instance
shall an accessory use, cellar, basement, tent or recreational trailer be used
as a residence. Accessory uses shall not be located between a principal
building and a street frontage on the same lot. Land uses permitted as an
accessory use are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable to uses
permitted by right as listed in subsection (a), above. Unless otherwise noted,
accessory uses may not be established without a principal use on the same lot.
   (5)   LAND USES PERMITTED AS A TEMPORARY USE . Land uses listed as permitted
as a temporary use are indicated with a “P” on
Table 35-3401.1. These are permitted subject to all the requirements applicable
to uses permitted by right as listed in subsection (a), above.
   (6)   PROHIBITED USES . Land Uses which are not listed in a specific zoning
district
Table 35-3401.1. are not permitted in such zoning district, except those that
are legal nonconforming uses (Sec.
35-3111).
   (7)   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED PRIOR TO ESTABLISHMENT OF USE . Although a land
use may be indicated as permitted by right or permitted as a special use in a
particular district, it does not follow that such a land use is permitted or
permissible on every parcel in such district. No land use is permitted or
permissible on a parcel unless it can be located thereon in full compliance
with all of the standards and regulations of this Code which are applicable to
the specific land use and parcel in question, or unless an appropriate variance
has been granted pursuant to Sec.
35-2207.
(Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-3401 amended; 02/4/25)
Table 35-3401.1.
Permitted Land Uses
Proceed to end of Table 35-3401.1 to see amendments thereto
Conservation General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
District (C- Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
2)           (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
Conservation General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
District (C- Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land Use
2)           (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal Residential Land
                                                                                                                                                                    Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3405)
P            P            P           P           P           P      P                              P            S                                                  (a) One-Family Detached
                                                                                                                                                                    Dwelling
                          P/I         P           P           P      P                                                                                              (b) Zero Lot Line
                                                                                                                                                                    Development
                          P/I         P           P           P      P                              P            S                                                  (c) Twin House
                                      P           P           P      P                              P            S                                                  (d) Duplex
                                      P           P           P      P                              P            S                                                  (e) Two Flat
                          S/I         P           P           P      P                                           S        S                                         (f) Town House
                          S/I         P           P           P      P                                           S        S                                         (g) Multiplex
                                      P           P           P      S                                           S        S                                         (h) Multiple-Family
                                                                                                                                                                    Dwelling
P            P            P           P           P           P      P                                                                                              (i) Manufactured Home
             P                                                P                                                                                                     (j) Mobile Home
                                                            P                                                                                                     (k) Mobile Home Park
                          P           P           P           S                                                  S                                                  (l) Boarding House
                                                                                                                                                                    (m) Group/Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                    Residential
P            P            S           P           P           P      S                                           S                                                  (1) Group/Institutional -
                                                                                                                                                                    Small
                          S           S           S           S      S        S                                  S        S         S                               (2) Group/Institutional –
                                                                                                                                                                    Large
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
For Group Developments, see Sec. 35.3419
 
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land Use
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal Agriculture Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3406)
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (a) Cultivation
             S                                                                                                                                           S          (b) Agricultural Services
P            P                                                                                                            P         P                               (c) On-Site Agricultural Retail
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (d) Silviculture, Selective Cutting
             S                                                                                                                                                      (e) Silviculture, Clear Cutting
                                                                                                                                                                    (f) Husbandry
                                                                                                                                                                    (g)   Intensive Agriculture.
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal Recreational &
                                                                                                                                                                    Institutional Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3407)
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (a) Recreation, Outdoor – Passive,
                                                                                                                                                                    Public
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P                               (b) Recreation, Outdoor – Active,
                                                                                                                                                                    Public
S            S                                                                                                                      S                               (c) Recreation, Outdoor – Private
                                                                                                                                                                    Camping
S            S            S           S           S                                                                       P         P                               (d) Institutional, Outdoor
S            S                        S           S                  S        S        P            S            P        P         P                               (e) Institutional, Indoor – Day Care
                                                                                                                                                                    Center
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P                               (f) Institutional, Indoor – General
                                                                              P                                  P        P         P                               (g) Institutional, Indoor – Intensive
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
For Group Developments, see Sec. 35.3419
 
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Use
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal
                                                                                                                                                                    Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                    Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3408)
                                                                     S        S        S            S            S        S         S                               (a) Food Truck
                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Mobile
                                                                     S        S        S            S            S        S         S                               Food
                                                                                                                                                                    Establishment
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (c) Office
                                                                                                                                                                    (d) Personal
                                                                                                                                                                    or
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P                               Professional
                                                                                                                                                                    Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    Limited
                                                                                                                                                                    (e) Sales and
                                                                              P        P            P            P        P         P                               Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    General
                                                                                                                                                                    (f) Sales and
                                                                                                    S            P        P         P                               Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    Intensive
                                                                                                                                                                    (g) Sales and
                                                                     S        S                     S            S        P         P                               Service, In-
                                                                                                                                                                    Vehicle
                                                                                                                                                                    (h) Sales and
                                                                                                                          P         P                               Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                                    Display
                                                                              S        P            P            P        P         P                               (i) Restaurant
                                                                              P                                  P        P         P                               (j) Lodging
                                                                                                                                                                    (k)
                                                                                                    P            P        P         P         S                     Entertainment,
                                                                                                                                                                    Indoor
                                                                                                                                                                    (l)
S                                                                                                                                   S         S          S          Entertainment,
                                                                                                                                                                    Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                                    (m)
                                                                                                                                              P          P          Entertainment,
                                                                                                                                                                    Adult
                                                                                                                                                                    (n) Vehicle
                                                                                                    S            S        S         P         P          P          Repair and
                                                                                                                                                                    Maintenance,
                                                                                                                                                                    Minor
                                                                                                                                                                    (o) Vehicle
                                                                                                                                    P         P          P          Repair and
                                                                                                                                                                    Maintenance,
                                                                                                                                                                    Major
                                                                                                                                                                    (p) Animal
P            P                                                                                                            S         P         S          S          Boarding
                                                                                                                                                                    Services
                                                                                                                                                                    (q) Sales and
                                                                                                                                    P                               Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    Cannabis
                                                                                                                                                                    Dispensing
                                                                                                                                                                    (r) Sales and
                                                                     S        P        P            P            P        P         P                               Service,
                                                                                                                                                                    Limited
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal
                                                                                                                                                                    Transportation
                                                                                                                                                                    & Utility Land
                                                                                                                                                                    Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3409)
             S                                                                                                                                           S          (a) Airport/
                                                                                                                                                                    Heliport
S            S            S           S           S           S      S        S        S            S            S        P         P         P          P          (b) Parking,
                                                                                                                                                                    Offsite
                                                                                                                                    P         P          P          (c) Terminal,
                                                                                                                                                                    Freight
S            S            S           S           S           S      S        S        S            S            P        P         P         P          P          (d) Terminal,
                                                                                                                                                                    Passenger
                                                                                                                                                                    (e) Public
P            P            P           P           P           P      P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Services and
                                                                                                                                                                    Utilities,
                                                                                                                                                                    Distribution
                                                                                                                                                                    (f) Public
P            P            S           S           S           S      S        S        S            S            S        S         S         S          P          Services and
                                                                                                                                                                    Utilities,
                                                                                                                                                                    Transmission
                                                                                                                                                                    (g) Solar
             S                                                                                                                                                      Energy System,
                                                                                                                                                                    Commercial
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
For Group Developments, see Sec. 35.3419
 
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land Use
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    Principal Storage,
                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesaling & Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                    Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3410)
                                                                                                                                              P          P          (a) Storage, Personal   
                                                                                                                                    P         P          P          (b) Storage and
                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesaling, Indoor
                                                                                                                                    P         P          P          (c) Storage and
                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesaling, Outdoor   
                                                                                                                                    P         P          P          (d) Contractor Shops
                                                                                                                                                         S          (e) Junkyard or Salvage
                                                                                                                                                                    Yard
                                                                                                                                                         S          (f) Waste Disposal
                                                                                                                                                                    Facility
                                                                              P                                                               P          P          (g) Industrial, Light
                                                                                                                                                         P          (h) Industrial, General
                                                                                                                                                         S          (i) Industrial, Intensive
S            S                                                                                                                                           S          (j) Extraction Use
                                                                                                                                              P          P          (k) Industrial, Cannabis
                                                                                                                                                                    Cultivation
                                                                                                                                                                    Accessory Residential Land
                                                                                                                                                                    Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3411)
                          P                                                                                                                                         (a) Accessory Dwelling
                                                                                                                                                                    Units
S            S                        S           S                                                              S                                                  (b) Bed and Breakfast
P            P            P           P           P                                                                                                                 (c) Charging Station
                                                                                                                                                                    (Level 1, Private)
P            P            P           P           P                                                                                                                 (d) Charging Station
                                                                                                                                                                    (Level 2, Private)
P            P            P           P           P                                                                                                                 (e) Charging Station
                                                                                                                                                                    (Level 3, Private)
P            P            P           P           P                  P                 P            P            P        P                                         (f) Day Care Home, Serving
                                                                                                                                                                    3 to 12 Children
P            P            P           P           P                  P                 P            P            P        P                                         (g) Home Occupation, Minor
S            S            S           S           S                  S                 S            S            S        S                                         (h) Home Occupation, Major
P            P            P           P           P                                                                                                                 (i) Kennel
P            P            P           P           P                  S                 S            S            S        S                                         (j) Outbuildings and
                                                                                                                                                                    Recreation Facilities
P            P            P           P           P                  P                                                                                              (k) Recreational Vehicle
                                                                                                                                                                    Storage
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
For Group Developments, see Sec. 35.3419
 
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Use
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    Accessory
                                                                                                                                                                    Recreational &

                                                                                                                                                                    Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                    Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (See Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3413)
                                                                                                                                                                    Accessory
                                                                                                                                                                    Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                    Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (See Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3414)
                                                                                                                                                                    (a) Charging
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Station (Level
                                                                                                                                                                    1, Public or
                                                                                                                                                                    Private)
                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Charging
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Station (Level
                                                                                                                                                                    2, Public or
                                                                                                                                                                    Private)
                                                                                                                                                                    (c) Charging
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Station (Level
                                                                                                                                                                    3, Public or
                                                                                                                                                                    Private)
                                                                                                                                                                    (d) Company-
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Provided
                                                                                                                                                                    Cafeteria
                                                                                                                                                                    (e) Company-
                                                                     P        S        P            P            P        P         P         S          S          Provided Day
                                                                                                                                                                    Care
                                                                                                                                                                    (f) Company-
                                                                     P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Provided On-
                                                                                                                                                                    Site
                                                                                                                                                                    Recreation
                                                                                                                                                                    (g) Dwelling
                                                                     P                 P            P            P        P                                         Units Above
                                                                                                                                                                    Ground Floor
                                                                                                                                                                    (h) Fleet
                                                                     S        P                                  S        P         P         P          P          Vehicle
                                                                                                                                                                    Storage
                                                                                                                                                                    (i) Light Ind.
                                                                                                                 P        P         P                               Incident to
                                                                                                                                                                    Indoor Sales
                                                                                                                                                                    (j) Mobile
                                                                              S        S            S            S        S         S                               Food
                                                                                                                                                                    Establishment
                                                                              S        P            P            P        P         P                               (k) Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                                    Dining
                                                                                                                                                                    (l) Outdoor
                                                                                       P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Display,
                                                                                                                                                                    Removable
                                                                                                                                                                    (m) Outdoor
                                                                              S                                  S        S         P         P          P          Display and
                                                                                                                                                                    Storage,
                                                                                                                                                                    permanent
                                                                                       S            S            S        P         P                               (n) Outdoor
                                                                                                                                                                    Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                    Accessory
                                                                                                                                                                    Transportation
                                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                                                                                                                                    Utility Land
                                                                                                                                                                    Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (See Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3415)
                                                                                                                                                                    (1) Solar
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Energy System,
                                                                                                                                                                    Attached
                                                                                                                                                                    (2) Solar
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          Energy System,
                                                                                                                                                                    Freestanding
S            S                                                                S                                  S        S         S         P          P          (3) Wind
                                                                                                                                                                    Energy System
                                                                                                                                                                    Accessory
                                                                                                                                                                    Storage,
                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesaling &
                                                                                                                                                                    Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                    Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3416)
                                                                                                                                                                    (a) Indoor
                                                                              P                                                               P          P          Sales Incident
                                                                                                                                                                    to Light Ind.
                                                                                                                                                                    Use
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
For Group Developments, see Sec. 35.3419
 
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General    Type
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial of
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)      Land
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)                           Use
             General      One-Family  One-Six     Multi-      Mobile Office   Office/  Neighborhood              Central  Community Highway/  Light      General
Conservation Agricultural Residential Family      Family      Home   District Research Business (B- Neighborhood Business Business  Intensive Industrial Industrial Type of Land Use
(C-2)        (AG-2)       (R-2)       Residential Residential Park   (O-1)    Park     1)           Center (NC)  (B-2)    (B-3)     Business  (I-1)      (I-2)
                                      (R-4)       (R-6)       (R-7)           (ORT)                                                 (B-4)
                                                                                                                                                                    General Accessory Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3417)
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (a) Caretaker’s Residence
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (b) Drainage Structure
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (c) Exterior Communication Devices
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (d) Filling
S            S                                                       S        S                                  S        S         S         S          S          (e) Heliport
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (f) Lawn Care of Subject Property
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            S        P         P         P          P          (g) On-Site Parking
                                                                                                                                                                    Temporary Land Uses
                                                                                                                                                                    (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3418)
S            S            S           S           S                  S        S        S            S            S        S         S         S          S          (b) Barrow Pit
S            S                                                                                                                                S          S          (c) Concrete Batch Plant
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (d) Contractor’s On-Site Equipment
                                                                                                                                                                    Storage
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (e) Contractor’s Project Office
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (f) Outdoor Assembly
P            P                                                                         P            P            P        P         P                               (g) Outdoor Sales, Agricultural
                                                                                                                                                                    Products
                                                                                       P            P            P        P         P                               (h) Outdoor Sales, General
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P                               (i) Portable Outdoor Storage Unit
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P        P         P         P          P          (j) Real Estate Sales Office
                                                                                                                          P         P         P          P          (k) Relocatable Building
P            P            P           P           P                  P                              P                                                               (l) Rummage Sales, Personal
P            P            P           P           P                  P        P        P            P            P                            P          P          (m) Vehicle Sales, Personal
                                                                                                                                                                    Group Developments
S            S            S           S           S                  S        S        S            S            S        S         S         S          S          (Sec.
                                                                                                                                                                    35-3419)
P= Permitted Use S= Special Use I= Infill Residential Development (see Sec.
35-3211)
 
Amendments to Table 35-3401.1:
Ord. No. 3034-2006; 08/15/06; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: 1) Sec.
35-3405 land use designation from “P” to “S” for (m)(1); 2) amended Sec.
35-3408 land use designation for (i) by placing a “P” in “Neighborhood Center”
column; 3) amended Sec.
35-3405 by placing “P” in the “Neighborhood Center” column for subsections (a),
(c), (d) and (e); and 4) amended Sec.
35-3405 by deleting “P” in the Multi-Family Residential” column; 8/15/06
Ord. No. 3014-2007; 04/10/07; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: 1) Sec.
35-3406: deleted “P” under “Office District” in subsection (f) Husbandry; 2)
Sec.
35-3407: added “P” under “Office District” in subsection (g) Institutional,
Indoor - Intensive
Ord. No. 3033-2008; 05/13/08; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: Sec.
35-3418 by repealing section entitled “Temporary Land Uses” and enacting in
lieu thereof new section entitled “Temporary Land Uses”
Ord. No. 3054-2008; 12/09/08; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: Sec. 3408 by
placing “S” in “Neighborhood Center” column for subsections (e) Sales and
Service, In-Vehicle and (l) Vehicle Repair & Maintenance, Minor
Ord. No. 3032-2010; 07/27/10; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: Sec.
35-3405 by placing an “S” in Central Business (B-2) of subsections (a), (c),
(d) and (e)
Ord. No. 3003-2102; 01/10/12; amended Table 35-3401.1, Sec.
35-3415, “Accessory Transportation & Utility Land Uses,” by adding new
designations for (1) Solar Energy System, (2) Solar Energy System, (3) Wind
Energy System
Ord. No. 3003-2014; 12/16/14; amended Table 35-3401.1, Sec.
35-3408, “Principal Commercial Land Uses,” by adding a new designation for (n)
Animal Boarding Services, by placing an “S” for special use in Community
Business (B-3)
Ord. No. 3024-2014; 10/21/14; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: 1) Sec.
35-3408, “Principal Commercial Land Uses,” by adding a new designation for (o)
Sales and Service, Cannabis Dispensing; 2) Sec.
35-3410, “Principal Storage, Wholesaling and Industrial Land Uses,” by adding a
new designation for (k) Industrial, Cannabis Cultivation
Ord. No. 3019-2018; 06/12/18; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3408, “Principal Commercial Land Uses,” by adding (p) Sales and Service,
Limited
Ord. No. 3024-2018; 06/12/18; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3408, “Principal Commercial Land Uses,” by adding a new designation for (i)
Entertainment, Indoor, by placing an “S” for special use in Light Industrial
(I-1) Ord. No. 3002-2019; 03/05/19; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3409, “Principal Transportation & Utility Land Uses,” subsection (b)
Parking, Offsite, by amending the designation for Central Business (B-2) from
“P” to “S”
Ord. No. 3002-2019; 03/05/19; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3417, “General Accessory Land Uses,” subsection (g) On-Site Parking,” by
amending the designation for Central Business (B-2) from “P” to “S”
Ord. No. 3037-2020; 12/01/2020; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3410, "Principal Storage, Wholesaling & Industrial Land Uses," subsection
(a) Storage, Personal," by removing the "P" designation for Highway/Intensive
Business (B-4)
Ord. No. 3012-2023; 04/11/23; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3411, “Accessory Residential Land Uses,” adding (b) Charging Station (Level
1, Private), (c) Charging Station (Level 2, Private), (d) Charging Station
(Level 3, Private)
Ord. No. 3012-2023; 04/11/23; amended Table 35-3401.1; Sec.
35-3414, “Accessory Commercial Land Uses,” adding (a) Charging Station (Level
1, Public or Private), (b) Charging Station (Level 2, Public or Private), (c)
Charging Station (Level 3, Public or Private)
Ord. No. 3039-2023; 10/10/23; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: 1) Sec.
35-3408, “Principal Commercial Land Uses,” by adding (a) Food Truck Park, (b)
Mobile Food Establishment; 2) Sec.
35-3408, “Accessory Commercial Land Uses,” by adding (j) Mobile Food
Establishment
Ord. No. 3020-2024; 5/7/24; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: “Accessory
Residential Land Uses,” adding (a) Accessory Dwelling Units and redesignating
subsequent subsections
Ord. No. 3007-2025; 2/4/25; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: adding (g)
Intensive Agriculture
Ord. No. 3036-2025; 9/9/25; amended Table 35-3401.1 as follows: 1) enacting
column “Mobile Home Park;” 2) enacting row (g) “Solar Energy System,
Commercial.”
SEC. 35-3402.   REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL LAND USES.
   All uses of land initiated within the jurisdiction of this Code on, or
following, the effective date of this Code shall comply with all of the
provisions of this Code. Specifically:
   (1)   LAND USE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All uses of land shall comply
with all the regulations and requirements of this Division pertaining to the
types of uses to which land is put within particular zoning districts. Such
regulations and requirements address both general and specific regulations
which land uses shall adhere to, and which are directly related to, the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
City of Moline and its environs.
   (2)   DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of this Code
pertaining to the maximum permitted density (for residential land uses) and
intensity (for nonresidential land uses) of land uses (see
Table 35-3201.1. and
35-3301.1.). Such regulations and requirements address issues such as Floor
Area Ratios (FARs), Green Space Ratios (GSRs), and Landscape Surface Ratios
(LSRs); which are directly related to, and are a critical component of, density
and intensity and the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of
the residents of the City of Moline and its environs.
   (3)   BULK REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of this Code, pertaining to
the maximum permitted bulk of structures and the location of structures on a
lot (see Tables
35-3201.1.,
35-3201.2 and
35-3201.3. for Residential and Resource Districts and Tables
35-3301.1. and
35-3301.2. for Non-Residential/Resource Districts). Such regulations and
requirements address issues such as height, setbacks from property lines and
rights of way, and minimum separation between structures; which are directly
related to, and a critical component of, the effective bulk of a structure and
the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Moline and its environs.
   (4)   NATURAL RESOURCES AND GREEN SPACE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All
land use and/or development of land shall comply with all the regulations and
requirements of this Code pertaining to the protection of sensitive natural
resources and required green space areas (see Article IV). Such regulations and
requirements address issues such as absolute protection, partial protection,
and migration; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the
protection of natural resources and the protection of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Moline and its environs.
   (5)   LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARDS REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All
development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of
this Code, pertaining to the provision of landscaping and bufferyards (see
Division 2 of Article V). Such regulations and requirements address issues such
as minimum required landscaping of developed land, and minimum required
provision of bufferyards between adjoining zoning districts and/or development
options; which are directly related to, and a critical component of, the
effective bulk of a structure and the protection of the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Moline and its environs.
   (6)   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS . All development of land shall
comply with all the regulations and requirements of this Code, pertaining to
the provision of appropriate access, parking, loading, storage, and lighting
facilities (see Article V). Such regulations and requirements address issues
such as maximum permitted access points, minimum required parking spaces, the
screening of storage areas, and maximum permitted intensity of lighting, as
well as defining acceptable levels of potential nuisances such as noise,
vibration, odors, heat, glare and smoke; which are directly related to, and a
critical component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Moline and its environs.
   (7)   SIGNAGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All land use and/or development
of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of the Moline
Sign Code pertaining to the type and amount of signage permitted on property
(see
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances). Such regulations and restrictions
address issues such as the maximum area of permitted signage and the number and
types of permitted signage; which are directly related to, and a critical
component of, the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Moline and its environs.
   (8)   PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS . All land use and/or
development of land shall comply with all the regulations and requirements of
this Code pertaining to the procedures necessary to secure review and approval
of land use and/or development (see Article II). Such regulations and
restrictions address both procedural and technical requirements; and are
directly related to, and a critical component of, the protection of the health,
safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Moline and its
environs.
   (9)   NUMBER OF BUILDINGS PER LOT . In the C-2, AG-2 and R-2 Districts, only
one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot. In all other
districts, more than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot.
   (10)   NUMBER OF LAND USES PER BUILDING .
      a.   No more than 10 nonresidential land uses shall be permitted in any
building unless a special    use permit for a group development is granted in
compliance with Sec.
35-3419.
      b.   With the exceptions of a Commercial Apartment (see Sec.
35-3414(4)), a caretaker’s    residence (see Sec.
35-3417(a)) or a home occupation (see Sec.
35-3411(3) and (4)), no    building containing a nonresidential land use shall
contain a residential land use.
   (11)   DIVISION OR COMBINING OF A LOT . No lot of record shall be divided
into two or more lots, and no two or more lots of record shall be combined into
one or more lots, unless such division or combination results in the creation
of lots, each of which conforms to all of the applicable regulations of the
zoning district in which said lot is located (as set forth in this Code). (See
also the City of Moline Subdivision Code.)
SEC. 35-3403.   RELATIONSHIP TO ILQC UNIFIED ZONING CODE.
   The land uses used in this Division vary from those described in the
Illinois Quad Cities Unified Zoning Code. In general, this Division is
constructed using fewer and broader land uses as opposed to the more specific
list of land uses contained in the ILQCUZC. Nevertheless, this Code and the
ILQCUZC tend to regulate specific lands uses in a similar manner in terms of
the zoning districts in which they are prohibited, permitted by-right, or
permitted by a special use permit. However, for several land uses, the
provisions of this Division contain additional regulations, such as increased
setbacks from neighboring properties and screening and buffering, that are not
included in the ILQCUZC. At the end of each land use description contained in
this Code is a list of similar land uses contained in the ILQCUZC for readers
who have familiarity with that Code.
SEC. 35-3404.   DETAILED LAND USE DESCRIPTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   The land use categories employed by this Code are defined in this Division.
Land uses which are not listed in this Division are not necessarily excluded
from locating within any given zoning district. Sec.
35-1108 empowers the Zoning Administrator to make interpretations on matters
regarding specific land use proposals which are not addressed by this Code.
SEC. 35-3405.   PRINCIPAL RESIDENTIAL LAND USES.
   (a)   ONE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING . Description: A dwelling designed for
and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, wall, or floor in
common with any other dwelling unit. This dwelling unit type consists of a
fully detached single-family residence which is located on an individual lot or
within a group development. The dwelling unit must be a site- built structure
built in compliance with the adopted City of Moline Residential Building Code
(RBC), or may be a manufactured dwelling (modular home) as permitted by the RBC
or a manufactured home as permitted by the HUD code. For any of these dwelling
units, the use of a permanent, continuous RBC foundation is required. This
dwelling unit type may not be split into two or more residences.
   (1)   Similar uses from the ILQCUZC:
      a.   One-family detached dwelling;
      b.   Foster family home.
   (b)   ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT . A “Zero Lot Line Development” is comprised
of detached, single family homes where the area (side yards) between the homes
is reserved for use by only one of the homes, thereby providing for greater use
and enjoyment of the side yard area. Each house is on a separate platted lot or
condominium. In the case of platted lots, each home is located 5 feet from each
side property line as necessary to comply with all fire and building code
requirements regarding building separation. However, on one side of the home a
five-foot easement is created running the entire depth of the lot. Under the
provisions of the easement, the neighboring (receiving) property is granted
full use rights of the area, and the granting property maintains limited use
rights as needed only for maintenance and emergency access. In the case of a
condominium, one of the homes is granted exclusive use of the area between the
homes, with exceptions for maintenance and emergency access to the other home.
To enhance privacy of the receiving property in using the easement area, no
windows or doors typically are located on the adjoining wall of the home of the
granting property. This dwelling may not be split into two or more residences.
   (1)   Similar Uses from the ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (c)   TWIN-HOUSE . Description: These dwelling unit types consist of a
single-family dwelling which is attached on one side to another single-family
residence. A minimum building code required fire rated wall assembly division,
separating living areas from the lowest level to flush against the underside of
the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals, are required
between each dwelling unit. The two residences are located on individual lots.
The Twin House is distinguished from the Duplex House merely by having each
unit located on separate lots or within a group development. These dwelling
unit types may not be split into additional residences.
   (1)   Similar uses from ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (d)   DUPLEX . Description: These dwelling unit types consist of a single-
family dwelling which is attached on one side to another single-family
residence. A minimum building code required fire rated wall assembly division,
separating living areas from the lowest level to flush against the underside of
the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and public water laterals are required
between each dwelling unit. The Duplex is distinguished from a Twin House
merely by having both units located on a single lot or within a group
development. These dwelling unit types may not be split into additional
residences.
   (1)   Similar uses from the ILQCUZC:
      a.   Two-family dwelling.
   (e)   TWO-FLAT HOUSE . Description: This dwelling unit type consists of a
single-family residence, which is in complete compliance with the RBC, which
has been converted into a two-family residence. The two residences may attach
horizontally or vertically and are both located on the same lot or within the
same group development. This dwelling unit type may not be split into
additional residences.
   (1)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC:
      a.   Two-family dwelling.
   (f)   TOWN HOUSE . Description: This dwelling unit type consists of
attached, two-story, single-family residences, each having a private,
individual access. This dwelling unit type is located on its own lot or within
a group development and may not be split into additional residences. A minimum
building code required fire rated wall assembly division, separating living
areas from the lowest level through the roof, and individual sanitary sewer and
public water laterals, are required between each dwelling unit. The number of
units that may be attached is controlled by the requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
   (1)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC:
      a.   Row (Twin House) dwelling.
   (g)   MULTIPLEX. Description: This dwelling unit type consists of three or
more attached single-family residences, each of which has a private, individual
exterior entrance. A minimum building code required fire rated wall assembly
division, separating living areas from the lowest level through the roof, is
required between each dwelling unit. The number of units that may be attached
is controlled by the requirements of the applicable zoning district.
   (1)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (h)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING . Description: This dwelling unit type
consists of an attached, multi-family structure with access to each unit from a
shared entrance or hallway. A minimum building code required fire rated wall
assembly division, separating living areas from the lowest level to the
underside of the roof, is required between each dwelling unit. The number of
units that may be attached is controlled by the requirements of the applicable
zoning district.
   (1)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC:
      a.   Multiple-family dwelling.
   (i)   MANUFACTURED HOME . Description: A residential dwelling for one
family, fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the
building site, bearing a HUD label or insignia certifying that it is built in
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Standards under
42 U.S.C. § 5401 to 5426, and built after June 14, 1976. A manufactured home
shall be considered a single family dwelling for the purposes of this Division
only where it meets the regulations of subsection (a).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Manufactured homes placed within manufactured home parks are subject
to all applicable regulations associated with that land use category.
   (2)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC:
      a.   Modular home.
   (j)   MOBILE HOME . Description: A transportable factory built structure,
designed for long term occupancy by one family and built prior to June 15,
1976, the effective date of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act. A mobile home is not considered to be a type of single
family dwelling as per subsection (a).
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   In districts where they are allowed, the mobile home must be
attached to a finished, permanent foundation, such as a poured concrete slab or
a basement.
      b.   Mobile homes placed within mobile home parks are subject to all
applicable regulations associated with that land use category.
   (2)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC :
      a.   Mobile home/manufactured home.
   (k)   MOBILE HOME PARK . Description: A parcel of land or subdivision used
for the placement of two (2) or more mobile homes and/or manufactured homes.
Manufactured home developments and subdivisions shall not be included under
this land use category where all manufactured homes meet the regulations of
subsection (a). 
   (1)   Regulations : (See
Chapter 19 Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks of the Moline Code of
Ordinances.)
   (2)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC :
      a.   Mobile home park.
   (l)   BOARDING HOUSE . Description: Boarding Houses include any residential
use renting more than one room which does not contain private bathroom or
kitchen facilities (does not include approved bed and breakfast facilities).
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type A bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   Shall be located in an area of transition from residential land uses
to nonresidential land uses.
   (2)   Uses similar to ILQCUZC :
      a.   Boarding house.
   (m)   GROUP/INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL . Description: This land use is a form
of residential development designed to accommodate institutional residential
land uses (such as retirement homes, nursing homes, convents, and dormitories)
as well as group residential land uses (including child welfare agencies, group
homes for children, and community based residential facilities). Such uses
provide shelter to two or more unrelated individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit. No individual lots are required, although the
development shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of gross site area for
each occupant of the development. A minimum of 30% of the development's Gross
Site Area (GSA) shall be held as permanently protected green space. For
purposes of this Division, such uses are defined as either “large or “small:”
   (1)   Small . A use with eight or fewer residents, plus supervisory or
overnight personnel.
      a.   Institutional Residential Uses – Regulations:
         1.    The proposed site shall be located so as to avoid disruption of
an established or developing office area.
         2.   Institutional residential developments shall be designed so as to
maintain the character of the adjacent properties.
      b.   Group Residential Uses – Regulations:
         1.   No group residential use shall be established within 2,500 feet
of any other such use regardless of its capacity.
         2.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the City shall not exceed
1% of the City’s population, unless specifically authorized as a special use
following a public hearing.
         3.   Foster homes housing eight or fewer children and licensed under
225 ILCS 10/2.17 shall not be subject to 1., above; and shall not be subject
to, or    count toward, the total arrived at in 2., above.
      c.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Care home, small residential;
         2.   Residential care homes;
         3.   Human care institution;
         4.   Unrelated group family use.
   (2)   Large . A use with more than eight residents, plus supervisory or
overnight personnel.
      a.   Institutional Residential Uses – Regulations:
         1.   Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street. No access shall be permitted to a local residential street.
         2.   Shall provide off-street passenger loading area at a minimum of
one location within the development.
         3.   All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property which does not contain an institutional
residential land use.
      b.   Group Residential Uses – Regulations:
         1.   No community living arrangement shall be established within 2,500
feet of any other such facility, regardless of capacity.
         2.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the total capacity of all
community living arrangements (of all capacities) in the City shall not exceed
1% of the City's population, unless specifically authorized as a special use
following a public hearing.
      c.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Care home, large;
         2.   Halfway house;
         3.   Nursing homes;
         4.   Housing designed for the elderly.
SEC. 35-3406.   PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL LAND USES.
   (a)   CULTIVATION. Description: Cultivation land uses include all operations
primarily oriented to the on-site, raising of plants. This land use includes
trees which are raised as a crop to be replaced with more trees after
harvesting, such as in nursery or Christmas tree operations and commercial
greenhouses. The raising of plants for consumption by farm animals is
considered cultivation if said plants are consumed by animals which are located
off-site. Such land uses do not include cultivation centers registered by the
State of Illinois to produce medical cannabis (see Sec.
35-3410(k)).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   On lots zoned and platted for non-agricultural uses, cultivation
areas shall not exceed 20% of the lot's area;
      b.   Cultivation areas shall not be located within the required front
yard of any platted lot or lot developed with a use other than agriculture;
      c.   Agricultural land uses are exempt from the surfacing requirements of
Sec.
35-5100 (g).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Agriculture (not including the raising of livestock);
      b.   Agriculture (not including the raising of livestock) and commercial
summer gardens;
      c.   Nurseries, commercial.
   (b)   AGRICULTURAL SERVICES . Description: Agricultural service land uses
(excluding confinement of animal units of more than one animal unit/per acre)
include all operations pertaining to the sale, handling, transport, packaging,
storage, or disposal of agricultural equipment, products, by-products, or
materials primarily used by agricultural operations. Examples of such land uses
include agricultural implement sales, storage, or repair operations; feed and
seed stores; agricultural chemical dealers and/or storage facilities; animal
feed storage facilities; commercial dairies; food processing facilities;
canning and other packaging facilities; and agricultural waste disposal
facilities.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Shall not be located in, or adjacent to, an existing or platted
residential subdivision.
      b.   All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and outdoor animal
containments (pastures, pens and similar areas) shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from all    lot lines.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Agricultural implement sales/service;
      b.   Agricultural services;
      c.   Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers;
      d.   Grain elevator.
   (c)   ON-SITE AGRICULTURAL RETAIL . Description: On-site agricultural retail
land uses include land uses solely associated with the sale of agricultural
products grown exclusively on the site. The sale of products grown or otherwise
produced off-site shall not be permitted within on-site agricultural retail
operations and such activity constitutes retail sales as a commercial land use.
Packaging and equipment used to store, display, package or carry products for
the convenience of the operation or its customers (such as egg cartons,
baskets, containers, and bags) shall be produced off-site.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   No structure or group of structures shall exceed 500 square feet in
floor area;
      b.   No structure shall exceed 12 feet in height;
      c.   All structures shall meet all required setbacks;
      d.   Signage shall be limited to one on-site sign which shall not exceed
30 square feet in    area;
      e.   Such land use shall be served by no more than one driveway; said
driveway shall require a valid driveway permits;
      f.   The sale of products which are grown or otherwise produced on non-
adjacent property under the same ownership, or on property under different
ownership, shall be prohibited;
      g.   Said structure and fencing shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from any residentially zoned property;
      h.   Agricultural land uses are hereby made exempt from the surfacing
requirements of Sec.
35-5100(g).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Roadside stand selling products grown on the premises.
   (d)   SILVICULTURE, SELECTIVE CUTTING. Description: Selective cutting land
uses include any operation associated with the one-time, continuing, or
cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting, or other destruction of trees
(including by fire) where the extent of such activity is limited to an area (or
combined areas) of less than or equal to 30% of the woodlands on the property
(or up to 100% for developments approved prior to the effective date of this
Code). Selective cutting activity shall be limited to areas located within
development pads which are designated on recorded plats or approved site plans
as per Sec.
35-2106. The destruction of trees in an area in excess of this amount of the
woodlands on the property shall be considered clear cutting (see (g), below).
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   n/a.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Forestry activities.
   (e)   SILVICULTURE, CLEAR CUTTING . Description: Clear cutting land uses
include the one-time, continuing, or cumulative clearing, cutting, harvesting,
or other destruction (including by fire) of trees in an area (or combined
areas) of more than 30% of the woodlands on a property (or up to 100% for
developments approved prior to the effective date of this Code). Clear cutting
is permitted only as a special use within the jurisdiction of this Code. Areas
which have been clear cut as a result of intentional action following the
effective date of this Code without the granting of a special use permit are in
violation of this Code and the property owner may be fined for such violation
(in accordance with the provisions of Article I) and be required to implement
the mitigation standards required for the destruction of woodlands solely at
his/her expense, including costs associated with site inspection to confirm the
satisfaction of mitigation requirements.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Applicant shall demonstrate that clear cutting will improve the
level of environmental protection on the subject property;
      b.   Areas of the subject property which are clear cut beyond the
limitations established above, shall be replanted per the requirements of Sec.
35-4106. (Referenced section requires the replanting of trees in other portions
of the subject property—thereby freeing the currently wooded area for
development while ensuring that the amount of required wooded area on the
subject property remains constant);
      c.   Clear cutting shall not be permitted within a required bufferyard or
landscaped area (see Division 2 of Article V), or within an area designated as
permanently protected green space (see Article IV).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (f)   HUSBANDRY . Description: Husbandry land uses include all operations
primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of animals. Apiaries are
considered husbandry land uses.
   (1)   Regulations : All husbandry uses are prohibited in the City of Moline.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Agriculture;
      b.   Public stable.
   (g)   INTENSIVE AGRICULTURE . Description: Intensive agricultural land uses
include all operations primarily oriented to the on-site raising and/or use of
animals and/or agricultural activities requiring large investments in
structures. Examples of such land uses include feed lots, hog farms, poultry
operations, fish farms, and certain other operations meeting this criterion.
   (1)   Regulations : All Intensive Agricultural Uses are prohibited in the
City of Moline.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Agribusiness.
(Ord. No. 3024-2014; Sec.
35-3406(a) repealed; new Sec.
35-3406(a) enacted; 10/21/14)
SEC. 35-3407.   PRINCIPAL RECREATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL LAND USES.
   (a)   RECREATION, OUTDOOR – PASSIVE, PUBLIC . Description: Passive outdoor
public recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on
public property which involve passive recreational activities. Such land uses
include arboretums, natural areas, wildlife areas, hiking trails, bike trails,
cross country ski trails, horse trails, open grassed areas not associated with
any particular active recreational land use (see (b), below), picnic areas,
picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas, and similar land uses.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   n/a.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Open space;
      b.   Public parks and forests;
      c.   Public parks, passive.
   (b)   RECREATION, OUTDOOR – ACTIVE, PUBLIC . Description: Active outdoor
public recreational land uses include all recreational land uses located on
public property which involve active recreational activities. Such land uses
include playcourts (such as tennis courts and basketball courts), playfields
(such as ball diamonds, football fields, and soccer fields), tot lots, outdoor
swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, public golf courses,
horse trails and similar land uses.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Facilities using night lighting shall install and continually
maintain a Type D bufferyard adjacent to residentially zoned property (See Sec.
35-5207);
      b.   All structures and active recreational areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property;
      c.   Facilities which serve a community-wide function shall be located
with primary vehicular access on a collector or arterial street;
      d.   Facilities which serve a regional or community-wide function shall
provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of the users will be
children.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Recreational uses;
      b.   Public parks and playgrounds.
   (c)   RECREATION, OUTDOOR – PRIVATE CAMPGROUND/CAMPING RESORT . Description:
Campgrounds include any facilities designed for overnight accommodation of
persons in tents, travel trailers, or other mobile or portable shelters or
vehicles.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Recreational vehicle parks.
   (d)   INSTITUTIONAL, OUTDOOR . Description: Outdoor institutional land uses
include public and private cemeteries, privately held permanently protected
green space areas, recreation camps, country clubs, non-public golf courses,
and similar land uses. Accessory restaurants and bars do not require a separate
review.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street;
      b.   Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if a significant
proportion of the users will be children;
      c.   All structures and actively used outdoor recreational areas shall be
located a minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property;
      d.   Facilities using night lighting shall install and continually
maintain a Type D bufferyard adjacent to residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Cemeteries;
      b.   Country clubs;
      c.   Outdoor recreation facilities such as golf courses, country clubs
and tennis courts;
      d.   Public and private recreational facilities (golf course, marina,
boat dock);
      e.   Recreation camps;
      f.   Recreation uses, open air.
   (e)   INSTITUTIONAL, INDOOR – DAY CARE CENTER . Description: Day care
centers are land uses in which qualified persons provide child care services
independent of residential use. Examples of such land uses include child and
adult day care centers and nursery schools. Such land uses shall not be located
within a residential building. Such land uses may be operated on a for-profit
or a not- for- profit basis. Such land uses may be operated in conjunction with
another principal land use on the same environs, such as a church, school,
business, or civic organization. In such instances, day care centers are not
considered as accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land
use.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Child care center;
      b.   Child care facilities;
      c.   Day care centers licensed by the State of Illinois.
   (f)   INSTITUTIONAL, INDOOR – GENERAL . Description: General indoor
institutional land uses include all indoor public and not-for-profit:
recreational facilities (such as gyms, swimming pools, libraries, museums, and
community centers) schools; churches; clubs; fraternal organizations; and
similar land uses that are of a size and character consistent with the
districts in which they are permitted and which serve the needs of the
community as opposed to the region.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street, where adjacent to the property;
      b.   Shall provide off-street passenger loading area if the majority of
the users will be children (as in the case of a school, church, library, or
similar land use);
      c.   All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Business or trade school;
      b.   Churches;
      c.   Club/lodge;
      d.   Community center;
      e.   Funeral home;
      f.   Community service offices;
      g.   Conservatory;
      h.   Meeting hall/clubs/fraternal organizations/lodges;
      i.   Private clubs, lodges, union halls;
      j.   Public and parochial schools;
      k.   Schools/facilities for academic instruction;
      l.   Trade/industrial schools/personnel training centers.
   (g)   INSTITUTIONAL, INDOOR – INTENSIVE . Description: Intensive indoor
institutional land uses include all public and non-profit: arenas; convention
centers; hospitals; jails; prisons; and similar uses of a size and character
that would be inconsistent with the districts in which general institutional
uses are permitted and which typically serve the needs of the region as opposed
to the community. This land use category shall also include churches of both
the size and intensity as characterized above, as well as those churches that
would be consistent with general institutional uses. The following
“regulations” shall be applied to intensive institutional land uses that exceed
the intensity and character of those uses found within the general
institutional land use category and that serve the needs of the region as
opposed to the community, whereas the “Regulations,” found within Section
35-3407(f)(1) shall be applied to churches of the intensity and character of
General Indoor Institutional church uses. (Ord. No. 3034-2006; Section
35-3407(g) repealed in its entirety; new Section
35-3407(g) enacted; 8/15/06)
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Shall be located with primary vehicular access on a collector or
arterial street;
      b.   Shall provide off-street passenger loading area;
      c.   All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Auditoriums;
      b.   Convention center/assembly hall/display hall/or similar use;
      c.   Hospital and special care facilities;
      d.   Museum.
SEC. 35-3408.   PRINCIPAL COMMERCIAL LAND USES.
   (a)   FOOD TRUCK PARK. Description: Food truck park land uses include
outdoor, public spaces where the primary function is mobile food services from
two or more food trucks. Such land uses do not include mobile food
establishments, campgrounds, or the storage or display of inoperative food
trucks or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a junkyard or
salvage yard.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   The area of the food truck park must be clearly defined and
separated from the patron parking area through the installation of a fence or
other enclosure which maintains an open appearance and is a maximum of five
feet in height.
      b.   The parking area for the food trucks must be a paved surface.
      c.   Food truck parks may have a pavilion or other permanent structure in
order to provide shelter for patrons and operators, provided said structure
meets the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district where the food
truck park is located.
      d.   Food truck parks and food trucks on the property must comply with,
all applicable laws, including “Rules and Regulations for Motorized Food
Vendors,” Res. No. 1157-2017, as may be amended from time to time.
   (b)   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Description: Mobile food establishment land
uses include all principal land uses involving the overnight parking, vehicle
storage, equipment storage, food preparation, and other services associated
with food trucks that do not include the food truck actively servicing its
route or selling food to customers. Mobile food establishment land uses shall
be separate and distinct from food truck park land uses.
   (1)   Regulations:
      1.   All parking areas shall be paved per the requirements of Article V.
      2.   Inoperative vehicles or equipment shall not be stored with food
trucks.
      3.   Parking and storage areas shall provide a Type C bufferyard along
all borders of the parking or storage area abutting residentially zoned
property.
   (c)   Office. Description: Office land uses include all exclusively indoor
land uses whose primary functions are the handling of information or
administrative services. Such land uses do not typically provide services
directly to customers on a walk-in or on-appointment basis.
   (1)   Parking Requirements: One space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Data processing/computing centers;
      b.   Laboratories (medical/dental);
      c.   Consultant offices;
      d.   Office – business/professional;
      e.   Offices – clerical administration.
   (d)   Personal and Professional Services. Description: Personal and
professional service land uses include all exclusively indoor land uses whose
primary function is the provision of services directly to an individual on a
walk-in or on-appointment basis. Examples of such uses include professional
services, insurance or financial services, realty offices, medical offices and
clinics, veterinary clinics, barber shops, beauty shops, and related land uses.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   n/a.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Bank;
      b.   Banks/financial enterprise;
      c.   Barber or beauty shop;
      d.   Clinics;
      e.   Medical clinics;
      f.   Public utility collection office;
      g.   Travel bureau and ticket office.
   (e)   Sales and Service, General. Description: General sales and service
land uses include all land uses which conduct or display sales or rental
merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional services,
entirely within an enclosed building. Impacts from such uses (noise, vibration,
odors) shall not be detectable out the building/leased area in which they are
located. In addition, such uses do not include those that sell alcohol,
prescription drugs or firearms. Such uses do include indoor self-service
facilities such as coin-operated laundromats. Depending on the zoning district,
such land uses may or may not display products outside of an enclosed building,
as per Sec.
35-3414(g).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Within the ORT district, permitted uses shall be limited to indoor
sales and personal services which primarily support office tenants such as
office supply stores and copy centers.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Auto Accessory Store;
      b.   Antique/custom furniture with incidental upholstery;
      c.   Art galleries/studios;
      d.   Bakery (retail on premises);
      e.   Bicycle sales/service;
      f.   Camera/photographic supply store;
      g.   Costume rental;
      h.   Custom dressmaking/millinery/tailoring or shoe repair;
      i.   Delicatessen;
      j.   Engraving of lithography;
      k.   Fabric/floor covering sales;
      l.   Hardware/paint supply store;
      m.   Hobby shop;
      n.   Interior decorating;
      o.   Laundromat;
      p.   Locksmith;
      q.   Mirror and glazing shop/glass cutting;
      r.   Picture framing;
      s.   Retail;
      t.   Second-hand stores/rummage shops.
   (f)   Sales and Service, Intensive. Description: Intensive sales and service
land uses include all land uses which conduct or display sales or rental
merchandise or equipment, or non-personal or non-professional services, within
an enclosed building. Impacts from such uses (noise, vibration, odors) may be
detectable outside the building/leased area in which they are located, but not
beyond the property lines. Such uses include those that sell alcohol,
prescription drugs or firearms. Depending on the zoning district, such land
uses may or may not display products outside of an enclosed building, as per
Sec.
35-3414(9) and (10). A land use which contains both indoor sales and outdoor
sales exceeding 15% of the total sales area of the building(s) on the property
shall be considered as an outdoor sales and service land use (see (h) below).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   If located on the same side of the building as abutting
residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 150 feet, or as far as possible, of a residentially zoned
property.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Blue printing/photostating/print shop/and duplicating
establishments;
      b.   Catering;
      c.   Convenience store;
      d.   Department stores;
      e.   Employment agency;
      f.   Hospital clinic (for small animals w/o long term kennel);
      g.   Laundry/dry cleaning;
      h.   Pawn shop;
      i.   Pet shops (not animal hospitals);
      j.   Plumbing/electrical/heating & air conditioning supply stores/
showroom (w/o repair or outdoor storage);
      k.   Printing/publishing/duplicating/photo graphic processing;
      l.   Taxidermist;
      m.   Upholstering shop for furniture.
   (g)   SALES AND SERVICE, IN-VEHICLE. Description: In-vehicle sales and
service land uses include all land uses which perform sales and/or services to
persons in vehicles, or to vehicles which may or may not be occupied at the
time of such activity (except vehicle repair and maintenance services see
subsections (n) and (o) below). Such land uses often have traffic volumes which
exhibit their highest levels concurrent with peak traffic flows on adjacent
roads. Examples of such land uses include drive-in, drive-up, and drive-through
facilities, vehicular fuel stations, and all forms of car washes.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Clearly marked pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided for each
walk-in customer access to the facility adjacent to the drive-through lane(s).
      b.   The drive-through facility shall be designed so as to not impede or
impair vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement, or exacerbate the potential
for pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.
         1.   Each drive-through facility must have a minimum of six off-street
stacking spaces 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length located directly
alongside the drive-through window, facility, or entrance used by patrons and
in lanes leading up to the service window.
         2.   Stacking spaces shall be designed so as not to interfere with the
ingress and egress to the off-street parking, traffic circulation on- or off-
site, and traffic visibility.
         3.   The maneuvering space shall be provided in the side or rear yard.
         4.   Stacking spaces should be separated from pedestrian paths or
marked with signs to indicate such path to drivers and requirement to yield to
pedestrians.
      c.   In no instance shall a drive-through facility be permitted to
operate which endangers the public safety, even if such land use has been
permitted under the provisions of this Section.
      d.   The setback of any overhead canopy or similar structure shall be a
minimum of 10 feet from all street rights-of-way lines, a minimum of 20 feet
from all residentially-zoned property lines, and shall be a minimum of 10 feet
from all other property lines with the exception that free standing menu board
or drive thru speaker canopies that are less than 120 square feet in area/
coverage can project no more than 3 feet into the setback. The total height of
any overhead canopy or similar structure shall not exceed 20 feet as measured
to highest part of the structure.
      e.   All vehicular areas of the facility shall provide a surface paved
with concrete or bituminous material which is designed to meet the requirements
of a minimum 4 ton axle load.
      f.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (Sec.
35-5207).
      g.   Interior curbs shall be used to separate driving areas from exterior
fixtures such as fuel pumps, vacuums, menu boards, canopy supports and
landscaped islands. Said curbs shall be a minimum of six inches high and be of
a non-mountable design.Curbs protecting exterior fixtures must be setback a
minimum of 25 feet to all property lines with the exception of curbs that
protect menu boards must be setback at least 10 feet from all property lines.
      h.   Any text or logo larger than one square foot per side on an overhead
canopy or other accessory structure shall be considered a freestanding sign
subject to regulation under the sign code.
      i.   Charging Stations (Level 2 or Level 3)
         1.   Maintenance: Charging station equipment, bollards and parking
spaces shall be maintained in all respects. The property owner of the equipment
shall be responsible for the maintenance of the charging station and shall
provide warranty and service for the charging stations and infrastructure for
the duration of their useful life. A phone number or other contact information
shall be provided to the user of public charging stations for reporting
purposes when the equipment is not functioning or other equipment problems are
encountered.
         2.   Accessibility: Where charging station equipment is provided
within a pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or other accessible
route to a building entrance, the charging station equipment must be located so
as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of the Illinois
Accessibility Code or other applicable accessibility standards.
         3.   Landscaping, lighting, and screening must be provided where
required by Sec. 35-5200, et seq., Sec. 35-5300, et seq., and Sec. 35-5502.
Public charging stations in parking lots should be located near landscaped
areas where possible.
         4.   Charging Station Equipment: Electric vehicle supply equipment
must have a cable management system to control and organize unused lengths of
cable or cord at charging stations. Equipment must be located as to not impede
pedestrian travel or create trip hazards on sidewalks.
         5.   Charging Station Equipment Protection: Adequate charging station
equipment protection, such as barrier curbing, concrete filled steel bollards,
or similar must be used for public charging stations.
         6.   Usage Fees: An owner of a charging station may collect fees for
use of a charging station, in accordance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
         7.   Notification: Voltage and amperage levels, hours of operation,
applicable fees, and safety information must be prominently displayed to the
user.
         8.   Location: When located within a parking lot, electric vehicle
charging station equipment shall be located to avoid vehicle conflicts.
         9.   Pavement Marking: Any and all pavement markings shall be in
compliance with Article V, Division 1 of this Code. No additional markings will
be permitted.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Car wash (multiple bays);
      b.   Car wash (single bay);
      c.   Drive-in or fast food restaurants;
      d.   Dry cleaning pick-up station.
   (h)   Sales and Service, Outdoor Display. Description: Outdoor display land
uses include all land uses which conduct sales, display sales or rental
merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building. Example of such land
uses include vehicle sales, vehicle rental, manufactured and mobile housing
sales and monument sales. The area of outdoor sales shall be calculated as the
area which would be enclosed by a fence installed and continually maintained in
the most efficient manner which completely encloses all materials displayed
outdoors. Such land uses do not include the storage or display of inoperative
vehicles or equipment, or other materials typically associated with a junkyard
or salvage yard. (Accessory land uses which conduct or display only a limited
amount of product outside of an enclosed building, are listed separately in
Sec.35-3414(h) and (i).)
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected
green space areas, required landscaped areas, or required bufferyards.
      b.   The display of items shall not be permitted within required setback
areas for the principal structure.
      c.   In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement
established by the provisions of Sec. 35-5100. If the number of provided
parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement, such
display area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already
present.
      d.   Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly
delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
      e.   Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site
traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian
conflicts.
      f.   Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar year;
however, if goods are removed from the display area all support fixtures used
to display the goods shall be removed within 10 calendar days of the goods'
removal.
      g.   Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored
or displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for this
land use.
      h.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
display area abutting residentially zoned property, except per e., above (See
Sec. 35-5207.).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a   Auto/pick-up sales;
      b.   Motor vehicle dealerships with outdoor storage;
      c.   Boat sales with outdoor storage;
      d.   Travel trailer sales/service with outdoor storage.
   (i)   Restaurant. Description: The restaurant land use includes commercial
establishments where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed
primarily within the principle structure and where food sales constitute more
than 50% of the gross sales receipts for food and beverages. Facilities with
drive-through or drive-in facilities are not included (see subsection (g)
above).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   n/a.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Inns and other dining places;
      b.   Restaurant.
   (j)   Lodging. Description: Commercial indoor lodging facilities include
land uses which provide overnight housing in individual rooms or suites of
rooms, each room or suite having a private bathroom. Such land uses may provide
in-room or in-suite kitchens, and may also provide indoor recreational
facilities for the exclusive use of their customers. Restaurant, arcades,
fitness centers, and other on-site facilities available to non-lodgers are not
considered accessory uses and therefore require review as a separate land use.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   If located on the same side of a building as abutting residentially
zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be permitted within 100
feet of a residentially zoned property.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec. 35-5207).
      c.   Within the ORT District, each and every room must take primary
access via an individual interior door, and may not be accessed via an external
balcony, porch or deck, except for emergency purposes.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Hotel/motel.
   (k)   Entertainment, Indoor. Description: Indoor commercial entertainment
land uses include all land uses which provide entertainment services or where
sales of alcohol constitute more than 50% of gross sales receipts for food and
beverage. Such uses are conducted entirely within an enclosed building except
for accessory outdoor dining and entertainment as permitted in Sec.
35-3414 (8) and (9). Such activities often have operating hours which extend
significantly later than most other commercial land uses. Examples of such land
uses include bars, taverns, theaters, health or fitness centers, all forms of
training studios (dance, art, martial arts, etc.), bowling alleys, arcades,
roller rinks, and pool halls.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   If located on the same side of the building as abutting
residentially zoned property, no customer entrance of any kind shall be
permitted within 150 feet, of a residentially zoned property.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Amusement centers;
      b.   Auction houses;
      c.   Bar/dance hall/cocktail lounge or night club/tavern/micro-brewery;
      d.   Health club;
      e.   Music studio;
      f.   Radio, television and CATV stations without transmission Towers;
      g.   Theater (indoor).
   (l)   Entertainment, Outdoor. Description: Outdoor commercial entertainment
land uses include all land uses which provide entertainment services partially
or wholly outside of an enclosed building. Such activities often have the
potential to be associated with nuisances related to noise, lighting, dust,
trash and late operating hours. Examples of such land uses include volleyball,
horseshoe and related facilities associated with entertainment land uses,
outdoor commercial swimming pools, driving ranges, miniature golf facilities,
amusement parks, drive-in theaters, go-cart tracks, and racetracks.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Activity areas shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting residentially zoned property (Sec.
35-5207).
      c.   Activity areas (including drive-in movie screens) shall not be
visible from any residentially-zoned property.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range;
      b.   Shooting range.
   (m)   Entertainment, Adult. The following section was adopted in whole from
the previous zoning code (Chapter 35, Article V, Division 5).
   (1)   Recitals. The foregoing recitals are incorporated herein as the City
Council's findings and determinations.
   (2)   Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known as, and may be referred to
as the "Moline Adult Use Zoning Ordinance."
   (3)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases and words shall have the meanings given herein.
      a.   Adult Booth. Any area of an adult entertainment establishment set
off from the remainder of such establishment by one or more walls or other
dividers or partitions and used to show, play or otherwise demonstrate any
adult materials or to view any live performance that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities;
      b.   Adult Entertainment Establishment or Establishment. Any of the
following commercial establishments as defined herein.
         1.   Adult Cabaret. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or a significant portion of its business provides any of the following:
            i.   Persons who appear nude or semi-nude.
            ii.   Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical
areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities;
            iii.   Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides,
computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind
that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or
simulation of specified sexual activities.
         2.   Adult Store. Any commercial establishment that, (a) contains one
or more adult booths; or (b) as a substantial or significant portion (more than
50%) of its business offers for sale, rental, exchange or viewing any adult
materials. Adult stores do not include commercial establishments which offer
for sale, rental, exchange or viewing any adult materials as a sideline or
adjunct to sales, rentals, exchanges or viewings of materials other than adult
materials.
         3.   Adult Theater. Any commercial establishment that as a substantial
or significant portion of its business features or provides films, motion
pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, or other visual representations or
recordings of any kind that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or the
conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
         4.   Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude
or in a state of nudity is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by any persons who pay money or
any form of consideration. This definition of nude model studio does not apply
to public or private junior colleges, colleges or universities licensed by the
State of Illinois and offering art or modeling classes or anatomical drawing
classes.
         5.   Sexual Encounter Center. Any business or commercial establishment
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration: (a) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or (b) activities between female and male
persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a
state of nudity or is semi-nude.
      c.   Adult Motel. Any hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
         1.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission,
phones, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of such
adult type photographic reproductions; or
         2.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours; or
         3.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet the room
for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
      d.   Commercial Establishment. Any place where admission, services,
performances or products are provided for or upon payment of any form of
consideration.
      e.   Licensed Premises. The place or location described in an
establishment license wherein an adult entertainment establishment is
authorized to operate. No sidewalks, streets, parking areas, public rights-of-
way, or grounds adjacent to any such place or location shall be included within
the licensed premises.
      f.   Nude or State of Nudity. The state of dress or undress that exposes
to view (a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed; or (b) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or any
device or covering that, when worn, simulates human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
      g.   Protected Uses.
         1.   A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
         2.   A public or private nursery school or any other public or private
school serving any one or more of grades kindergarten through twelve.
         3.   A childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois Department of
Children and Family Services.
         4.   A public park, playground, playing field, or forest preserve.
         5.   A public or private cemetery.
         6.   A public housing facility.
      h.   Residential Property. Any lodge or other tract of land zoned in any
of the following districts or zones under this Code: R-2, R-4, R-6, and R-7.
      i.   Semi-Nude. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no
more than the human genitals, pubic region, anus, and areola of the female
breast, as well as     portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices or by other minor accessory apparel including, without limitation,
hats, gloves, and socks.
      j.   Specified Anatomical Areas. Any of the following:
         1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola but not including any portion of the cleavage of a female
breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other
wearing apparel providing the areola is not exposed; or
         2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered or any device or covering that when worn,
simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      k.   Specified Sexual Activities. Any of the following:
         1.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts.
         2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
without limitation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, bestiality, intercourse,
oral copulation or sodomy.
         3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
         4.   Human genitals in a state of sexual simulation, arousal, or
tumescence.
         5.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3) or (4) of this definition of
specified sexual activities.
   (4)   Adult Entertainment Location Standards.
      a.   Requirements. Adult entertainment establishments located,
established, maintained or operated on any lot in the City shall also comply,
in addition to complying with all other applicable regulations set forth in
this Code, with the regulations set forth in paragraphs b. through g. of this
section. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of any other such
regulations and the regulations set forth in paragraphs b. through g. of this
section, the regulations set forth in paragraphs b. through g. of this section
shall control to the extent of any conflict.
      b.   Permitted Districts. Adult entertainment establishments shall be
permitted only in an industrial zoning district (I-1 and I-2).
      c.   Minimum Distance from Other Entertainment Establishments. No adult
entertainment establishment shall be located, established, maintained or
operated on any lot that has a property line within 500 feet of the property
line of any other lot on which any other adult entertainment establishment is
located, established, maintained or operated, nor shall more than one adult
entertainment establishment be located on any lot.
      d.   Minimum Distance from Protected Uses. No adult entertainment
establishment shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot
that has a property line within 750 feet of the property line of any other lot
on which a protected use is located, established, maintained or operated.
      e.   Minimum Distance from Residential Property. No adult entertainment
establishment shall be located, established, maintained or operated on any lot
that has a property line within 750 feet of the property line of any
residential property.
      f.   Measurement. For the purposes of this section, distances shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the
adult entertainment establishment is located to the nearest point on a property
line of any residential property, or any lot on which a protected use or other
adult entertainment establishment, as the case may be, is located, established,
maintained, or operated.
      g.   Limited Exception from Subsequent Protected Uses, Alcohol Business
and Residential Property. An adult entertainment establishment lawfully
operating under this Code and under the City's Adult Use Licensing Ordinance
shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions set forth
herein solely because (1) a protected use subsequently locates within the
minimum required distance of the adult entertainment establishment, (2) a
business that sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages subsequently locates
within the same building as the adult entertainment establishment, or (3)
property within the minimum required distance of an adult entertainment
establishment subsequently becomes residential property. This paragraph g.
shall not apply to an adult entertainment establishment at a time when an
application for an adult entertainment license under the City's Adult Use
Licensing Ordinance for that establishment is submitted after the license has
previously expired, has been revoked, or is at that time under suspension.
   (5)   Severability. In the event that any provision of this division, or any
part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
found otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction
on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the validity of any of
the remaining provisions or any application thereof to any person or
circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or
circumstance. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City
that this article would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective provisions not been included herein. (Ord. No. 2000-02-03; new
Division 5 to Article V enacted, "ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS"; 02/08/
00)
   (n)   Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Minor. Description: Minor vehicle
repair and maintenance services include land uses which perform minor
maintenance services to motorized vehicles (such as minor repairs, incidental
body and fender work, touch-up painting and upholstering, replacement of minor
parts and general tune-up service to automobiles and trucks not exceeding one
and 1½ tons capacity entirely within an enclosed building.)
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Storage of abandoned vehicles is prohibited.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (Sec. 35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Auto repair, minor.
   (o)   Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major. Description: Major vehicle
repair and maintenance services include land uses which perform general repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning of engines of any type for motor vehicles, trucks,
buses, or trailers. Also includes collision service, including body work, frame
or fender straightening or repair, overall painting of motor vehicles, trucks,
or trailers, and painting booths.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Storage of abandoned vehicles is prohibited.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (Sec. 35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Auto repair, major with outdoor storage.
   (p)   Animal Boarding Services. Description: Commercial animal boarding
facility land uses include land uses which provide short-term and/or long-term
boarding for animals. Examples of these land uses include commercial kennels
and commercial stables. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails
associated with such land uses are considered accessory to such land uses and
do not require separate consideration.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Each animal shall be provided with an indoor containment area.
      b.   The minimum permitted size of horse or similar animal stall shall be
100 square feet.
      c.   Special events such as shows, exhibitions, and contests may be
permitted as a temporary use as per Sec. 35-3418(f).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Kennels.
   (q)   SALES AND SERVICE, CANNABIS DISPENSING. Description: In accordance
with the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act of
410 ILCS 130/1, and subsequent amendments, a Sales and Service, Cannabis
Dispensing land use is any state-registered dispensing organization which
acquires medical cannabis from registered cultivation centers for the purpose
of dispending medical cannabis products to registered qualifying patients.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Must be in full compliance with all applicable state statutes and
regulations.
   (r)   SALES AND SERVICE, LIMITED. Description: Limited sales and service
land uses include boutiques and small business establishments providing finite
retail services or specialty retailing which serve particular needs of the
community as opposed to general needs of the region. Such uses may also offer
training and repair, customization, or related services for products sold and
generally serve professionals, hobbyists, specialists, and devotee clientele.
Such uses are exclusively indoors and may not display products outside of an
enclosed building. Impacts from such uses (noise, vibration, odors) shall not
be detectable outside the building/tenant area in which they are located. In
addition, such uses do not include those that offer entertainment services nor
those that sell alcohol, tobacco, prescription drugs, firearms, hazardous
materials, animals or pets, furniture, large appliances, hardware, power tools,
building materials, contractor equipment, machinery, vehicles, or similar
products. Examples of such land uses include clothing or jewelry shops, card
shops, comics or book stores, art or teaching supply stores, candy or coffee
stores, small food markets or cafés, cooking or kitchen suppliers, beauty or
grooming suppliers, and related land uses.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Indoor retail sales and product display shall not exceed 5,000
square feet in total floor area;
      b.   Shall be located with primary vehicle access on a collector or
arterial street;
      c.   All structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
      d.   Facility shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting residentially-zoned property.
(Ord. No. 3024-2014; Sec. 35-3408(o) enacted; 10/21/14; Ord. No. 3019-2018; new
subsection (p), "SALES AND SERVICE," enacted; 06/12/18; Ord. No. 3012-2023; new
subsection (e)(1)i. enacted; 04/11/23; Ord. No. 3037-2023; new subsections (e)
(1)b.1. - 4. enacted; 9/26/23; Ord. No. 3039-2023; new subsections (a), (b)
enacted and subsequent subsections relettered; 10/10/23; Ord. No. 3007-2025;
Sec. 35-3408 amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-3409.   PRINCIPAL TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY LAND USES.
   (a)   AIRPORT/HELIPORT. Description: Airports and heliports are
transportation facilities providing takeoff, landing, servicing, storage and
other services to any type of air transportation. The operation of any type of
air vehicle (including ultralight aircraft, hang gliders, parasails, and
related equipment, but excepting model aircraft) within the jurisdiction of
this Code shall occur only in conjunction with an approved airport or heliport.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   All buildings, structures, outdoor airplane or helicopter storage
areas, and any other activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from
all lot lines.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
property not otherwise completely screened from activity areas by buildings or
structures (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Aircraft hangers/tie-downs;
      b.   Airstrips/runways and heliports;
      c.   Aviation facilities (private and public).
   (b)   PARKING, OFFSITE . Description: Off-site parking lots are any areas
used for the temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed
and operative. (See also Sec.
35-5100 for additional parking regulations.)
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Access to an off-site parking lot shall only be permitted from a
collector or arterial street.
      b.   Access and vehicular circulation shall be designed so as to
discourage cut-through traffic.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Commercial parking lot;
      b.   Garage (public);
      c.   Parking lots (public and private).
   (c)   TERMINAL, FREIGHT. Description: Freight terminals are defined as land
and buildings representing either end of one or more truck carrier line(s)
which may have some or all of the following facilities: yards, docks,
management offices, storage sheds, buildings and/or outdoor storage areas,
freight stations, and truck maintenance and repair facilities, principally
serving several or many businesses and always requiring trans-shipment. Also
includes distribution centers, which are facilities oriented to the short-term
indoor storage and possible repackaging and reshipment of materials involving
the activities and products of a single user. Retail outlets associated with
this use shall be considered accessory uses as per Sec.
35-3416(1).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines
abutting residentially zoned property.
      c.   In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
front yard, landscape area, or bufferyard area.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Bus terminal/railroad station/freight terminal or other public
transportation terminal.
   (d)   TERMINAL, PASSENGER. Description: Passenger terminals are defined as
land and buildings representing either end of one or more bus companies,
transit services or rail lines, which provide facilities for departing or
arriving passengers. Terminals providing freight services and/or service to
vehicles require a separate use review consistent with those services.
Likewise, passenger terminals providing services to passengers, such as
restaurants shall require a separate use review for those uses as appropriate.
Ticket offices and other ancillary offices uses, however, are considered
accessory to the passenger terminal and do not require a separate use review.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines
abutting residentially zoned property.
      c.   In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
front yard, landscape area, or bufferyard area.
      d.   Parking Requirements: One space per each employee on the largest
work shift, plus one space per every 5 passengers based on average daily
ridership.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Bus transfer station.
   (e)   PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES, DISTRIBUTION. Description: Public
services and utilities, distribution land uses include all City, County, State
and Federal (except those otherwise identified in this Division) emergency and
local service facilities, such as fire and police departments and rescue
operations, treatment plants, water Towers, lift stations, and similar public
uses serving the city and its immediate environs. The use also includes private
electrical, gas and telecommunications facilities, such as overhead lines (of
up to 34,000 volts) and pad-mounted switch gear and transformers, and similar
facilities where the size/capacity already has been stepped down by a
transmission facility (see subsection (f), below) to directly meet the needs of
customers/users.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
      b.   All outdoor storage areas shall install and continually maintain a
Type D bufferyard adjacent to all residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      c.   All buildings and treatment structures shall be located a minimum of
20 feet from any residentially zoned property.
      d.   The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors
of surrounding buildings.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Essential public services;
      b.   Government buildings;
      c.   Governmental uses;
      d.   Municipal buildings and libraries;
      e.   Municipal fire and police station;
      f.   Post office;
      g.   Railroad right-of-way, but not switching, storage or freight yards;
      h.   Distribution lines, pipelines of public utility companies w/in
existing public rights-of-way;
      i.   Utility stations w/out service yards or storage.
   (f)   PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES, TRANSMISSION. Description: Public
services and utilities, transmission land uses includes private electrical, gas
and telecommunications facilities, such as overhead lines (69,000 volts and
higher), substations (to change from transmission to distribution voltage/
capacity), high pressure gas lines, and similar facilities where the size/
capacity must be stepped down to directly meet the needs of customers/users.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Outdoor storage areas shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
      b.   All outdoor storage areas shall install and continually maintain a
Type D bufferyard adjacent to all residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      c.   All structures shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
residentially zoned property.
      d.   The exterior of all buildings shall be compatible with the exteriors
of surrounding buildings.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Essential public services;
      b.   Transmission lines, pipelines of public utility companies w/in
existing public rights-of-way;
      c.   Utility stations w/out service yards or storage.
   (g)   Solar Energy System, Commercial. Description: Any device or assembly
of devices that (i) is ground installed and (ii) uses solar energy from the sun
for generating electricity for the primary purpose of wholesale sale and not
primarily for consumption on the property on which the device or devices reside
as defined in 55 ILCS 5/5-12020(a). (Commercial solar energy systems exclude
community solar energy systems in county jurisdictions.)
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Setbacks. Setback distance is measured from the edge of any
component of the solar facility to the nearest edge of the setback object
(building, ROW, property line). Commercial solar facilities must meet the
following setbacks:
         1.   Property line setback of 50 feet from nonparticipating
properties, except as otherwise determined in (1)a.4. below.
         2.   Street setback of 50 feet from the nearest ROW edge for all
street categories.
         3.   Occupied community buildings or dwellings setback of 150 feet for
non-participating properties, except as otherwise determined in (1)a.4 below.
         4.   Protected lands property line setback of 500 feet or the site-
specific guidelines of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) as
part of an EcoCAT natural resource review report under 17 Illinois Admin. Code
Part 1075.
      b.   Screening. Commercial solar shall be screened as follows:
         1.   A screening plan shall be submitted that identifies the type and
extent of screening. The screening shall be included in the project’s
vegetation management plan and must include provisions to maintain the
screening for the life of the facility.
         2.   A Type C landscaped bufferyard shall be provided for screening
along all property lines adjacent to a property not zoned industrial.
      c.   Ground cover and buffer areas. The following provisions shall apply
to the clearing of existing vegetation and establishment of vegetative ground
cover. Additional site- specific conditions may apply as required.
         1.   Large-scale removal of mature trees on the site is discouraged.
The city may set additional restrictions on tree clearing or require mitigation
for cleared trees.
         2.   The project design shall include the installation and
establishment of ground cover meeting the pollinator-friendly standard
consistent with 525 ILCS 55/1 “Pollinator-Friendly Solar Site Act” or successor
statutes and guidance as set by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
         3.   The applicant shall submit a vegetation management plan adhering
to guidance set forth by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
         4.   Pollinator-friendly standards shall be maintained on the site for
the duration of site operation, until the site is decommissioned.
         5.   The city may require submittal of an inspection fee with the
initial permit application to support ongoing inspection of the pollinator-
friendly ground cover and consistency with the vegetation management plan.
         6.   The applicant shall submit a financial guarantee in the form of a
letter of credit, cash deposit, or bond in favor of the city equal to 125% of
the costs to meet the pollinator-friendly standard. The financial guarantee
shall remain in effect until vegetation is fully established, as verified by
the county conservation official.
      d.   Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar panel racking and support is within accepted
professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      e.   Power and communication lines. Power and communication lines running
between banks of solar panels and to nearby electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the city in instances where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other
elements of the natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or
distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the zoning
administrator.
      f.   Fencing. Perimeter fencing for the site shall not include barbed
wire and shall adhere to wildlife-friendly fencing standards that include
clearance at the bottom. Alternative wildlife-friendly fencing can be used if
the site is incorporating agrivoltaics.
      g.   Stormwater and NPDES. Commercial solar energy systems are subject to
the stormwater management and erosion and sediment control provisions in
Chapter 34 of this code, as well as National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit requirements.
      h.   Other standards and codes. All commercial solar shall be in
compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulatory codes,
including the Construction Codes adopted by the city in Chapter 8 of this code.
      i.   Aviation protection. For commercial solar located within 500 feet of
an airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete
and provide the results of a glare analysis through a qualitative analysis of
potential impact, field test demonstration, or geometric analysis of ocular
impact in consultation with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Office of
Airports, consistent with the Interim Policy, FAA Review of Solar Energy
Projects on Federally Obligated Airports, or most recent version adopted by the
FAA.
      j.   Decommissioning. A decommissioning plan shall be prepared and
submitted as part of the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Plan (505 ILCS 147).
         1.   Decommissioning of the system must occur in the event the project
is not in use for 12 consecutive months.
         2.   The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures
and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and consistency with all
standards of the AIMP.
         3.   Disposal of structures and/or foundations shall meet the
provisions for local solid waste disposal.
         4.   Financial assurances for decommissioning the site shall be
provided to the city consistent with the Agricultural Impact Plan and
Mitigation Agreement.
(Ord. No. 3036-2025; new Sec 35-3409(g) enacted; 9/9/25)
SEC. 35-3410.   PRINCIPAL STORAGE, WHOLESALING AND INDUSTRIAL LAND USES.
   (a)   STORAGE, PERSONAL. Description: Personal storage facilities are land
uses oriented to the indoor storage of items entirely within partitioned
buildings having an individual access to each partitioned area. Such storage
areas may be available on either a condominium or rental basis. Also known as
"mini-warehouses."
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Facility shall be designed so as to minimize adverse visual impacts
on nearby developments. The color, exterior materials, and orientation of
proposed buildings and structures shall complement surrounding development.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Mini-warehousing.
(Ord. No. 3007-2009; Sec. 35-3410(a) repealed; new Sec. 35-3410(a) enacted; 03/
17/09)
   (b)   STORAGE AND WHOLESALING, INDOOR. Description: Indoor storage and
wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and
shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. With the exception of loading and parking facilities, such land
uses are contained entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of this land
use include conventional warehouse facilities, long-term indoor storage
facilities, and joint warehouse and storage facilities. Retail outlets
associated with this use shall be considered accessory uses per Sec.
35-3416(1).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Buffering loading areas;
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially; zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Wholesaling/warehousing/storage (except mini-storage).
   (c)   STORAGE AND WHOLESALING, OUTDOOR . Description: Outdoor storage and
wholesaling land uses are primarily oriented to the receiving, holding, and
shipping of packaged materials for a single business or a single group of
businesses. Such a land use, in which any activity beyond loading and parking
is located outdoors, is considered an outdoor storage and wholesaling land use.
Examples of this land use include contractors' storage yards, equipment yards,
lumber yards, coal yards, landscaping materials yard, construction materials
yards, recreational vehicle storage yards, and shipping materials yards. Such
land uses do not include the storage of inoperative vehicles or equipment, or
other materials typically associated with a junkyard or salvage yard.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by any
permitted combination of buildings, structures, walls, fencing, or vegetation.
Such walls and fencing shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height and shall be
designed to completely screen all stored materials from view from non-
industrialized areas at an elevation of 5 feet above the grade of all adjacent
properties and rights-of-way. Said walls or fencing shall be screened from
residentially zoned property by a Type D bufferyard. (See Sec.
35-5207)
      b.   The storage of items shall not be permitted in permanently protected
green space areas.
      c.   The storage of items shall not be permitted in a required front
yard, landscape area, or bufferyard area.
      d.   In no event shall the storage of items reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement
established by the provisions of Sec.
35-5100. If the number of provided parking stalls on the property is already
less than the requirement, such storage area shall not further reduce the
number of parking stalls already present.
      e.   Storage areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly
delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
      f.   Materials being stored shall not interfere in any manner with either
on-site or off-site traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and
traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
      g.   Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically stored
in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored under the provisions of this
land use.
      h.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property
borders abutting residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      i.   All outdoor storage areas shall be located no closer to a
residentially zoned property than the required minimum setback for the
principal buildings on the subject property.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Building material sales yard, wholesale;
      b.   Bulk station;
      c.   Feed and seed store (wholesale);
      d.   Bath house or boat house w/outdoor storage.
   (d)   CONTRACTOR SHOP. Description: Includes any business engaged in
contract services or labor, such as contractors involved with: landscaping;
building construction or carpentry; and electrical, plumbing or heating
systems. Includes towing businesses that do not have any on-site storage of
vehicles or salvage of unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles. Often involves
accessory equipment storage yards and rental of equipment commonly used by
contractors. Retail outlets associated with this principal use shall be
considered an accessory use, and shall be subject to the requirements of Sec.
35-3416(1).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the property
adjacent to the outdoor storage area (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   Outdoor sales, display or repair areas shall be set back from all
streets and residentially zoned properties a distance equal to the required
principal building setbacks and shall not be located within landscaped areas or
bufferyards.
      c.   The storage of items shall not interfere with traffic visibility or
reduce or inhibit the use or number of parking spaces provided on the property
below the requirement established below. If the number of provided parking
spaces on the property is already less than the requirement, such display area
shall not further reduce the number of spaces already present.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Building material sales yard, wholesale;
      b.   Air conditioning/heating sales & service with outdoor fabrication;
      c.   Carpenter/cabinet shop w/outdoor storage;
      d.   Contractors offices/shops;
      e.   Custom cabinet shop;
      f.   Custom drapery manufacture;
      g.   Exterminating shop;
      h.   Sign painting shop.
   (e)   JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD. Description: Description: Junkyard or
salvage yard facilities are any land or structure used for a salvaging
operation including but not limited to: the above-ground, outdoor storage and/
or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, and any other discarded materials
intended for sale or recycling; and/or the towing, collection, dismantlement,
storage, or salvage of two or more unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicles.
Recycling facilities involving on-site outdoor storage of salvage materials are
included in this land use.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Facility shall be fully screened from off-site users, from
residentially zoned developments and all public streets and, at a minimum,
shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all property borders abutting
residentially zoned property and all public streets (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   All buildings, structures, outdoor storage areas, and any other
activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
      c.   In no instance shall activity areas be located within a required
front yard, landscape area, or bufferyard area.
      d.   Shall not involve the storage, handling or collection of hazardous
materials, including any of the materials listed in subsection (i) below.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Auto salvage & wrecking operations;
      b.   Recycling centers/stations;
      c.   Scrap/salvage services;
      d.   Industrial metal and waste salvage.
   (f)   WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY . Description: Waste disposal facilities are
any areas used for the disposal of solid wastes. Also included are composting
operations, which are any land uses devoted to the collection, storage,
processing and or disposal of vegetation.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all of the borders
of the property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      c.   All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
      d.   No food scraps or other vermin-attracting materials shall be
processed, stored or    disposed of on-site.
      e.   Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or
disposal of hazardous materials as defined by subsection (i) below.
      f.   Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans
that, at a minimum, include detailed grading and revegetation plans,
maintenance plans, and a detailed written statement indicating the timetable
for such restoration. A surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 125% of the
costs determined to be associated with said restoration (as determined by a
third party selected by the City), shall be filed with the City by the
applicant (subject to approval by the City attorney), and shall be held by the
City for the purpose of ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed
condition. This amount shall be recalculated and a new bond shall be required
bi-annually. (The requirement for said surety is waived for waste disposal
facilities owned by public agencies.)
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Disposal/storage of toxic waste;
      b.   Landfill/construction debris/rubble/ sanitary;
      c.   Transfer station for waste.
   (g)   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. Description: Light industrial land uses are
industrial facilities at which all operations (with the exception of loading
operations) are: 1) conducted entirely within an enclosed building; 2) not
potentially associated with nuisances such as odor, noise, heat, vibration, and
radiation which are detectable at the property line; 3) do not pose a
significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion); and 4) comply with all
of the general performance standards listed for potential nuisances in Division
4 of Article V. Light industrial land uses may conduct retail sales activity as
an accessory use provided that the requirements of Sec.
35-3416(1) are complied with.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   All activities, except loading and unloading, shall be conducted
entirely within the confines of a building.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Apparel/other products mfg. from textiles;
      b.   Assembly of products from finished materials/parts;
      c.   Bottling/canning of soft drinks;
      d.   Cabinet making;
      e.   Computer manufacture/electronic assembly;
      f.   Food processing;
      g.   Fur repair/storage;
      h.   Laboratories (research/development/ testing of medical/optical/
dental/pharmaceutical products);
      i   Laundry/dry cleaning/dyeing (except walk-in or drive-up);
      j.   Photo processing involving photo engraving;
      k.   Printing and binding;
      l.   Processing & assembly of engineering/lab/scientific/research
instruments & associated    equipment;
      m.   Prosthetic manufacture;
      n.   Research & development/technical training & related activities for
industrial/scientific/ business enterprises/design of pilot or experimental
products.
   (h)   INDUSTRIAL, GENERAL . Description: General industrial land uses are
industrial land uses which: may be wholly or partially located outside of an
enclosed building; may have the potential to create certain nuisances which are
detectable at the property line; do not involve large quantities of materials
which pose a significant safety hazard. However, in no instance shall a general
industrial land use exceed the general performance standards listed in Division
4 of Article V. Examples of general industrial land uses include alcoholic
beverage producers; general manufacturers; stone, clay or glass product
producers; primary metal producers; heavy machinery producers; electrical
distribution equipment producers; electrical industrial apparatus producers;
and transportation vehicle producers.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise
stored so as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Aircraft assembly/testing;
      b.   Animal black/lamp black/bone black/graphite manufacture;
      c.   Auto/tractor trailer/farm implement assembly or manufacture;
      d.   Bleaching/cleaning/dyeing plant;
      e.   Boiler shops/machine shops/structural steel fabricating shops/
railway car or locomotive   shops;
      f.   Box and crate manufacture;
      g.   Brewing or distilling of liquors;
      h.   Brick manufacture;
      i.   Candle or sperm oil manufacture;
      j.   Cans and other container manufacture;
      k.   Cement/lime/gypsum/plaster of paris manufacture;
      l.   Chalk manufacture;
      m.   Coffin manufacture;
      n.   Cooperage works;
      o.   Cotton ginning and cotton wadding;
      p.   Cottonseed oil manufacture;
      q.   Dextrin, starch or glucose manufacture;
      r.   Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and other manufacture;
      s.   Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture;
      t.   Enameling, lacquering or japanning;
      u.   Flour, grain or feed milling or processing;
      v.   Gelatin, vegetable and animal manufacture;
      w.   Glass blowing and manufacture;
      x.   Grain elevators;
      y.   Hair or hair products manufacture;
      z.   Hemp products manufacture;
      aa.   Linoleum, oil cloth or oiled goods manufacture;
      bb.   Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planning
mills manufacture;
      cc.   Machinery, heavy manufacture and repair;
      dd.   Meat packing & processing (not slaughtering and glue/size mfg);
      ee.   Metal stamping/extrusion of metal products manufacture and plating;
      ff.   Motor testing/internal combustion motors manufacture;
      gg.   Pickle/sauerkraut/sausage manufacture;
      hh.   Porcelain products manufacture;
      ii.   Railroad equipment manufacture;
      jj.   Rubber manufacturing and processing;
      kk.   Rubber products;
      ll.   Sandblasting/cutting;
      mm.   Shoe blacking/polish/stove polish mfg.;
      nn.   Soap manufacture;
      oo.   Stone/monument works;
      pp.   Wax products manufacture;
      qq.   Wire or rod drawing/nut-screw or bolt mfg.;
      rr.   Wool scouring and pulling;
      ss.   Yeast manufacture.
   (i)   INDUSTRIAL, INTENSIVE. Description: Intensive industrial land uses are
industrial facilities potentially associated with nuisances such as odor,
noise, heat, vibration, and radiation, which are detectable at the property
line and which pose a significant safety hazard (such as danger of explosion).
Intensive industrial land uses are industrial facilities with the potential to
be dangerous or extremely obnoxious (stored explosives, petroleum refineries,
natural and liquid gas refineries, storage/distribution of bulk petroleum
products, radioactive material, acid/pesticide manufacture, hazardous waste
storage/treatment) and, therefore, require special use approval prior to
locating.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting properties which are not zoned I-2 (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise
stored so as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Acetylene manufacturing;
      b.   Acid manufacture;
      c.   Ammonia/chlorine/bleach powder manufacture;
      d.   Asbestos/asbestos products manufacture;
      e.   Asphalt plant;
      f.   Blast furnaces/steel works/rolling mills;
      g.   Celluloid or pyroxidine manufacture/ explosive or inflammable
cellulose/mfg. or storage;
      h.   Charcoal manufacture;
      i.   Chemicals manufacture/use;
      j.   Creosote manufacture or treatment;
      k.   Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture;
      l.   Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bones;
      m.   Establishments with potential to be dangerous or extremely obnoxious
(stored explosives, petroleum refineries, natural and liquid gas, storage/
distribution of bulk petroleum products, radioactive material, acid/pesticides
manufacture, hazardous waste storage/treatment);
      n.   Explosive manufacture or storage;
      o.   Fertilizer, compost – manufacture or storage;
      p.   Fish curing, smoking or packing, fish oil manufacture or refining;
      q.   Flammable liquids storage;
      r.   Foundry works;
      s.   Gas-generation or storage for illumination of heating;
      t.   Match manufacture;
      u.   Oil shellac/turpentine/varnish/enamel manufacture;
      v.   Paper/pulp manufacture;
      w.   Perfume manufacture;
      x.   Petroleum/flammable liquids production and refining;
      y.   Poultry slaughterhouse (includes packing and storage for wholesale);
      z.   Rock crushing;
      aa.   Sewage disposal plant or incinerator/sanitary landfill/recycling or
composting operation (except municipal);
      bb.   Steam power plant;
      cc.   Storage/curing/tanning of raw-green or salted skins;
      dd.   Storage of flammable liquids;
      ee.   Sugar refining;
      ff.   Tar distillation/asphalt roofing/waterproofing mfg.;
      gg.   Vinegar manufacture.
   (j)   EXTRACTION USE . Description: Extraction uses include land uses
involving the removal of soil, clay, sand, gravel, rock, minerals, peat, or
other material in excess of that required for approved on-site development or
agricultural activities. Barrow pits may be permitted as a temporary use as per
Sec.
35-3418(a).
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall comply with all County, State and Federal regulations.
      b.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
property (see Sec.
35-5207).
      c.   All buildings, structures, and activity areas shall be located a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
      d.   Required site plans shall include detailed site restoration plans
that, at minimum, include detailed grading and revegetation plans, and a
detailed written statement indicating the timetable for such restoration. A
surety bond, in an amount equivalent to 125% of the costs determined to be
associated with said restoration (as determined by a third party selected by
the City), shall be filed with the City by the applicant (subject to approval
by the City attorney), and shall be held by the City for the purpose of
ensuring that the site is restored to its proposed condition. This amount shall
be recalculated and a new bond shall be required bi-annually.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Commercial excavation of natural materials;
      b.   Resource extraction.
   (k)   INDUSTRIAL, CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Description: In accordance with the
Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act at 410 ILCS
130/1, and subsequent amendments, an Industrial, Cannabis Cultivation land use
is any cultivation facility registered by the State of Illinois to perform
necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis to registered
dispensing organizations.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Must be in full compliance with all applicable state statutes and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 3024-2014; Sec.
35-3408(k) enacted; 10/21/14; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec.
35-3410 amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-3411.   ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL LAND USES.
   Residential accessory uses are those which are incidental and subordinate
to, and serving, the principal residential use. The following provide standards
for permitted residential accessory uses. Accessory uses not specifically
listed herein, but similar to those permitted by right, may be permitted upon
site plan review and approval by the zoning administrator or at the time of
principal use approval by the appropriate decision making body. Accessory use
not listed herein, but similar to those permitted as a special use, may be
permitted with a special use permit.
   (1)   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT.
   a.   Description and definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases,
when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      1.   Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) means a residential dwelling unit
located on the same lot of record as a One-Family Dwelling, per Sec.
35-3405 (“principal dwelling” or “principal structure”), that provides a
completely independent dwelling unit for one or more persons with a separate
entrance. An Accessory Dwelling Unit shall be one of four approved types,
further defined in this section below. Those four types are: Attached, Coach
House, Detached, or Interior. An Accessory Dwelling Unit is, for all purposes
of this section and this Article III, an Accessory Use and Accessory Structure,
as those terms are defined in Section
35-1203(5) of this Code.
      2.   Attached means an Accessory Dwelling Unit that expands an existing
principal one-family dwelling.
      3.   Coach House means an Accessory Dwelling Unit that is located on the
second floor of a detached garage, above parking spaces on the ground level. A
coach house is subject to all regulations applicable to major accessory
structures.
      4.   Detached means an Accessory Dwelling Unit (Freestanding) that is
located on the property such that the unit does not share any walls with the
one-family dwelling and is not a Coach House.
      5.   Interior means an Accessory Dwelling Unit that is entirely inside of
an existing one-family dwelling.
   b.   General Limitations and Requirements.
      1.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) are permitted only in the “R-2” One-
Family Residence District, and subject to the applicable development standards,
building codes, and other requirements of this section.
      2.   Accessory Dwelling Units must fall within one of the defined
categories set forth in Section
35-3411(a)(1).
      3.   The property owner of a property with an Accessory Dwelling Unit
must permanently reside in either the Principal One-Family Dwelling, or the
Accessory Dwelling Unit. Only one Accessory Dwelling Unit is allowed per lot of
record.
      4.   An Accessory Dwelling Unit cannot be used as a short-term rental or
“Vacation Rental Unit” as defined by Chapter 8 of the Moline Code of
Ordinances.
      5.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall have an entrance separate from the
entrance to the principal dwelling.
      6.   No additional parking is required for an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      7.   When converting an existing detached or attached garage to an ADU,
the required parking for the principal structure must be replaced on site.
      8.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall not have a separate driveway or curb
cut.
      9.   Accessory Dwelling Units shall be incidental to the principal one-
family dwelling use of the lot of record in terms of location and appearance
and shall not alter the character of the principal structure. The architectural
style, exterior materials, and colors of the accessory dwelling unit shall be
compatible with the principal structure.
   c.   ADU Types and Specific Requirements.
      1.   Coach House Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      (a)   Coach Houses are permitted on a lot used for a one-family dwelling
that is a minimum of 6,500 square feet in lot area.
      (b)   Coach Houses must be located in a detached garage on the upper
floor, above parking spaces located on the ground level.
      (c)   Coach Houses shall contain no more than one dwelling unit.
      (d)   Coach Houses must be designed to be compatible with the principal
dwelling, per Sec. 35-5501.
      (e)   Structures containing Coach House ADUs cannot exceed the height or
area of the principal dwelling.
      (f)   Coach House ADUs are limited to a maximum size of 1,000 square feet
of livable space.
      (g)   Required Setbacks for structures containing Coach House ADUs:
         i)   Side Setback = 5 feet/Total of both side setbacks =12 plus feet.
         ii)   Rear Setback = 10 feet.
      2.   Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      (a)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units are permitted on a lot used for a
one-family dwelling that is a minimum of 6,500 square feet in lot area.
      (b)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units may be newly constructed
buildings or converted existing accessory buildings.
      (c)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units must contain equal to or less
than 1,000 square feet of livable space and be no greater in square-footage
than the principal dwelling.
      (d)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units must be located to the rear or
side of a principal dwelling.
      (e)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units shall contain no more than one
dwelling unit.
      (f)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units must be designed to be compatible
with the principal dwelling, per Sec. 35-5501.
      (g)   Detached Accessory Dwelling Units cannot exceed the height of the
principal dwelling and must not exceed maximum lot coverage standards for the
R-2 District.
      (h)   Required Setbacks for Detached Accessory Dwelling Units are:
         i)   Side Setback = 5 feet/Total of both side setbacks =12 plus feet.
         ii)   Rear Setback = 10 feet.
      (i)   The distance between the nearest point of any portion of the new
Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit and the principal dwelling must be six feet or
greater.
      3)   Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      (a)   Attached Accessory Dwelling Units are permitted on a lot used for a
one-family dwelling that is a minimum of 6,500 square feet in lot area.
      (b)   Attached Accessory Dwelling Units must contain equal to or less
than 1,000 square feet of livable space and be no greater in square-footage
than the principal dwelling.
      (c)   Attached Accessory Dwelling Units must be located in the rear or
side of a one-family dwelling and meet principal structure setbacks.
      (d)   Attached Accessory Dwelling Units must be designed to be compatible
with the principal dwelling, per Sec.
35-5501.
      4)   Interior Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      (a)   One Interior Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted on a lot within a
principal one-family dwelling.
      (b)   An Interior Accessory Dwelling Unit must have a separate entrance
from the principal one-family dwelling.
      (c)   An Interior Accessory Dwelling Unit must contain equal to or less
than 1,000 square feet of livable space and be no greater in square-footage
than the principal dwelling.
   d.   Restrictive Covenant.
      1.   Prior to issuance of a building permit to construct an Accessory
Dwelling Unit, the owner(s) shall file with the Rock Island County Recorder of
Deeds, at the owner’s(s’) expense, a covenant by the owner(s) to the City
stating that the owner(s) agree to restrict use of the Accessory Dwelling Unit
in compliance with the requirements of this section and notify all prospective
purchasers and subsequent owners of the property of these requirements by
providing a copy of this section.
      2.   The covenant will run with the land and be binding upon the property
owner, their heirs and assigns, and upon any parties subsequently acquiring any
right, title, or interest in the property. The covenant will be in a form
prescribed by the Community & Economic Development Director that includes the
legal description of the property. The property owner(s) will return the
original covenant with recording stamp to the Community & Economic Development
Director before a building permit for the Accessory Dwelling Unit is issued.
      3.   At the request of a property owner and upon an inspection finding
that an Accessory Dwelling Unit has been removed from the property, the
Community & Economic Development Director will record, or cause to be recorded,
at the owner’s(s’) expense, a release of any previously recorded covenant for
the Accessory Dwelling Unit.
   e.   Enforcement; Violations and Penalties.
      1.   The City Administrator will have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this section, and may assign responsibility for administration
and enforcement of this section to such department or departments of the City
as may be appropriate. The City Administrator is authorized to recommend
reasonable and necessary policies, rules and regulations to carry out the
provisions of this Section, which will be approved by resolution or ordinance
of the City Council. This Section is not intended to, nor shall its effect be,
to limit any other enforcement remedies, which may be available to the City
under any other code, law, rule or regulation.
      2.   In addition to any other legal and equitable remedies available to
the City, including, without limitation, removal of an Accessory Dwelling Unit
from the City’s rental property registration list, any person who commits an
offense, violates, neglects, refuses to comply with, or assists or participates
in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or the requirements of
this Section will be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and
not more than one thousand, five-hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
violation. Each day a violation continues will constitute a new and separate
offense.
   (2)   BED AND BREAKFAST INN . Description: An operator-occupied residence
providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five
guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than ten nights in a twelve month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and Breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food
service establishments. "Operator" shall mean the owner of the bed and
breakfast establishment, or the owner's agent, who is required to reside in the
bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous property.
      a.   Regulations :
         1.   The primary use of the structure shall be residential and owner
occupied.
         2.   Individual Bed-and-Breakfast units shall not contain cooking
facilities.
         3.   Interior residential features shall be retained in a manner which
will allow re-conversion back to dwelling unit purposes.
         4.   Parking shall be provided on the site and shall be in accordance
with Article V of    this ordinance; and in addition to the two spaces required
for the residents of the dwelling unit, one space for each rental room shall be
provided.
         5.   The Bed-and-Breakfast Inn shall not be detrimental to the
neighborhood.
         6.   The Inn shall be operated in conformity with the "Bed and
Breakfast Act," 740 ILCS 90/1 et seq.
         7.   No residential structure shall be removed in order for a Bed-and-
Breakfast Inn to be established. No external remodeling or adding to existing
buildings is permitted unless required by law, in which case it shall be
architecturally compatible with the structure.
         8.   The Inn shall be used for the lodging of transient guests.
         9.   Each operator shall keep a list of the names of all persons
staying at the Bed-and-Breakfast operation; such list shall be available for
inspection by duly authorized City officials at any reasonable time.
         10.   Generally not more than 35% of the habitable floor area of the
dwelling unit shall    be used for bedrooms in the Bed-and-Breakfast Inn.
         11.   Signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Bed and Breakfast Inn.
   (3)   DAY CARE HOME (SERVING 3 TO 12 CHILDREN). Description: As per 225 ILCS
10/2.18 Sec. 2.18, a Day Care Home means family homes which receive more than
three up to a maximum of 12 children for less than 24 hours per day. The number
counted includes the family’s natural or adopted children and all other persons
under the age of 12. The term does not include facilities which receive only
children from a single household.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Must be in full compliance with Title 89, Chapter III, Subchapter
e, Part 406, Licensing Standards for Day Care Home, Illinois Administrative
Rules.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Day care home;
         2.   Day care home licensed by the State of Illinois;
         3.   Day care home serving 9-12 children.
   (4)   HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR . Description: Minor home occupations are home
occupations which shall not have nonresident customers and employees.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by
the inhabitants thereof and no other.
         2.   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not
be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the
use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or other emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry    beyond the premises.
         3.   Shall have no more than 200 square feet of floor area used for
the home occupation.
         4.   Signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
         5.   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stocks of    merchandise, supplies or products, provided that orders previously
made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. That is,
direct sales of products off display shelves, racks or from inventory is not
allowed, but a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described above.
         6.   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside
the structure.
         7.   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the Fire Marshall. No activity shall
be allowed that would interfere with radio or television reception in the area,
nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
         8.   Shall not create greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than
normal for the district in which it is located, including commercial and
general delivery services.
         9.   Shall not use material or equipment not recognized as being part
of the normal practices of owning and maintaining a residence.
         10.   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary,
garage, basement, yard or other similar sales shall not be allowed more than
twice a year, and each sale shall not last more than 72 consecutive hours, and
only goods which have been generated from within the household and not
purchased elsewhere for resale. Sales shall be conducted on the owner’s
property, except that multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on
the property of one of the participants and any such    sale shall be
considered to be a sale for all participants.
         11.   Shall have no deliveries from commercial suppliers made more
than once a week, and the deliveries shall not be made from semi-tractor
trailer trucks.
         12.   Shall have no more than two visitors/clients per day, with all
such visits occurring between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
         13.   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
            (a)   Artists and sculptors;
            (b)   Authors, desktop publishers and composers;
            (c)   Home crafts for sale off-site;
            (d)   Office facility of clergy;
            (e)   Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or
manufacturer’s representative provided that no transactions are made in person
on the premises;
            (f)   Address of convenience used solely for receiving and making
telephone calls including computer usage, mail, keeping business records in
connection with a profession or occupation;
            (g)   Individual tutoring;
            (h)   Preserving and home cooking for sale off-site;
            (i)   Individual instrument and vocal instruction provided that no
instrument may be amplified;
            (j)   Telephone solicitation work;
            (k)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Zoning
Administrator.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Minor home occupation;
         2.   Home occupation (non-impact, minor impact);
         3.   Private office of lawyer, architect, or engineer w/in own
dwelling.
   (5)   HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR . Description: Major home occupations are home
occupations where customers and employees may come to the home and where the
occupation complies with the following:
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on
by the inhabitants thereof and no other.
         2.   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not
be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the
use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry beyond the premises.
         3.   Shall have no more than 200 square feet of floor area used for
the home occupation.
         4.   Signs shall comply with all applicable requirements of
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
         5.   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stocks of    merchandise, supplies or products, provided that incidental retail
sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations, for
example, a single-chair beauty parlor would be allowed to sell combs, hair
spray, and other miscellaneous items to customers. However, a dressmaker would
be required to do only custom work for specific clients and would not be
allowed to develop stocks of dresses for    sale to the general public on-site.
         6.   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside
the structure.
         7.   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the Fire Marshall. No activity shall
be allowed that would interfere with radio or television reception in the area,
nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
         8.   Shall have adequate off-street parking spaces available to
compensate for additional parking needs generated. Deliveries from commercial
suppliers may be made more than once a week, and the deliveries shall not be
made from semi-tractor trailer trucks.
         9.   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
            (a)   Single-chair beauty parlors and barber shops;
            (b)   Photo developing and printing;
            (c)   Organized classes with up to six students at a time;
            (d)   Television and other electric or electronic repair, excluding
major    appliances such as refrigerators or storage;
            (e)   Upholstering;
            (f)   Dressmaking and millinery; and
            (g)   Woodworking excluding cabinet making.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Major home occupation;
         2.   Home occupation (major impact).
   (6)   KENNEL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL. Description: A maximum of any combination
of two dogs and/or cats (over six months of age) are permitted by right for any
one residential unit. Any residence housing a number of dogs and or cats
exceeding this number shall be considered a private residential kennel. A
private residential kennel shall meet the following requirements
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   All animals shall be owned by an occupant of the principal
residential use.
         2.   For any number over three animals, a maximum of one additional
animal per five acres shall be permitted.
         3.   Outdoor containments for animals shall be located a minimum of 25
feet from any residentially zoned property and shall be screened from adjacent
properties.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (7)   OUTBUILDINGS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES . Description: This land use
includes all active outdoor recreational facilities and accessory structures
located on a private residential lot. Materials and lighting shall limit light
levels at said property line are to be equal to or less than 0.5 foot candles
(see Division 3 of Article V). All private residential recreation facilities
and other accessory structures shall comply with the bulk requirements for
accessory structures. Common examples of these accessory uses include swing
sets, tree houses, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools, other
recreation-type equipment, and sheds.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   n/a.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (8)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE. Description: On-site long term storage
of one (1) recreational vehicle (as defined in Division 2, of Article 1) that
does not exceed 20 feet in overall length, 8 feet in width or 6 feet in overall
height. Recreational vehicles meeting these dimensions may be stored on
residential property in accordance with the following regulations. Recreational
vehicles which exceed any of those dimensions may not be stored on residential
property under any circumstances.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   No recreational vehicle, as defined, shall be parked or stored on
any lot in a residential district except behind the rear building line of the
principal structure providing all major accessory structure yard setbacks are
met by the recreation vehicle and the vehicle is parked on a concrete pad,
asphalt or concrete pavers and not parked on gravel. However, such equipment
may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period of time not to
exceed 24 hours during loading and unloading no more than twice in any
consecutive period of seven days. At least 30 hours must separate each
occurrence. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any
location not approved for such use.
         2.   No recreational vehicle intended for portable temporary housing
shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or
stored on a residential lot, or in any other location not approved for such
use.
         3.   No recreational vehicle shall be stored out of doors on
residential premises unless it is in condition for safe and effective
performance of the function for which it is    intended or can be made so at a
cost not exceeding the value of the equipment in its existing state. In no case
shall any such equipment be so stored for a period of more than six months if
not in condition for safe and efficient performance of the function for which
it is intended.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (9)   CHARGING STATIONS. Description: Private Level 1, Level 2, or Level 3
Charging Stations.
      a.   Regulations: Accessory use charging stations must comply with the
applicable regulations for principal use charging stations. Sec.
35-3408 (g)(1)(i).
      b.   Uses Similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
(Ord. No. 3012-2023; Sec. 35-3411(8) enacted; 04/11/23; Ord. No. 3020-2024;
Sec. 35-4111(1) enacted and subsequent subsections renumbered; 5/7/24; Ord. No.
3007-2025; Sec. 35-3411 amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-3412.   ACCESSORY AGRICULTURAL LAND USES.
   Agricultural accessory uses are those which are incidental and subordinate
to, and serving, the principal agricultural use. Generally, any principle
agricultural use permitted by right within the applicable zoning district may,
upon review and approval of the zoning administrator, be permitted as an
accessory use. Agricultural uses that require special use approval as a
principal use in the applicable zoning district shall also require special use
approval prior to establishment as an accessory use.
SEC. 35-3413.   ACCESSORY RECREATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL LAND USES.
   Recreational and institutional accessory uses are those which are incidental
and subordinate to, and serving, the principal recreational and institutional
use. Generally, any principle recreational and institutional use permitted by
right within the applicable zoning district may, upon review and approval of
the zoning administrator, be permitted as an accessory use. Recreational and
institutional uses that require special use approval as a principal use in the
applicable zoning district shall also require special use approval prior to
establishment as an accessory use.
SEC. 35-3414.   ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL LAND USES.
   Commercial accessory uses are those which are incidental and subordinate to,
and serving, the principal commercial use. The following provide standards for
permitted commercial accessory uses. Accessory uses not specifically listed
herein, but similar to those permitted by right, may be permitted upon site
plan review and approval by the zoning administrator or at the time of
principal use approval by the decision making body. Accessory use not listed
herein, but similar to those permitted as a special use, may be permitted with
a special use permit.
   (1)   COMPANY-PROVIDED CAFETERIA . Description: A company cafeteria is a
food service operation which provides food only to company employees and their
guests, which meets State and City food service requirements, and is located on
the same property as a principal land use engaged in an operation other than
food service.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   n/a.
         b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      1.   n/a.
   (2)   COMPANY PROVIDED DAY CARE CENTER . Description: A company provided day
care center, licensed by the State of Illinois.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Shall comply fully with all regulations pertaining to Day Care
Centers (see Sec.
35-3407(e).
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (3)   COMPANY PROVIDED ON-SITE RECREATION. Description: A company provided
on-site recreational facility is any active or passive recreational facility
located on the same site as a principal land use, and which is reserved solely
for the use of company employees and their guests.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   All structures and actively used outdoor areas shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any residentially zoned property.
         2.   Outdoor recreation facilities using night lighting shall install
and continually maintain a Type D bufferyard along all property sides abutting
residentially zoned property (see Sec.
35-5207).
         3   Facilities using night lighting shall require a special use
permit.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (4)   DWELLING UNITS ABOVE THE GROUND FLOOR . Description: Commercial
apartments are dwelling units which are located above the ground floor of a
building used for a commercial land use, most typically an office or retail
establishment.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   The gross floor area devoted to commercial apartments shall be
counted toward the floor area of a nonresidential development for purposes of
computing the floor area ratio.
         2.   A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for
each bedroom within a commercial apartment. Parking spaces provided by
nonresidential land uses on the site may be counted for this requirement with
the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Dwellings above the ground floor.
   (5)   FLEET VEHICLE STORAGE . Description: Overnight parking of more than 4
delivery or service vehicles owned by a commercial establishment, not including
vehicles issued license plates based on the gross vehicle weight (GVW).
      a.   Regulations :
         1.   All parking areas shall be paved as per the requirements of
Article V.
         2.   In no event shall the parking/storage of fleet vehicles reduce or
inhibit the use or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Article V.
         3.   Inoperative vehicles or equipment shall not be stored with fleet
vehicles.
         4.   All vehicle service shall comply fully with the Vehicle Repair
and Maintenance, minor requirements of Sec.
35-3408(n).
         5.   Storage areas shall provide a Type C bufferyard along all borders
of the storage area abutting residentially zoned property (See Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (6)   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES INCIDENTAL TO INDOOR SALES OR SERVICE.
Description: These land uses include any light industrial activity conducted
exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as indoor
sales or service, on the same site.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   The total area devoted to light industrial activity shall not
exceed 15% of the total    area of the buildings on the property, or 5,000
square feet, whichever is less.
         2.   Production area shall be physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas and shall be soundproofed to the level required by Section
35-5409 for all adjacent properties.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Assembly of small electrical appliances;
         2.   Ceramics products manufacture (for sale on premises);
         3.   Drapery and mattress manufacturing (for sale on premises);
         4.   Mattress manufacture with retail activities.
   (7)   MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS. Accessory mobile food establishment land
uses include all land uses accessory to a principal restaurant involving the
overnight parking, vehicle storage, equipment storage, food preparation, and
other services associated with food trucks that do not include the food truck
actively servicing its route or selling food to customers. Mobile food
establishment land uses shall be separate and distinct from food truck park
land uses.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Accessory mobile food establishments must comply with the
applicable requirements for principal mobile food establishments.
         2.   In no event shall the parking/storage of food trucks reduce or
inhibit the use or number of parking spaces provided on the property below the
requirement established by the provisions of Article V.
      b.   Uses Similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a
   (8)   OUTDOOR DINING. Description: This land use includes patios, decks,
lawns, sidewalks and similar outdoor areas for dining that are accessory to a
principal restaurant use. The area of outdoor dining shall not exceed 15% of
the total indoor dining area as the principal use and shall comply with all
regulations below. Outdoor dining areas that are larger than 15% of the indoor
dining area shall meet all requirements of the Sales and Service, Outdoor
Display Land Use (see Sec.
35-3408(h)).
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   The dining areas shall not be permitted in permanently protected
green space areas, required landscaped areas, or required bufferyards.
         2.   In no event shall the dining area reduce or inhibit the use or
number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement
established by the provisions of Division 1 of Article V. If the number of
provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement,
such dining area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already
present.
         3.   Dining areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly
delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
         4.   Furniture, equipment, signs, screening, or enclosures shall not
interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site traffic visibility,
including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian conflicts.
         5.   The dining area shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all
borders of the dinning area abutting residentially zoned property.
         6.   The dining area shall comply with all other City and state
regulations regarding such areas.
   (9)   OUTDOOR DISPLAY, REMOVABLE . Description: Removable outdoor display
includes portable or semi-portable racks, displays and merchandise which are
set out each morning and taken inside a building each night.
      a.   Regulations :
         1.   The total area of outdoor display area shall not exceed 5% of the
total lot area or    500 square feet, whichever is less.
         2.   All items, including display racks and other fixtures, shall be
stored in a fully enclosed building from 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. and at all
times when the business is closed.
         3.   Display areas shall not be located in any required bufferyards or
other landscaped areas, public right-of-way, or the visibility triangle (see
Sec.
35-5210).
         4.   Display areas shall not be located in required front setbacks or
any setback adjacent to residentially zoned property.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
   (10)   OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE, PERMANENT . Description: Accessory
outdoor display and storage land uses include all uses which conduct sales,
display sales or rental merchandise or equipment, or store goods, materials or
by-products outside of an enclosed building on a permanent or seasonal basis,
where such merchandise, equipment, materials and by-products are not stored
overnight in a fully enclosed building but where the area of such outdoor
display and storage is 15% or less of the total sales area of the principal
use. Land uses with outdoor storage and sales areas larger than 15% of the
sales area of the principal use shall be considered a Sales and Service,
Outdoor Display Land Use (see Sec.
35-3408(h)).
      a.   Regulations :
         1.   The display of items shall not be permitted in permanently
protected green space areas, required landscaped areas, or required
bufferyards.
         2.   The display of items shall not be permitted within required
setback areas for the principal structure.
         3.   In no event shall the display of items reduce or inhibit the use
or number of parking stalls provided on the property below the requirement
established by the provisions of Division 1 of Article V. If the number of
provided parking stalls on the property is already less than the requirement,
such display area shall not further reduce the number of parking stalls already
present.
         4.   Display areas shall be separated from any vehicular parking or
circulation area by a minimum of 10 feet. This separation shall be clearly
delimited by a physical separation such as a greenway, curb, fence, or line of
planters, or by a clearly marked paved area.
         5.   Signs, screening, enclosures, landscaping, or materials being
displayed shall not interfere in any manner with either on-site or off-site
traffic visibility, including potential traffic/traffic and traffic/pedestrian
conflicts.
         6.   Outdoor display shall be permitted during the entire calendar
year; however, if goods are removed from the display area, all support fixtures
used to display the goods shall be removed within 10 calendar days of the
goods' removal.
         7.   Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically
stored or displayed in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be displayed for
this land use.
         8.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of
the display area abutting public streets and residentially zoned property.
   (11)   OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT. Description: These accessory land uses include
a variety of entertainment uses, such as volleyball courts, horseshoe pits, and
music stages, where the area of such uses does not exceed 15% of the floor area
of the principal use.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Activity areas shall not be located closer than 100 feet to a
residentially zoned property.
         2.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of
the property abutting residentially zoned property (Sec.
35-5207).
         3.   Outdoor entertainment uses shall comply with all other city and
state regulations regarding such uses, including, but not limited to, those
dealing with noise and lighting.
   (12)   CHARGING STATIONS. Description: Public or Private Level 1, Level 2,
or Level 3 Charging Stations
      a.   Regulations: Accessory use charging stations must comply with the
applicable regulations for principal use charging stations. Sec.
35-3408(g)(1)(i).
      b.   Uses Similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   n/a.
(Ord. No. 3012-2023; Sec. 35-3414(11) enacted; 04/11/23; Ord. No. 3039-2023;
new Sec. 35-3414(7) enacted; subsequent subsections renumbered; 10/10/23)
SEC. 35-3415.   ACCESSORY TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY LAND USES.
   Transportation and utility accessory uses are those which are incidental and
subordinate to, and serving, the principal use. Generally, any principle
transportation and utility use permitted by right within the applicable zoning
district may, upon review and approval of the zoning administrator, be
permitted as an accessory use. Transportation and utility uses that require
special use approval as a principal use in the applicable zoning district shall
also require special use approval prior to establishment as an accessory use.
Additionally, the City of Moline wishes to allow the safe, effective, and
efficient use of renewable energy systems which will reduce pollution and
dependence on nonrenewable energy resources. The following provide specific
standards for accessory utility uses permitted by right or by special use
permit within the applicable zoning districts.
   (1)   GENERAL.  
      a.   A solar panel may be building mounted or freestanding.
   (2)   BUILDING MOUNTED SOLAR SYSTEMS.
      a.   Shall be mounted on a principle or major accessory structure.
      b.   Shall not project more than five (5) feet above the attached roof.
      c.   On pitched roof buildings, shall not project more than eighteen (18)
inches from the attached building wall or roof edge unless demonstrated to the
zoning administrator, that the proposed installation will integrate into the
design of the building and will not project into minimum yard setback.
      d.   On flat roofed buildings up to 40 feet in height, the roof-mounted
solar panel system is limited to a maximum height of six (6) feet above the
surface of the roof. On flat roofed buildings over forty (40) feet in height,
the roof-mounted solar panel system is limited to fifteen (15) feet above the
height of such structure. Roof-mounted solar energy systems are excluded from
the calculation of building height.
      e.   Wall-mounted solar panels may project up to two point five (2.5)
feet from a building façade and must be integrated into the structure as an
architectural feature.
   (3)   FREESTANDING SOLAR SYSTEMS.
      a.   In residential zoning districts, shall be limited to one (1) system
per lot with a maximum overall height of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum array
size of no larger than 50% of the principal structure (array size is determined
by adding the area of each separate array but does not include the space
between each array).
      b.   In non-residential and resource zoning districts, multiple systems
are allowed, however, each system shall have a maximum overall height of
fifteen (15) feet. Minimum landscaping surface ratio requirements from
Table 35-3301.1 apply.
      c.   Shall meet accessory structure setbacks established in Article III
for the applicable zoning district. In residential districts, shall be located
behind the principle structure, opposite the street, or in a rear yard.
      d.   Shall be secured from climbing and unauthorized access.
   (4)   SOLAR SYSTEMS LOCATED IN HISTORIC DISTRICT / LOCALLY DESIGNATED
LANDMARKS.
      a.   On pitched roof buildings located in a historic district, roof
mounted solar panels shall be flush mounted and not alter the slope of the
roof.
      b.   Panels shall be positioned on rear slopes not visible to the public
right-of-way.
      c.   Panels shall be positioned behind existing architectural features
such as parapets, dormers, and chimneys to limit their visibility.
      d.   Solar panels and mounting systems shall use compatible colors to
established roof materials.
      e.   Panels on flat roofs should remain unseen from the public right-of-
way.”
(Ord. No. 3003-2012; Sec. 35-3415 repealed; new Sec. 35-3415 enacted; 01/17/12;
Ord. No. 3015-2019; Sec. 35-3415 repealed; new Sec. 35-3415 enacted; 05/28/19;
Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-3416(1)b repealed.; 02/4/25; Ord. No. 3036-2025;
Sec. 35-3415(3)a. amended; 9/9/25)
SEC. 35-3416.   ACCESSORY STORAGE, WHOLESALING AND INDUSTRIAL LAND USES.
   Storage, wholesaling and industrial accessory uses are those which are
incidental and subordinate to, and serving, the principal storage, wholesaling
and industrial use. The following provide standards for permitted storage,
wholesaling and industrial accessory uses. Accessory uses not specifically
listed herein, but similar thereto, may be permitted upon site plan review and
approval by the zoning administrator or at the time of principal use approval
by the decision making body.
   (1)   INDOOR SALES INCIDENTAL TO STORAGE OR LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE .
Description: These land uses include any retail sales activity conducted
exclusively indoors which is incidental to a principal land use such as
warehousing, wholesaling or any light industrial land use, on the same site.
      a.   Regulations:
         1.   Adequate parking, per the requirements of Division 2 of Article
V, shall be provided for customers. Said parking shall be in addition to that
required for customary light industrial activities.
         2.   The total area devoted to sales activity shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the buildings on the property. Areas devoted to artisan
studio uses such as custom ceramics, glass, wood, paper, fabric, and similar
crafts may exceed 5,000 square feet with the granting of a special use permit
for such use.
         3.   Shall provide restroom facilities directly accessible from retail
sales area.
         4.   Retail sales area shall by physically separated by a wall from
other activity areas.
      b.   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
         1.   Services, not more than 5% comes from retail (except vehicle
repair).
SEC. 35-3417.   GENERAL ACCESSORY LAND USES.
   (a)   CARETAKER'S RESIDENCE. Description: This land use includes any
residential unit which provides permanent housing for a caretaker of the
subject property in either an attached or detached configuration.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall provide housing only for on-site caretaker and family.
      b.   Shall provide a minimum of two on-site parking spaces.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   Living quarters for persons employed on premises;
      b.   Residence of caretaker/security personnel.
   (b)   DRAINAGE STRUCTURE. Description: These include all improvements
including, but not limited to, swales, ditches, culverts, drains, tiles,
gutters, levees, basins, detention or retention facilities, impoundments, and
dams intended to effect the direction, rate and/or volume of stormwater runoff,
snow melt, and/or channelized flows across, within and/or away from a site.
   (1)   Regulations :
      a.   Shall comply with Sec.
35-3420 for the placement of drainage structures in permanently protected green
space areas.
      b.   Shall comply with Article IV regarding protection measures for
drainageways.
      c.   Any drainage improvement shall not increase the rate or volume of
discharge from the subject property onto any adjacent properties, except where
regional stormwater management facilities such as storm sewers and retention or
detention facilities are in place to serve the subject property.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (c)   EXTERIOR COMMUNICATION DEVICES. Description: This land use includes
any device (e.g. satellite dishes, ham radio Towers, tv. antennas) used for
communication reception, other than those defined as Communication Towers.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Except for television antennas and satellite dishes 18" or smaller,
exterior communication devices shall not be visible from a public street.
      b.   Devices must be sited an equal or greater number of feet from
property lines as their maximum height and may not be located in a required
street yard.
      c.   The applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable mechanisms have
been used to mitigate safety hazards and the visual impacts of the device.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (d)   FILLING. Description: Filling includes any activity in an area over
4,000 square feet, or greater than 500 cubic yards of fill, involving the
modification of the earth's surface above that in its undisturbed state.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall comply with Sec.
35-3420 regarding filling activities in permanently protected green space
areas.
      b.   Shall comply with Article IV regarding protection measures for
natural resources.
      c.   Shall not create drainage onto other properties.
      d.   Shall not impede on-site drainage.
      e.   Shall comply with provisions of the Moline Subdivision Ordinance.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC:
      a.   n/a.
   (e)   HELIPORT. Description: Facility providing takeoff and landing services
only for helicopters. Servicing and storage of helicopters is prohibited.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   Shall comply with all state and federal aviation standards and
permitting    requirements.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (f)   LAWN CARE. Description: Lawn care includes any activity involving the
preparation of the ground, installation and maintenance of vegetative ground
cover (including gardens) which complies with the City of Moline Code of
Ordinances. Lawn care is not permitted in certain permanently protected green
space areas (see Sec.
35-3420).
   (1)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (g)   ON-SITE PARKING LOT. Description: On-site parking lots are any areas
located on the same site as the principal land use which are used for the
temporary parking of vehicles which are fully registered, licensed, and
operative.
   (1)   Regulations:
      a.   n/a.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   Off-street parking facilities for permitted uses;
      b.   Parking lots accessory to use in adjoining or less restrictive
district;
      c.   Private garages or parking areas;
      d.   Public parking lot (customer or accessory).
SEC. 35-3418.   TEMPORARY LAND USES.
   (a)   Temporary uses are those which are present on a property for limited
and specified period of time. The following provide standards for permitted
temporary uses. Temporary uses not listed herein, but similar to those
permitted by right, may be permitted upon site plan review and approval by the
zoning administrator. Temporary uses not listed herein, but similar to those
permitted with a special use permit, may be permitted upon approval of a
special use permit by the Plan Commission. Whether permitted by right or with a
special use permit, all temporary uses shall comply with the following general
requirements, in addition to those specific to the temporary use:
   (1)   There is no other valid temporary use on the parcel or lot;
   (2)   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and
general welfare, and the use is consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Code and the specific zoning district in which it will be located;
   (3)   The use is compatible in intensity, characteristics and appearance
with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity of the temporary use, and the
use will not be adversely affected by the use of activities associated with it.
Factors in determining compatibility include, but are not limited to location,
noise, odor, light, dust control and hours of operation;
   (4)   The use will not cause traffic volumes to exceed the capacity of
affected streets;
   (5)   Adequate off-street parking to serve the use is provided in accordance
with Sec.
35-5100 of this Code. The use shall not displace the required off-street
parking spaces or loading areas of the principal permitted uses on the site;
   (6)   The entrance and exit drives comply with this Code, except that paving
shall not be required for a temporary use;
   (7)   Permanent hook-ups to utility services are not provided;
   (8)   Structures and/or display of merchandise comply with the yard and
property line setback requirements of the zone district within which the use is
located. The items shall be displayed so as not to interfere with the sight
visibility triangle of the intersection of the curb    line of any two streets
or a driveway and a street. In no case shall items be located within the public
right-of-way;
   (9)   Uses involving the sale of merchandise have obtained a sales tax
license from the City Finance Department in accordance with City sales tax
ordinances;
   (10)   Signage shall comply with all applicable requirements of
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of Ordinances; and
   (11)   A minimum of 30 calendar days has lapsed since the previous temporary
use on the parcel or lot expired.
   (b)   BARROW PIT . Description: This land use includes the one-time
excavation of a property in order to obtain fill material to be taken off-site
and where the excavation area is not intended to be refilled.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Excavation shall comply with all extraction use regulations as per
Sec.
35-3410(j).
      b.   Unless approved otherwise at the time of Special Use approval, the
excavation activity shall last no longer than one year.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (c)    CONCRETE BATCH PLANT. Description: This land use includes concrete
mixing and truck loading facilities along with stock piles of materials and
attendant office trailers, but not the overnight storage of vehicles.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Facility shall provide a Type D bufferyard along all borders of the
property abutting residential properties (see Sec.
35-5207).
      b.   All outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from residentially zoned property. No materials shall be stacked or otherwise
stored so as to be visible over bufferyard screening elements.
      c.   Facility shall be removed within one year from issuance temporary
use permit. Any extensions shall be permitted only as a Special Use.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (d)   CONTRACTOR'S ON-SITE EQUIPMENT STORAGE FACILITY. Description: Includes
any structure or outdoor storage area designed for the on-site storage of
construction equipment and/or materials for an active construction project.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of occupancy
permit.
      b.   Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365 days
shall require a special use permit for a maximum of one additional year.
      c.   Shall be limited to a maximum area not exceeding 10% of the
property's gross site area.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (e)   CONTRACTOR'S PROJECT OFFICE . Description: Includes any structure
containing an on-site construction management office for an active construction
project.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Structure shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in gross floor area.
      b.   Facility shall be removed within 10 days of issuance of occupancy
permit.
      c.   Shall not be used for sales activity.
      d.   Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365 days
may receive an extension of up to one additional year by the zoning
administrator. All other extensions shall require a special use permit.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (f)   OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY . Description: Includes any organized outdoor
assembly of more than 100 persons, and as defined and regulated by City policy,
Code or other pertinent requirements related thereto.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   A street use permit is required for all activities within a
dedicated public right-of-way.
      b.   Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
      c.   Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in
the sign code.
      d.   Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be
provided, and shall be described in the application.
      e.   If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area,
activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
      f.   Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made, and shall be
described within the application.
      g.   The use of amplified sound equipment shall require approval and
permitting as per the City’s existing requirements.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (g)   OUTDOOR SALES, AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS . Description: Includes any
outdoor display or sale of agricultural products not otherwise regulated by the
City of Moline Code of Ordinances. Examples of this land use include but are
not limited to: farmer’s markets and produce stands.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
      b.   Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in
the sign code.
      c.   Adequate parking shall be provided.
      d.   If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales
and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (h)   OUTDOOR SALES, GENERAL . Description: Includes the display of any
items outside the confines of a building which is not otherwise permitted as a
permitted or special use, or a special event otherwise regulated by the City of
Moline Code of Ordinances. Examples of this land use include but are not
limited to: seasonal garden shops, tent sales, parking lot sales, food stands,
and vendors.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Display shall be limited to a maximum of 12 days in any calendar
year.
      b.   Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
including vehicular sight distances.
      c.   Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in
the sign code.
      d.   Adequate parking shall be provided.
      e.   If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales
and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (i)   PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT. Description: Includes a purpose-built,
fully-enclosed container placed outdoors which is designed and intended to
temporarily serve as a storage or containment unit for household or commercial
goods or equipment. Outdoor storage land uses that do not meet this definition
or these regulations may be considered Outdoor Display and Storage, Permanent
(see Sec.
35-3414).
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations – Residential / Resource Zoning Districts
      a.   Units must be accessory to a principal building or use.
      b.   There shall be no more than 1 portable outdoor storage unit per
property.
      c.   Units shall not exceed 16 feet in length, 8 feet in width, and 8
feet in height.
      d.   Units shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from all property lines.
      e.   No unit shall remain on the property for more than 30 days per year.
      f.   Units shall be placed on a driveway or other paved surface.
      g.   Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right-of-
way, or in a location that obstructs traffic visibility.
      h.   Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust,
peeling paint, and other forms of visible deterioration.
   (2)   Temporary Use Regulations – Non-Residential / Non-Resource Zoning
Districts
      a.   Units must be accessory to a principal building or use.
      b.   There shall be no more than 3 portable outdoor storage units per
property.
      c.   Units shall not exceed 40 feet in length, 8 feet in width, and 9
feet in height.
      d.   Units shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from all property lines.
      e.   No unit shall remain on the property for more than 90 days per year.
      f.   Stacking of units is not permissible.
      g.   Units shall be placed on a paved surface within a side or rear yard.
      h.   Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right-of-
way, or in a location that obstructs traffic visibility.
      i.   Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust,
peeling paint, and other forms of visible deterioration.
   (3)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (j)   REAL ESTATE SALES OFFICE. Description: Includes any building which
serves as an on-site sales office for a development project.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in gross floor area.
      b.   Facility shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use
within 10 days of the completion of sales activity.
      c.   Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in
the sign code.
      d.   Projects requiring land use to be in place for more than 365 days
may receive an extension of up to one additional year by the zoning
administrator. All other extensions shall require a special use permit.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (k)   RELOCATABLE BUILDING . Description: Includes any manufactured building
which serves as a temporary building for less than six months. (Facilities
serving for more than six months shall be considered special uses and subject
to the general standards and procedures presented in Sec.
35-2206.)
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Shall conform to all setback regulations.
      b.   Shall conform to all building code regulations.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (l)   RUMMAGE SALES, PERSONAL. Description: Includes any occasional sale of
personal property at a residence or non-commercial property by one or more
families in a neighborhood or by a group, including, but not limited to garage
sales, yard sales, attic sales, auctions, estate sales, and moving sales.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations :
      a.   Sales shall be limited to a maximum of 2 occurrences per year.
      b.   Each sale shall not last more than 72 consecutive hours.
      c.   Sales must only include excess goods which have been generated from
within the household and not acquired or produced specifically for resale.
      d.   Sales shall be conducted on the owner’s property except that
multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of
the participants and any such sale shall be considered to be a sale for all
participants.
      e.   Merchandise and display units shall be removed or placed indoors at
conclusion of sales.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
   (m)   VEHICLE SALES, PERSONAL. Description: Includes temporarily parking and
offering for sale any motor vehicle as defined by the Illinois Traffic Code, or
any personal property item which is required by Illinois law to be registered
or licensed. This description shall not include persons or businesses that are
properly licensed and zoned to sell vehicles on a recurring basis, or vehicles
that are routinely used for transitory or transportation purposes.
   (1)   Temporary Use Regulations:
      a.   A maximum of 2 vehicles per property per calendar year, regardless
of the number of owners or tenants, may be displayed for sale at the owner’s
residence or principal place of business or employment.
      b.   Each vehicle may be displayed for a maximum period of 60 consecutive
or cumulative days per year.
      c.   Vehicles shall comply with all site parking standards and the Moline
Traffic Code.
   (2)   Uses similar from ILQCUZC :
      a.   n/a.
(Ord. No. 3033-2008; Sec.
34-3418 repealed; new Sec.
34-3418 enacted; 05/13/08)
SEC. 35-3419.   GROUP DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   DEFINITION. A group development is any development containing:
   (1)   Any single structure or combination of structures on a single lot
which together contain 50 or more dwelling units or 10 or more non-residential
uses; and/or,
   (2)   Any single structure or combination of structures on a single lot
devoted to institutional, office or commercial land uses containing more than
50,000 gross square feet of floor area.
   (3)   An off-street parking area (surface or structure) located within the
B-2 zoning district that exceeds 2,000 square feet, inclusive of parking
stalls, aisles, landscaping, and/or hardscape areas, that is created, improved,
repaved, or upgraded.
   (4)   A proposal to clear, demolish, or otherwise remove a building within
the B-2 zoning district whether for the purpose of creating parking, or a
vacant property.
   (5)   Common examples of group developments include apartment buildings,
apartment complexes, condominium complexes, strip centers, shopping centers,
office centers, and when located within the B-2 zoning district, parking areas
as described above.
(Ord. No. 3002-2019; Sec.
35-3419(a)(3)(4)(5) repealed; new Sec.
35-3419(a)(3)(4)(5) enacted; 03/05/19)
   (b)   PERMITTED BY RIGHT:
   (c)   SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS. All group developments shall be permitted
only with special use approval. Any land use that is permitted as a permitted
by right land use or as a special use within the applicable zoning district(s)
is permitted to locate within a group development. The detailed land use
regulations of this subsection that pertain to individual land uses shall also
apply to individual land uses within a group development, as shall all other
applicable provisions of this Code. Therefore, land uses in the zoning district
shall be permitted by right within an approved group development (unless
otherwise restricted by the conditions of approval imposed during the special
use approval for the group development as a whole), and land uses permitted as
a special use in the zoning district shall be permitted within the group
development only with special use approval for the specific use. In all cases,
the following special use conditions shall be applied to the group development
as a whole, and to individual uses within the group development:
   (1)   All required off-street parking spaces and access drives shall be
located entirely within the boundaries of the group development.
   (2)   The development shall contain a sufficient number of waste bins to
accommodate all trash and waste generated by the land uses in a convenient
manner.
   (3)   No group development shall take access to a local residential street.
   (4)   All development located within a group development shall be located so
as to comply with the intent of this Code regarding setbacks of structures and
buildings from lot lines. As such, individual principal and accessory
structures and buildings located within group developments shall be situated
within building area envelopes that serve to demonstrate complete compliance
with said intent. Said building area envelopes shall be depicted on the site
plan required for review of group developments. The use of this approach to
designing group developments will also ensure the facilitation of subdividing
group developments in    the future, (if such action is so desired).
   (5)   The following standards shall apply to all new institutional,
commercial, and office buildings in excess of 50,000 gross square feet and to
all multi-building group developments in which the combined total of all
structures on a site, regardless of diverse ownership, use or tenancy, combine,
to exceed 50,000 square feet, and to the development of all new parking areas
in excess of 2,000 square feet when located witin the B-2 zoning district.
These conditions shall also be applied to the entire building and site in
instances where building additions bring the total building size to over 50,000
gross square feet. Such conditions shall apply to both the building additions
and to older portions of the building and the site that were constructed prior
to the adoption of this Section
34-3419(c)(5). This 50,000 square foot limit shall apply to individual free-
standing buildings and to group developments in which the combined total of all
structures on a site, regardless of diverse use or tenancy, combine to more
than 50,000 gross square feet:
      a.   Building exterior materials shall be of high quality on all sides of
the structure including glass, brick, decorative concrete block, or stucco.
Decorative architectural metal with concealed fasteners may be permitted if
approved with the special use.
      b.   Building exterior design shall be unified in design and materials
throughout the structure, and shall be complementary to other structures in the
vicinity. However, the development shall employ varying building setbacks,
height, roof, treatments, door and window openings, and other structural and
decorative elements to reduce the apparent size and scale of the structure. A
minimum of 20% of the combined façades of the structure shall employ actual
façade protrusions or recesses. A minimum of 20% of the combined linear roof
eave or parapet lines of the structure shall employ differences in height of 8
feet or more. Roofs with particular slopes    may be required by the City to
complement existing buildings or otherwise establish a particular aesthetic
objective.
      c.   Mechanical equipment, refuse containers and any permitted outdoor
storage shall be fully concealed from on-site and off-site ground level views,
with materials identical to those used on the building exterior.
      d.   Standard corporate trademark building designs, materials,
architectural elements, and colors all shall be acceptable, as determined by
the City, only as subtlety integrated into the more generic design of the
building as a whole. Color schemes of all architectural elements should be
muted, neutral, non-reflective and non-use nor tenant specific.
      e.   Public entryways shall be prominently indicated from the building’s
exterior design, and shall be emphasized by on-site traffic flow patterns. All
sides of the building that directly face or abut a public street shall have at
least one public entrance.
      f.   Loading areas shall be completely screened from surrounding roads,
residential, office, and commercial properties. Said screening may be through
internal loading areas, screening wall that matches the building exterior in
materials and design, fully opaque landscaping at time of planting, or
combinations of the above. Gates and fencing may be used for security purposes,
but not for screening, and shall be of high aesthetic quality.
      g.   Vehicle access from public streets shall be designed to accommodate
peak traffic volumes without disrupting traffic on public streets from
inadequate throat length access drive width or design or inadequate driveway
location. The impact of traffic generated by the proposed development shall be
demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis performed by the applicant’s traffic
engineer to not adversely impact off site public roads, intersections,
interchanges during the traffic peak associated with a full parking lot. Where
the project shall adversely impact off-site traffic, the City may deny the
application, may require a size reduction in the proposed development, or may
require off-site improvements.
      h.   Parking lot design shall employ interior landscaped islands with a
minimum of 400 square feet at all parking isle ends, and in addition shall
provide a minimum of one landscaped island of a minimum of 400 square feet in
each parking isle for every 20 cars in that aisle. Aisle-end islands shall
count toward meeting this requirement. Landscaped medians shall be used to
break large parking areas into distinct pods, with a maximum of 100 spaces in
any one pod.
      i.   A minimum of one two-hundred square foot cart return area shall be
provided for every parking area pod. There shall be no exterior cart return nor
cart storage areas located within 25 feet of the front lot line in areas
located between the building and a public street.
      j.   The applicant shall demonstrate full compliance with City standards
for stormwater, utilities, erosion control and public safety.
      k.   On site landscaping shall be provided per the landscaping
requirements of this Code except that building foundation landscaping and paved
area landscaping shall be provided at 1.5 times the required landscape points
for development in the zoning district.
      l.   A conceptual plan for exterior signage shall be provided at time of
special use application that provides for coordinated and complimentary
exterior sign location, configurations, and colors throughout the planned
development. All freestanding signage within the development shall compliment
the on-building signage. Freestanding sign materials and design shall
compliment building exterior, and may    not exceed the maximum height
requirement of the zoning ordinance.
      m.   The entire development shall provide for full and safe pedestrian
and bicycle access within the development, and shall provide appropriate
connections to the existing and planned pedestrian and bicycle facilities in
the community and in surrounding neighborhoods, including sidewalk connections
to all building entrances from all public streets. The development shall
provide secure bicycle parking and pedestrian furniture in appropriate
quantities and location. A central pedestrian gathering area shall be provided.
      n.   Where such developments are proposed to provide a new location for a
business already located within the community, a required condition of approval
for the new development shall be a prohibition on conditions of sale, lease, or
use of the previously occupied building or site which provide limits beyond the
range of applicable local, state or federal regulations. If such limits are
required, the applicant may seek City approval to demolish the previously
occupied structure and prepare the site for some future development.
      o.   The requirements found within Divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Article V
of this
Chapter 35 shall apply to the development of all parking areas and structures
in excess of 2,000 square feet and located within the B-2 zoning district, and
said parking areas and structures shall be consistent with Sections
35-3309(a) and (b).
      p.   The developer of a new parking area or structure in excess of 2,000
square feet within the B-2 zoning district shall demonstrate that there are no
viable existing locations within 600 feet of the proposed parking site in which
to collocate parking spaces as an alternative to developing a new such parking
facility.
      q.   New parking areas in excess of 2,000 square feet within the B-
2 zoning district shall include masonry perimeter walls when adjacent to public
right-of-way not less than 30 inches nor more than 42 inches in height. Non-
opaque plant material may be incorporated on top of the wall. Total height of
the wall and plantings shall not exceed 48 inches.
      r.   New parking areas in excess of 2,000 square feet within the B-
2 zoning district shall be designed and constructed consistent with the City of
Moline Downtown Streetscape Master Plan.
      s.   In addition to the review requirement of all design and construction
related to development within the “downtown urban redevelopment zone,” new
parking areas in excess of 2,000 square feet wthin the B-2 zoning district
shall comply with the Policy Statement of Guiding Principles for design and
construction within the Moline Downtown Urban Redevelopment Zone as approved by
the Moline City Council per Council Bill/Resolution No. 1131-2018 on October 9,
2018.
      t.   The Plan Commission may waive any of the above standards by a three-
fourths (3/4) vote of members in attendance, but only if supplemental design
elements or improvements are incorporated into the project that compensate for
the waiver of the particular standard.
(Ord. No. 3002-2019; Sec.
35-3419(c) introductory paragraph repealed; new Sec.
35-3419(c) introductory paragraph enacted; 03/05/19)
(Ord. No. 3002-2019; Sec.
35-3419(o) – (s) repealed; new Sec.
35-3419(o) – (s) enacted; remaining subsection consecutively relettered to (t);
03/05/19)
SEC. 35-3420.   NATURAL RESOURCE DISRUPTION AND REQUIRED MITIGATION STANDARDS.
   In all developments, certain areas may be required to be set aside as
permanently protected green space for the purpose of natural resource
protection, to meet a Minimum Green Space Ratio (GSR) requirement, or to meet a
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) requirement. Where such permanently
protected green space is required, and where the land use is also permitted per
the land use regulations of the applicable zoning district, the following
regulations shall also be employed to establish land use regulations. All land
uses listed elsewhere in this Division, but not listed in this section, are
prohibited in permanently protected green spaces.
   For all land uses, disruption to natural resource areas shall comply with
the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance pertaining to drainage, grading
and erosion control. All land uses located within Permanently Protected Green
Space Areas shall comply with the following:
   (1)   CULTIVATION.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (Permanently protected green space areas
other than permanently protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Permitted only if designated on the submitted site plan, and/or
the recorded plat or as an "Area which may be used for cultivation."
   (2)   RECREATIONAL, OUTDOOR - PASSIVE.
      a.   Permitted by Right (All permanently protected green space areas):
         1.   Limited to a 20 foot wide area in permanently protected natural
resource areas. Permitted in other permanently protected green space areas
without restriction.
         2.   Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas beyond said 20 foot wide area.
   (3)   RECREATIONAL, OUTDOOR – ACTIVE PUBLIC.
      a.   Permitted by Right (Permanently protected green space areas other
than permanently    protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas, other than permanently protected
natural resource areas and    per Article IV.
   (4)   INSTITUTIONAL, OUTDOOR .
      a.   Permitted by Right (Permanently protected green space areas other
than permanently    protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas.
   (5)   LAWN CARE .
      a.   Permitted by Right (Permanently protected green space areas other
than permanently    protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Non-native ground cover shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas. Clearance of understory growth
shall be permitted.
      b.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected natural
resource areas except    wetlands):
         1.   Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is
permitted, with the exception of a 20 foot wide access path which may be
cleared for passive recreation purposes.
         2.   Each property abutting a natural resource area shall be limited
to one such access path.
         3.   Non-native vegetation (such as domestic lawn grasses) shall not
be introduced into natural resource areas beyond said 20 foot wide access path.
   (6)   GOLF COURSE.
      a.   Permitted by Right (Permanently protected green space areas other
than permanently    protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Non-native vegetation shall not be permitted to spread into
permanently protected natural resource areas.
      b.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected natural
resource areas):
         1.   Only disturbance associated with the care of native vegetation is
permitted. Natural resource areas which are located within or adjacent to golf
play areas shall be incorporated into the course design as out-of-bounds play
hazards, and shall be maintained in their natural state.
   (7)   ANY PERMITTED TEMPORARY USE.
      a.   Permitted by Right (Permanently protected green space areas other
than permanently protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Activity shall in no manner encroach upon permanently protected
natural resources areas.
   (8)   DRAINAGE STRUCTURE.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected green space
areas):
         1.   Structure shall be deemed necessary by the City engineer;
         2.   Natural native vegetation shall be established or restored in
disturbed areas.
   (9)   FILLING.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected green space
areas):
   (10)   INDIVIDUAL SEPTIC DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (Permanently protected green space areas
other than permanently protected natural resource areas as per Article IV):
         1.   Shall not locate closer than 30 feet to any other permanently
protected natural resource area.
   (11)   ROAD AND/OR BRIDGE.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected green space
areas):
         1.   May locate in or across a natural resource areas only in
conjunction with a boat    landing, or when deemed essential by the Department
of Public Works.
         2.   May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if
designed to provide an essential service to an activity area located within the
green space area which cannot be efficiently reached from another point.
         3.   Road networks shall be designed to circumvent permanently
protected green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for intrusions and
crossings.
   (12)   UTILITY LINES AND RELATED FACILITIES.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected green space
areas):
         1.   May locate in or across a natural resource areas only when deemed
essential by the Department of Public Works.
         2.   May locate in other permanently protected green space areas if
designed to provide an essential service to an activity area located within the
green space area which cannot be efficiently reached from another point.
         3.   In general, utility lines shall be designed to circumvent
permanently protected green space areas, thereby eliminating the need for
intrusions and crossings.
   (13)   PIERS AND WHARFS.
      a.   Permitted as a Special Use (All permanently protected green space
areas):
         1.   A site plan shall be required per Sec.
35-2106 for construction, erection, placement or extension of a pier or wharf,
with specific information provided regarding: its location in relation to the
shoreline and abutting riparian property lines, and regarding dimensions and
building materials.
DIVISION 5. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
AND FACILITIES
SEC. 35-3500.   FINDINGS.
   The City Council hereby finds that the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“the Act”), grants the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over:
   (1)   The regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF)
emissions from Telecommunications Facilities; and
   (2)   The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF
spectrum. The City’s regulation of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in
the City of Moline will not have the effect of prohibiting any person from
providing wireless telecommunications services in violation of the Act.
   This division has been taken in whole from the previous zoning code as found
in
Chapter 35, Article IV.
SEC. 35-3501.   PURPOSES.
   The general purpose of this Division is to regulate the placement,
construction, and modification of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in
order to protect the health, safety, prosperity and welfare of the public,
while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the
competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City. Specifically,
the purposes of this Division are:
   (1)   To regulate the location of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities
in the City;
   (2)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities;
   (3)   To minimize adverse visual impact of Towers and Telecommunications
Facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
   (4)   To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of Towers and Antenna
Support Structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use Towers;
   (5)   To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that
will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new Tower structures
to support antenna and Telecommunications facilities;
   (6)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by Towers and
Telecommunications Facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and
carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no
longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound;
   (7)   To ensure that Towers and Telecommunications Facilities are compatible
with surrounding land uses;
   (8)   To provide Overlay Districts in which the zoning regulations permit
the development of wireless communication facilities, which are consistent with
the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in the best interest
of the future of the City of Moline;
   (9)   To provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of
Wireless Communication Facilities; and
   (10)   To streamline and expedite the permitting procedures to effect
compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
SEC. 35-3502.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this Division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (1)   ANTENNA ARRAY means one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals or for
purposes of Wireless Communications, which may include omni-directional antenna
(rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The Antenna
Array does not include the Support Structure.
   (2)   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY means an Antenna Array that
is attached to an existing building or structure (Attachment Structure), which
structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water
Towers, rooftops, Towers with any accompanying pole or device (Attachment
Device) which attaches the Antenna Array to the existing building or structure
and associated connection cables, and an Equipment Facility which may be
located either inside or outside of the Attachment Structure.
   (3)   APPLICANT means any person that applies for a Tower development
permit.
   (4)   APPLICATION means the process by which the owner of a parcel of land
within the City submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or
erect a Tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all written
documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or
forum, made by an Applicant to the City concerning such request.
   (5)   COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING means an Antenna Array use of a common
Wireless Communication Facility or common site by more than one wireless
communication license holder for more than one type of communications
technology and/or placement of a Wireless Communication Facility on a structure
owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
   (6)   ENGINEER means any engineer licensed by the State of Illinois.
   (7)   EQUIPMENT FACILITY means any structure used to contain ancillary
equipment for a Wireless Communication Facility which includes cabinets,
shelters, a build out of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar
structures.
   (8)   FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (9)   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
   (10)   FTA means the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
   (11)   HEIGHT . When referring to a Wireless Communication Facility, Height
shall mean the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
Wireless Communication Facility, excluding the Antenna Array.
   (12)   NON-TOWER SUPPORT STRUCTURE means any building or structure other
than a Tower which can be used for location of Telecommunications facilities.
   (13)   OWNER means any person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding ten
years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the City who desires to develop
or construct, build, modify, or erect a Tower upon such parcel of land.
   (14)   PERSON is any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for
profit or not for profit.
   (15)   SETBACK means the required distance from the property line of the
parcel on which the Wireless Communication Facility is located to the base of
the Support Structure and equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in
the case of guy-wire supports, the guy anchors.
   (16)   STEALTH means any Tower or Telecommunications Facility, which is
designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not
limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated
into architectural elements, and Towers designed to look other than like a
Tower such as light poles, and trees. The term Stealth does not necessarily
exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole Tower designs.
   (17)   SUPPORT STRUCTURE means a structure designed and constructed
specifically to support an Antenna Array, and may include a monopole, self-
supporting (lattice) Tower, guy-wire-support Tower and other similar structures
constructed by grade. Any device (Attachment Device) which is used to attach an
attached Wireless Communication Facility to an existing building or structure
(Attachment Structure) shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations
applicable to Support Structures.
   (18)   TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY shall mean a Wireless
Communication Facility to be placed in use for 90 or fewer days.
   (19)   TOWER means a support structure as defined herein; provided, however,
that neither “support structure” nor “Tower” shall include amateur radio
operators’ equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
   (20)   TOWER USE PERMIT (TUP) means a permit issued by the City of Moline
specifically for the location construction and use of a Wireless Communication
Facility subject to an approved site plan and any special conditions determined
by the zoning administrator to be appropriate under the provision of this
Division.
   (21)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS means any personal wireless services as
defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently
exist. This term also includes other means of wireless communications or
transmission of signals via electromagnetic waves such as, but not limited to
radio and television broadcasts, internet or broadband services, microwave
communications, and similar services or technologies that require the use of an
Antenna Array, Tower, and/or Support Structure.
   (22)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY means any staffed or unstaffed
facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communications
services, consisting of an Antenna Array, connection cables, an Equipment
Facility, and a Support Structure to achieve the necessary elevation or any
combination of one or more of the above items or other similar or related
components.
(Ord. No. 3003-2008; Sec.
35-3502 (1), (21), (22) repealed; new Sec.
35-3502 (1), (21), (22) enacted; 01/22/08)
SEC. 35-3503.   DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   The City of Moline shall be divided into two Wireless Communication
Facility Overlay Districts. Said districts shall include all lands situated
within the City of Moline.
   (1)   Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 1 (“Overlay
District”) shall include only those areas described in
Appendix B hereto and areas subsequently added thereto less any areas
subsequently deleted therefrom. Attached Wireless Communication Facilities with
support structure shall be permitted as provided herein in Wireless
Communication Facility Overlay District 1.
   (2)   Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 2 shall consist of
all lands not included in Wireless Communication Facility Telecommunications
Overlay District 1 which are located within the City of Moline. Attached
Wireless Communication Facilities shall be permitted as setout herein in
Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 2. Wireless Communication
Facilities with support structure shall not be permitted under this Division in
Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 2.
   (b)   PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall install or
construct any Wireless Communication Facility unless and until a Tower Use
Permit (TUP) has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this Division.
   (c)   PRE-EXISTING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Wireless Communications
Facilities for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date of
this Division shall be considered non-conforming and shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this Division unless and until such facilities are
repaired, remodeled, altered or reconstructed in any manner, which repair,
remodeling, alteration or reconstruction shall be completed in conformity with
this Division.
   (d)   AMATEUR RADIO EXCLUSION. This Article shall not govern the
installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
"receive only" antennas. Such installations shall comply with any other
applicable provisions of the zoning code.
   (e)   RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES . This Division shall supersede all
conflicting requirements of other Ordinances regarding the locating and
permitting of Wireless Communication Facilities, except as specified in (g),
below.
   (f)   AIRPORT ZONING . Any Wireless Communication Facility located or
proposed to be located in airport areas governed by the F.A.A. shall also
comply with the provisions of all applicable local, state and federal airport
regulations.
   (g)   BUILDING CODES . Construction of all Wireless Communication Facilities
shall comply with the requirements of the City of Moline Building Codes and
permitting process in addition to the requirements of this Division.
SEC. 35-3504.   DEVELOPMENT OF TOWERS.
   (a)   A Tower shall be a permitted use of land in Overlay District 1. No
person shall build, erect, or construct a Tower upon any parcel of land within
Overlay District 1, unless a permit shall have been issued, as specified in
Sec.
35-3506 and Sec.
35-3507. Application shall be made to the zoning administrator in the manner
provided in this Division.
   (b)   A Tower shall be a special use of land in all areas of all zoning
districts not within Overlay District 1.
   (c)   No person shall build, erect, or construct a Tower upon any parcel of
land within any zoning district set forth above unless a permit shall have been
issued by the zoning administrator and approval of the City Plan Commission and
City Council.
   (d)      The height of Towers shall be governed by Sec.
35-3509 ”Height Standards” below. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150
feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of 150 feet in accordance with Section
35-3524 “Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications.”
   (e)   No new Tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the City
unless the Tower is capable of supporting another Person’s operating
Telecommunications Facilities comparable in weight, size, and surface area to
the Telecommunications Facilities installed by the Applicant on the Tower
within six months of the completion of the Tower construction, as specified in
the Collocation Policy contained in Sec.
35-3505.
   (f)   The zoning administrator may require an Applicant to supplement any
information that said official considers inadequate or that the Applicant has
failed to supply. The said official may deny an Application on the basis that
the Applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this
subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the City in a prompt manner and
all decisions shall be support in writing setting forth the reasons for
approval or denial.
SEC. 35-3505.   SHARED FACILITIES AND COLLOCATION POLICY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   COLLOCATION.
   (1)   All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered,
designed and constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other
providers, to collocate with other existing wireless communication facilities
and to accommodate the future collocation of other wireless communication
facilities.
   (2)   A TUP shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a new wireless
communications facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good
faith attempt to locate its Wireless Communication Facility onto an existing
structure by submitting the affidavit required herein. Competitive conflict and
financial burden are not deemed to be adequate reasons against collocation.
Collocation shall be made in every instance where it is commercially reasonable
under the existing circumstances to do so.
   (3)   All Wireless Communication Facilities with support structure up to a
height of 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least
three antenna array. All Wireless Communication Facilities with support
structures up to a height of more than 150 feet shall be engineered and
constructed to accommodate at least four antenna array.
   (b)   COLLOCATION AGREEMENT . The Collocation Agreement shall be considered
a condition of issuance of a Tower Use Permit (TUP). A TUP shall not be issued
unless the applicant complies with the collocation policy outlined above in
this section. All applicants for Wireless Communications Facilities are
required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and
reasonably market collocation opportunities to other Wireless Communications
Facility users. The statement shall include the applicant’s policy regarding
collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant
in determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers.
SEC. 35-3506.   REVIEW PROCESS.
   (a)   The applicable Development Criteria referred to herein are those set
forth in Sec.
35-3504 of this Division.
   (b)   PERMITTING PROCEDURES . Attached Wireless Communications Facilities
with or without new building construction that meet the Development Criteria
may be permitted by Administrative Review in all zoning districts except as
hereinafter specified. All monopole type Wireless Communications Facilities
with Support Structures that meet the development criteria and that are located
on properties in Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 1 (listed in
Appendix B), may be permitted by Administrative Review except hereinafter
specified. All others, regardless of type or location shall be subject to the
Plan Commission hearing process and may not be approved by the Administrative
Review process.
   Any Wireless Communications Facility (Attached or with a Support Structure),
regardless of type, to be located within an established historic area, Historic
District or other designated Overlay District will be subject to review by the
appropriate Historic Preservation Commission and the Plan Commission. Review by
the Commission shall be in accordance with administrative procedures for a
certificate of appropriateness under the Moline Code of Ordinances. All
Wireless Communications Facility applications that do not conform to the
Development Criteria or are otherwise not eligible for Administrative Review
shall be subject to the special use process.
   (c)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AS A PART OF A COORDINATED
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL . Wireless Communications Facilities as part of a proposed
residential or non-residential subdivision, planned unit development, site
plan, conditional rezoning, or other coordinated development approval shall be
reviewed and approved through those respective processes.
   (d)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FOR TEMPORARY TERM . Temporary
Wireless Communications Facilities may be permitted by Administrative Approval
for a term not to exceed 90 days. Once granted, a temporary Wireless
Communications Facility permit may be extended for an additional 90 days upon
clear evidence of substantial need by the applicant. In case of emergency
(e.g., storm damage to an existing Tower or other circumstances resulting in
the interruption of existing services) the Administrative Review shall be
expedited to the extent feasible.
   (e)   AN APPLICATION TO DEVELOP A TOWER SHALL INCLUDE :
   (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the Owner and Lessee of the
parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated. If the applicant is not the
Owner of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated, the written
consent of the Owner shall be evidenced in the Application.
   (2)   The legal description, parcel number, and commonly known address of
the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated.
   (3)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other
Towers or usable Antenna Support Structures within a 1/2 mile radius of the
proposed new Tower site, including City-owned property. If no existing Towers
or usable Support Structures exist within this radius, a written statement
attesting to such circumstances shall be provided.
   (4)   A sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed architect or
structural engineer that must include a site plan, elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations and documentation showing the location and
dimensions of the wireless communications facility and all improvements
associated therewith, including information concerning specifications, antenna
locations, public safety impacts, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping,
parking, access, fencing, topography, adjacent uses and existing vegetation.
   (5)   A Radio Frequency Intermodulation Study if the Applicant is proposing
to collocate on an existing Wireless Communication Facility.
   (6)   A description of the wireless service and design plan proposed by the
Applicant. Applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent
technological design, including stealth design if required, as part of the
design plan. The Applicant must demonstrate the need for the Tower(s) and why
design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to
accomplish the provision of the Applicant’s telecommunications services.
   (7)   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the Applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the
Applicant’s Telecommunications Facilities on City-owned Towers or usable
Antenna Support Structures located within a 1/2 mile radius of the proposed
Tower site. If no existing Towers or usable Support Structures exist within
this radius, a written statement attesting to such circumstances shall be
provided.
   (8)   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the Applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the Applicant’s
Telecommunications Facilities on Towers or usable Antenna Support Structures
owned by other persons located within 1/2 mile radius of the proposed Tower
site. If no existing Towers or usable Support Structures exist within this
radius, a written statement attesting to such circumstances shall be provided.
   (9)   Written technical evidence from an Illinois licensed Professional
Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower or Telecommunications Facilities cannot be
installed or collocated on another person’s Tower or usable Antenna Support
Structures owned by other persons located within 1/2 mile radius of the
proposed Tower site. If no existing Towers or usable Support Structures exist
within this radius, a written statement attesting to such circumstances shall
be provided.
   (10)   A written statement from an Illinois licensed Professional Engineer
(s) that the construction and placement of the Tower will not interfere with
public safety communications and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed by
adjacent residential and non-residential properties. If this statement cannot
be reasonably obtained from an Illinois licensed Professional Engineer, then as
acceptable to the Zoning Administrator under the then existing circumstances,
the Applicant may provide a written statement from an unlicensed Radio
Frequency (RF) Engineer with demonstrated knowledge, qualifications, skills,
and abilities to provide such statement. Should RF Engineers become licensed or
otherwise regulated subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance, any such RF
Engineer must thereafter be licensed to provide the statement required herein.
   (11)   Written, technical evidence from an Illinois licensed Professional
Engineer(s) that the proposed structure meets the standards set forth in Sec.
35-3511, “Structural Requirements,” of this Division.
   (12)   Written, technical evidence from an Illinois Licensed Professional
Engineer (s) acceptable to the Fire Marshall and the building official that the
proposed site of the Tower or Telecommunications Facilities does not pose a
risk of explosion, fire, or other danger to life or property due to its
proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials, including
without limitation LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or
other dangerous chemicals.
   (13)   In order to assist City staff and the Plan Commission in evaluating
visual impact, the Applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the
proposed site of the Tower with a photo-realistic representation of the
proposed Tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property
and from adjacent roadways.
   (14)   A copy of the telecommunications provider’s FCC license to operate
and provide wireless communications.
   (15)   A written airspace analysis for the proposed Tower site which
concludes there will be no adverse impact to federal airways or traffic pattern
airspace. This statement shall be accompanied by the following documentation,
at minimum:
      a.   A copy of the appropriate application or notification to the FAA, if
required. Evidence of final FAA approval shall be submitted to the City prior
to obtaining a building permit.
      b.   Documentation of review and tentative approval from the Quad City
Metropolitan Airport Authority.
   (16)   An abandonment bond (in accordance with Sec.
35-3526) may be provided with the application or, at the Applicant’s
discretion, no later than application approval. An approved bond shall be on
file prior to obtaining a building permit.
   (17)   Submission Requirements . Application for a TUP shall be submitted to
the City of Moline on forms prescribed by the City. The application shall be
accompanied by the applicable attachments described above and all other
requirements of this Division. If Plan Commission or Historic Preservation
Commission review is required, the application and site plan shall be placed on
each of the next available Commission agendas in accordance with any agenda
deadlines established by the city.
   (18)   Technical Assistance . In the course of its consideration of an
application, the City of Moline, the zoning administrator, the Plan Commission
or the City Council may deem it necessary, in complex situations, to employ an
engineer(s) or other consultant(s) qualified in the design and installation of
wireless communication facilities to assist the City in the technical aspects
of the application. In such cases, any additional reasonable costs incurred by
the City not to exceed $1,500.00 for the technical review and recommendation
shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to Plan Commission action granting
or denying the TUP.
(Ord. No. 3032-2010; Sec.
35-3506(e) repealed; new Sec.
3032-2010 enacted; 07/27/10)
SEC. 35-3507.   APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (a)   APPLICATION SUBMISSION . All requests for a Tower Use Permit,
regardless of Wireless Communication Facility type shall submit an application
in accordance with the requirements of this Division.
   (1)   Application Fees . A plan review fee of $500.00 and a Radio Frequency
Intermodulation Study review fee of $500.00 (for applicants who are not
collocating on existing Towers because of claimed RF interference) shall
accompany each application. These fees may be used by the City of Moline to
engage an engineer(s) or other qualified consultant(s) to review the technical
aspects of the application, public safety communication impacts, and Radio
Frequency Intermodulation Study (if required). In addition to the above,
applications requiring a special use permit shall include a special use
application fee (amount determined by the current City fee schedule).
(Ord. No. 3032-2010; Sec.
35-3507(a) repealed; new Sec.
35-3507(a) enacted; 07/27/10)
   (b)   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW . The following administrative review process
shall apply to all wireless communications facility applications eligible for
administrative review, as specified in Overlay District 1.
   (1)   Review Authority . Review of wireless communication facilities under
this section shall be conducted by the zoning administrator or designee upon
filing a Wireless Communication Facility application.
   (2)   Review Criteria . Each application shall be reviewed for compliance
with the Development of Towers specified in Sec.
35-3504.
   (3)   Timing of Decision . The zoning administrator shall render a decision
on the Wireless Communication Facility application by written response to the
applicant within 14 business days after receipt of the complete application,
except that an extension may be agreed upon by the applicant. Any application
that is not reviewed within 14 business days shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission for review.
   (4)   Deferral . The zoning administrator may defer administrative approval
of wireless communication facilities for any reason. Deferral of administrative
approval shall require submission to the Plan Commission for review.
   (5)   Application Denial . If Administrative approval is not obtained or is
denied due to non-compliance with the Development Criteria, the applicant may
appeal the denial by applying for Plan Commission review.
   (6)   Application Approval . If the TUP application is in compliance with
the Development of Towers in Sec.
35-3504 and otherwise meets the requirements of this section, the zoning
administrator may issue a Tower Use Permit.
   (c )   PLAN COMMISSION REVIEW. The following shall apply to all Tower Use
Permit applications requiring submission to the Plan Commission.
   (1)   Review Authority . The Plan Commission shall be the review authority
for TUP applications not eligible for Administrative Review or otherwise
referred to the Commission.
   (2)   Notice . Notice of the application and the public hearing by the Plan
Commission shall be accomplished in the same manner as a special use permit
under the zoning ordinance.
   (3)   Hearing . The Plan Commission shall review and consider the TUP
application at a public hearing. At the hearing, interested persons may appear
and offer information in support or opposition to the proposed application. The
Plan Commission shall consider the following in reaching a decision:
      a.   Development of Towers. The Tower Use Permit application shall be
reviewed for compliance with the Development of Towers set forth in Sec.
35-3504; provided that the applicable Development of Towers may be amended or
waived so long as the approval of the Wireless Communication Facility meets the
goals and purposes of this Division. The Plan Commission may recommend any
alternative development criteria by specific inclusion in a motion for
approval.
      b.   Tower Siting Conditions. The Plan Commission may impose conditions
and restrictions on the application or on the premises benefited by the TUP as
it deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the
compatibility of the Wireless Communication Facility with the surrounding
property, in accordance with the purposes and intent of this Division. The
violation of any condition shall be grounds for revocation of the TUP. The Plan
Commission may recommend such conditions in addition to the development
criteria upon the following findings:
         1.   The Wireless Communication Facility would result in significant
adverse    visual or aesthetic impact on nearby residences or otherwise
interferes with emergency transmissions of any of the City’s emergency service
providers.
         2.   The conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this
Division and the Comprehensive Plan.
         3.   The conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished.
      c.   Action. Following the public hearing and presentation of evidence,
the Plan Commission shall take one of the following actions:
         1.   Recommend the application as submitted.
         2.   Recommend the application with conditions or modifications.
         3.   Defer the application for additional information or neighborhood
input; or
         4.   Deny the application in writing, subject to (4) below.
   (4)   Findings . All denials rendered by the Plan Commission concerning a
Tower Use Permit shall be supported by written findings of fact and conclusions
of law based upon substantial evidence of record.
   (5)   Timing of Decision . The Plan Commission shall render its decision
within 60 days of the final submission of all required application documents
and technical review; however, this time may be increased due to deferrals by
either the applicant or the Plan Commission.
   (6)   Requests for Review . The decision of the Plan Commission may be
reviewed by the City Council in accordance with the following circumstances:
      a.   A request for review shall be filed no later than 30 days after the
final action by the zoning administrator or the Plan Commission. Only the
applicant and those who registered an objection to the TUP in the record of the
Plan Commission shall have standing to appeal.
      b.   Only such evidence or testimony in support of or opposition to the
issuance of the TUP which was provided to the Plan Commission may be presented
to the City Council unless the City Council, by two-thirds majority vote,
decides to hear such new evidence or testimony.
      c.   Notice of City Council review shall be accomplished in the same
manner as a special use permit under the zoning code.
   (7)   Appeals . The actions taken by the City Council shall be final and
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
“Administrative Review Act,” 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et. seq. A request for judicial
review properly and timely taken shall stay the imposition of any decision
rendered by the City Council.
SEC. 35-3508.   SETBACKS.
   (a)   All Wireless Communication Facility installations up to 100 feet in
height shall be setback on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback
requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers in excess of 100 feet in
height shall be set back one additional foot per each foot of Tower height in
excess of 100 feet. However, an Attached Wireless Communication Facility
Antenna Array may extend up to 30 inches horizontally beyond the edge of the
Attachment Structure, so long as the Antenna Array does not encroach upon an
adjoining parcel. The requirements of this section may be modified by the City
Council or Plan Commission when necessary, upon the following findings:
   (1)   The Wireless Communication Facility would result in significant
adverse visual or aesthetic impact on nearby residences or otherwise interferes
with emergency transmissions of any of the City’s emergency service providers.
   (2)   The conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this Division
and the Comprehensive Plan.
   (3)   The conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished.
   (b)   Setback requirements for Towers shall be measured from the base of the
Tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   (c)   Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in Sec.
35-3508 (a) when replacement of a Tower in a location which will reduce the
visual impact can be accomplished. For example, adjacent to trees which may
visually hide the Tower.
SEC. 35-3509.   HEIGHT STANDARDS.
   Allowable uses, subject to the limitations within each Overlay District,
will include the underlying zoning district plus Wireless Communication
Facilities in compliance with the following development criteria:
   The following height standards shall apply to all Wireless Communications
facility installations:
   (1)   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES . Attached Wireless
Communication Facilities shall not add more than 20 feet to the height of the
existing building or structure to which it is attached (Attachment Structure).
However, antenna attachments to existing communication Towers shall not
increase the height of Tower above the maximum permitted height of that Tower.
   (2)   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES WITH SUPPORT STRUCTURES . Wireless
Communication Facilities with Support Structures shall have a maximum height as
set out in
Appendix B in Wireless Communication Facility Overlay District 1.
SEC. 35-3510.   RADIO FREQUENCY EMISSIONS/SOUND.
   The following radio frequency emissions standards shall apply to all
Wireless Communications Facility Installations:
   (1)   RADIO FREQUENCY IMPACT . The FTA gives the FCC jurisdiction of the
regulation of Radio Frequency (RF) emissions, and Wireless Communications
Facilities that do not exceed the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or
denied on the basis of RF impact.   
   (2)   FCC COMPLIANCE . In order to provide information to its citizens,
copies of ongoing FCC information concerning Wireless Communications Facilities
and RF emissions standards may be requested. Applicants for Wireless
Communications Facilities shall be required to provide information with the
application on the measurement of the effective radiated power of the facility
and how this meets the FCC standards.
   (3)   SOUND PROHIBITED . No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells,
buzzers or the like are    permitted.
SEC. 35-3511.   STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Wireless Communications Facilities with Support Structures shall be designed
and certified by an Illinois licensed engineer to be structurally sound and
shall be constructed to the Electronics Industries Association/
Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard
entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antennas Towers and Antenna Support
Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each Support
Structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays.
SEC. 35-3512.   SEPARATION OR BUFFER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the separation distances between
Towers or support structures (hereinafter: “Tower”) shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or
approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the
proposed Tower. Tower separation distances from other residentially zoned
properties shall be measured from the base of a Tower to the closest point of
the residentially zoned property. The minimum Tower separation distances from
residentially zoned properties and from other Towers shall be calculated and
applied irrespective of City jurisdictional boundaries.
   (b)   Towers shall be separated from all other residentially zoned lands by
a minimum of 200 feet or 200% of the height of the proposed Tower, whichever is
greater.
(Ord. No. 3003-2008; Sec.
35-3512(b) repealed; new Sec.
35-3512 enacted; 01/22/08)
   (c)   Proposed Towers must meet the following minimum separation
requirements from existing Towers or Towers which have a development permit but
are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to
this Division:
   (d)   Tower structures shall be separated from all other Towers, whether
monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of 750 feet.
SEC. 35-3513.   METHOD OF DETERMINING TOWER HEIGHT.
   Measurement of Tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with
all requirements of this section shall include the Tower structure itself, the
base pad, and any other Telecommunications Facilities attached thereto which
extend more than 20 feet over the top of the Tower structure itself. Tower
height shall be measured from grade.
SEC. 35-3514.   ILLUMINATION; SIGNAGE; FENCING.
   (a)   Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as provided in this
section. Upon commencement of construction of a Tower, in cases where there are
residential uses located within a distance which is three hundred (300) percent
of the height of the Tower from the Tower and when required by federal law,
dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA.
   (b)   LIGHTING AND SIGNAGE . The following lighting and signage requirements
shall apply to all Wireless Communications Facility installations:
   (1)   Artificial Illumination. Wireless Communications Facilities shall not
be artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for:
      a.   Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting
is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site;
and
      b.   Such illumination of the Wireless Communications Facility as may be
required by the FAA or other applicable authority installed in a manner to
minimize impacts on adjacent residences; and
      c.   Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority,
the required light shall be red and shielded upward.
   (2)   Signage . Wireless Communications Facilities shall not display any
signage, logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a commercial or non-
commercial nature, except for a small message containing provider
identification and emergency telephone numbers and such other information as
may be required by local, state or federal regulations governing Wireless
Communications Facilities.
   (3)   Fencing . Wireless Communications Facilities with Support Structures
shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or fence and landscape material determined
by the Planning and Development Department to adequately accomplish the primary
purposes of said opaque fence (but excluding slatted chain link) not less than
6 feet in height. Security features may be incorporated into the buffer and
landscaping requirements for the site. Nothing herein shall prevent fencing
that is necessary to meet requirements of State or Federal agencies.
SEC. 35-3515.   EXTERIOR FINISH.
   Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish
which camouflages the Tower or otherwise enhances compatibility with adjacent
land uses, as approved by the Plan Commission or zoning administrator.
SEC. 35-3516.   LANDSCAPING.
   (a)   All landscaping on a parcel of land containing Towers, Antenna Support
Structures, or Telecommunications Facilities shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscaping requirement in the zoning district where the Tower,
Antenna Support Structure, or Telecommunications Facilities are located. The
City may require landscaping in excess of the requirements of Article V in
order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. Landscaping shall be
installed on the outside of any fencing, and in addition to the foregoing, the
following landscaping requirements shall apply to all Wireless Communications
Facility installations:
   (1)   Land Form Preservation . Existing mature tree growth and natural land
form on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided, however,
that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access
to the Equipment Facility may be trimmed or removed.
   (2)   Existing Vegetation . Existing vegetation on a Wireless Communication
Facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the
zoning administrator.
SEC. 35-3517.   ACCESS.
   A parcel of land upon which a Tower is located must provide access to at
least one paved vehicular parking space on site.
SEC. 35-3518.   AESTHETIC PLACEMENT, MATERIALS AND COLORS.
   Wireless Communications Facilities shall be designed so as to be compatible
with the existing structures and surroundings to the extent feasible, including
placement in a location which is consistent with proper functioning of the
Wireless Communication Facility, the use of compatible or neutral colors, or
camouflage technology.
SEC. 35-3519.   STEALTH DESIGN.
   All Towers which must be approved as a special use shall be of stealth
design.
SEC. 35-3520.   PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS INTERFERENCE; ONGOING
RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the duty of every telecommunications provider in the City of
Moline, to whom this ordinance is applicable, to refrain from interference with
public safety communications in any manner, as such communications provider
initially indicated in such communications provider’s application as required
in Sec.
35-3506(a). This duty shall be ongoing and shall continue so long as the Tower
is placed, maintained or operated within the City of Moline. Any Tower causing
interference with public safety communications in contravention of this
Division shall cease operations immediately upon notice from the Police Chief
or designee and shall not resume operations thereafter until testing
(acceptable within the industry) demonstrates that such interference has been
completely eliminated.
SEC. 35-3521.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ON ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   Any Telecommunications Facilities which are not attached to a Tower may be
permitted on any Antenna Support Structure at least 50 feet tall, regardless of
the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure
is located, but only as provided herein. Telecommunications Facilities are
prohibited on all other structures. The owner of such structure shall, by
written certification to the zoning administrator, establish the following at
the time plans are submitted for a permit:
   (1)   That the height from grade of the Telecommunications Facilities shall
not exceed the height from grade of the Antenna Support Structure by more than
20 feet.
   (2)   That any Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Structure, are set back
one foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one foot in height above
the primary roof of the Telecommunications Facilities. This setback requirement
shall not apply to Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances,
located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Structure, if such
facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels,
walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the City. Setback
requirements shall not apply to Stealth antennas which are mounted to the
exterior of Antenna Support Structures below the primary roof, but which do not
protrude more than 18 inches from the side of such an Antenna Support
Structure.
SEC. 35-3522.   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES; MODIFICATION OF TOWERS.
   A Tower existing prior to the effective date of this Division, which was in
compliance with the City’s zoning regulations immediately prior to the
effective date of this article, may continue in existence as a nonconforming
structure. Such non-conforming structures may not be modified or demolished and
rebuilt without complying with all of the requirements of this section, a
nonconforming structure or use may not be enlarged, increased in size, or
discontinued in use for a period of more than 180 days. This section shall not
be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time this
section is adopted which structure or use is in violation of the Code prior to
enactment of this section.
SEC. 35-3523.   CERTIFICATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   All Towers shall be certified by an Illinois licensed Engineer to be
structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the Moline
Building Code and all other construction standards set forth in this Chapter or
elsewhere in the City’s Code or federal and state law. For new monopole Towers,
such certification shall be submitted with an Application pursuant to Sec.
35-3507 of this Division and every five years thereafter. For new lattice or
guyed Towers, such certification shall be submitted with an Application
pursuant to Sec.
35-3507 of this Division and every two years thereafter. For existing lattice
or guyed Towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days of the
effective date of this Division and then every two years thereafter. The Tower
owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent certifications should
there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the
Tower is jeopardized.
   (b)   The City, its employees, or agents shall have authority to enter onto
the property upon which a Tower is located, between the inspections and
certifications required above, to inspect the Tower for the purpose of
determining whether it complies with the Moline Building Code and all other
construction standards provided by the City Code and federal and state law.
   (c)   The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time,
upon reasonable notice to the Tower owner. All expenses related to such
inspections by the City shall be borne by the Tower owner.
SEC. 35-3524.   MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
   (b)   Tower owners shall install and maintain Towers, Telecommunications
Facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all
FCC, state and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere
with the use of other property.
   (c)   All Towers, Telecommunications Facilities, and Antenna Support
Structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order,
and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property
of any person.
   (d)   All maintenance or construction of Towers, Telecommunications
Facilities, or Antenna Support Structures shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
   (e)   All Towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission
standards of the FCC.
   (f)   In the event that the use of a Tower is discontinued by the Tower
owner, the Tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued, subject to
the abandonment conditions contained in Sec.
35-3525 herein below.
SEC. 35-3525.   CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT MODIFICATIONS.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the Tower requirements provided in this Division, a
modification to the requirements may be approved by the Plan Commission as a
special use in accordance with the following:
   (1)   In addition to the requirement for a Tower Application, the
Application for modification shall include the following:
      a.   A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that
might occur as a result of approving the modification.
      b.   A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any
adverse impacts which occur as a result of the modification.
      c.   A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted
by the Applicant upon which the request for modification is based. The
technical study shall be certified by an Illinois Licensed Engineer and shall
document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and
its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties.
      d.   For a modification of the setback requirement, the Application shall
identify all parcels of land where the proposed Tower could be located,
affidavits concerning   attempts by the Applicant to contract and negotiate an
agreement for collocation, and the result of such attempts.
      e.   The Plan Commission may require the Application to be reviewed by an
independent Engineer under contract to the City to determine whether the
antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested.
   (2)   The cost of review by the City’s Engineer shall be reimbursed to the
City by the applicant.
   (3)   The Plan Commission shall consider the Application for modification
based on the following criteria:
      a.   That the Tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely
impact the character and integrity of surrounding properties.
      b.   Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse
impacts, if any, created by the modification.
      c.   In addition, the board may include conditions on the site where the
Tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the
character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed Tower and
mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the
modification.
   (b)   In addition to the Requirements of subparagraph (a) of this Section
35-3524, in the following cases, the Applicant must also demonstrate, with
written evidence satisfactory in form and content to the Plan Commission, the
following:
   (1)   In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement,
Section
35-3508, that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land upon
which the Tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the person is
to locate the Tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a
residentially zoned land.
   (2)   In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer
requirements from other Towers of Sec.
35-3512, “Separation or Buffer Requirements,” that the proposed site is zoned
“Light Industrial” or “General Industrial” and the proposed site is at least
double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as
provided for in Sec.
35-3512.   
   (3)   In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer
requirements from residentially zoned land of Sec.
35-3512, if the person provides written technical evidence from an Illinois
licensed Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower and Telecommunications Facilities
must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements
of the Applicant’s wireless communications system and if the Person is willing
to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the Tower from being
visible to residentially zoned property.
   (4)   In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for
Towers and Telecommunications Facilities or to the minimum height requirements
for Antenna Support Structures, that the modification is necessary to: (i)
facilitate collocation of telecommunications Facilities in order to avoid
construction of a new Tower; or (ii) to meet the coverage requirements of the
Applicant’s wireless communications system, which requirements must be
documented with written, technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that
demonstrates that the height of the proposed Tower is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily, and no Tower that is taller than such
minimum height shall be approved.
SEC. 35-3526.   ABANDONMENT.
   To secure the obligation of removal set forth in this section, the Applicant
[and/or owner] shall post a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000) which shall be updated periodically thereafter so long as the Tower
remains in use. Such bond shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk.
Any Wireless Communication Facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the City of Moline, at
its election, may require such abandoned Wireless Communication Facility owner
to remove the Wireless Communication Facility within 90 days after notice from
the City to remove the Wireless Communication Facility. If the abandoned
Wireless Communication Facility is not removed within 90 days, the City may
remove it and recover its costs from the Wireless Communication Facility or the
bond required herein, this provision shall not become effective until all
providers cease to use the Wireless Communication Facility. If the owner of an
abandoned Wireless Communication Facility cannot be located or is no longer in
business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the
landowner on whose property the Wireless Communication Facility is located.
(Ord. No. 3034-2006; Sec.
35-3526 repealed in its entirety; new Sec.
35-3526 enacted; 8/15/06; Ord. No. 3032-2010; Sec.
35-3526 repealed in its entirety; new Sec.
35-3526 enacted; 07/27/10)
SEC. 35-3527.   SEVERABILITY.
   That if any clause, section, or other part of this Division shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Division shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in
full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 2002-05-01; new Article IV, Division 3, enacted; 05/28/02)
DIVISION 6. DENSITY AND INTENSITY REGULATIONS
SEC. 35-3600.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Division is to assist developers in determining the
maximum permitted density for residential projects and maximum permitted
intensity (for nonresidential projects) of development on any given site within
the jurisdiction of this Chapter. The development potential of any site is
determined by a variety of factors, including but not limited to: 1) the area
of the site; 2) the proportion of the site not containing sensitive natural
resources; 3) the zoning district(s) in which the site is located; 4) the
development option(s) the site is developed under; and 5) the use(s) considered
for development.
   Rationale: This Division regulates the development potential of all property
within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. This Division is designed to ensure
the implementation of many goals and objectives of the City of Moline
Comprehensive Plan. Many of these are extremely difficult to address using
conventional zoning techniques, particularly those which rely on minimum lot
area requirements to establish maximum permitted residential densities, and
maximum floor area ratios to establish the character of nonresidential
developments. Such approaches provide for minimum flexibility and/or the
needless destruction of sensitive natural resources. The approach employed by
this Division, relying on Maximum Gross Densities (MGDs) and minimum Green
Space Ratios (GSRs) for residential development, and minimum required Landscape
Surface Ratios (LSRs) in combination with maximum permitted Floor Area Rations
(FARs) for nonresidential development, (both in conjunction with a variety of
development options available in every zoning district) results in a very high
degree of site design flexibility and the protection and implementation of
desired of desired community character and adopted community goals and
objectives.
SEC. 35-3601.   HOW TO USE THIS DIVISION.
   This Division contains the standards which determine the maximum amount of
development permitted on any given site. Prior to using the provisions of this
Division to determine the development potential of a given property, the
guidelines provided by this Division should be reviewed. This Division
recognizes inherent differences between residential and nonresidential land
uses, and thus regulates their development in slightly different manners. All
developers/persons seeking development permits are encouraged to complete the
worksheets and follow the steps contained herein: however, the requirement to
complete the worksheets shall apply only to applications for certain types of
development permits as established as part of the administrative policies of
the city, a copy which may be obtained from the zoning administrator.
SEC. 35-3602.   NATURAL RESOURCES SITE EVALUATION.
   (a)   PURPOSE. An important goal of the City of Moline Comprehensive Plan is
the protection of natural resources which are sensitive to disruption caused by
development and/or other land use activities. These resources include:
Shorelands, Wetlands, Drainageways, Steep Slopes, and Woodlands. These
resources serve important functions which are lost when these areas are subject
to development and/or other land use activities, in the absence of correct
mitigation approaches. In many instances, these functions cannot be provided by
other natural or man-made features. Specific broad categories of such functions
include the protection and enhancement of air, surface water, ground water, and
soil quality; habitat provisions and diversification; aesthetic
diversification; and buffering effects.
   (b)   MITIGATION. In certain instances, natural features can accommodate
development and/or other land use activities without a significant loss of
their functional benefits if proper mitigation practices are employed. Article
IV, Site Development Standards, and
Chapter 13 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, Flood Prevention, provide detailed
standards regarding permitted mitigation techniques and requirements.
   (c)   NATURAL RESOURCES SITE EVALUATION WORKSHEET.
   (1)   Determine the Gross Site Area (GSA) of the Site :
 
a. Total Site Area as determined by actual on-site survey                     __
                                                                              acres
   Subtract area located within proposed rights-of-ways of roads and within
b. proposed boundaries of public facilities which are designated within the   -__
   City’s Comprehensive Plan and/or required for dedication per Subdivision acres
   regulations
c. Subtract land which although part of the same parcel is not contiguous to, -__
   or is not accessible from, the proposed road network serving the project.  acres
d. Subtract land which is proposed for a different development option or a    - __
   different zoning district.                                                 acres
e. Subtract area of navigable waters (lakes & streams).                       - __
                                                                              acres
f. Equals Gross Site Area (GSA)                                               =__
                                                                              acres
 
   (2)   Determine the Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) of the Site :
a. Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodways.                                __
                                                                                   acres
b. Portion of Gross Site Area containing Floodfringes.                             +__
                                                                                   acres
c. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Wetlands                              +__
                                                                                   acres
d. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Drainageways                          +__
                                                                                   acres
e. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Shorelands.                           +__
                                                                                   acres
f. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Woodlands                             +__
                                                                                   acres
g. Add portion of Gross Site Area containing Steep Slopes                          +__
                                                                                   acres
h. Subtract portions of natural resource areas (a. – g., above) made developable - __
   using approved environmental mitigation techniques.                             acres
i. Equals Required Resource Protection Area (RPA).                                 =__
                                                                                   acres
 
   (3)   Determine the Net Developable Area (NDA) of the Site :
 
a. Enter Gross Site Area (GSA) (from (1)f., above)               __ acres
b. Subtract Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) (from (2)i., -__ acres
   above)
c. Equals Net Developable Area (NDA).                            =__ acres
 
SEC. 35-3603.   RESIDENTIAL DENSITY STANDARDS.
   Division 2 of this Article provides density standards for each of the
Residential /Resource Zoning Districts.
   (1)   INSTRUCTIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
      a.   Step 1 - Check Planning Recommendations for the Subject Property :
 The City’s Comprehensive Plan should be checked for implications related to
the subject property, particularly the future Land Use and Transportation Plan
Chapters.
      b.   Step 2 - Check the Zoning of the Subject Property : The potential
amount and type of development any given site may contain is directly related
to the zoning district in which the site is located. The subject property
should be identified on the City ’s Official Zoning Map, and the current zoning
designation should be compared with the description of that district provided
in Division 2 of this Article.
      c.   Step 3 - Complete a Natural Resources Site Evaluation for the Site :
The effect of protected natural resources on the development potential of the
subject    property should be evaluated. All resources listed in Sec.
35-3602(c)(2), Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation, should be identified
on the subject property, located on a map (or air photo) of the subject
property, and the total area of the property (in acres) covered by those
resources, known as Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) should be
determined, as should Gross Site Area (GSA) and the Net Developable Area (NDA)
of the subject property. The zoning administrator should be contacted if
assistance is desired in completing the calculations in Sec.
35-3602(c)(3).
      d.   Step 4 - Determine What Types of Dwelling Units Are Permitted :
  Division 2 of this Article should be checked to determine which types of
dwelling units are permitted within the zoning district for the subject
property.
      e.   Step 5 - Determine Maximum Gross Density Permitted on the Site : The
Maximum Gross Density (MGD), given for the applicable zoning district
identified in
Table 35-3201.1., should be noted; and used in Step (6), below.
      f.   Step 6 - Determine the Maximum Number of Units Permitted on the Site
:  The Maximum Gross Density (MGD), identified in Step 5, above, multiplied by
the    Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated in Step 3, above, equals the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted on the subject property under the selected
development option within the selected zoning district. The ability to actually
develop this number of dwelling units on the subject property is not guaranteed
by the provisions of this chapter. Inefficient site design, poor property
configuration, and other factors may result in a lower number of units actually
fitting on the site.
      g.   Step 7 - Check the Minimum Permitted Lot Area : The Minimum Lot Area
(MLA) requirement given in the zoning district identified in Step 2 above, is
the smallest size lot permitted within the zoning district. The MLA must equal
or be less than the lot size requirement for the type of dwelling unit proposed
for the project in Step 4, above. If the MLA given in the zoning district is
larger than the lot size requirement given in Step 4, then a dwelling unit type
with a larger lot size must be selected (in which case, it may be advantageous
to repeat these Steps using a different dwelling unit type).
SEC. 35-3604.   NONRESIDENTIAL INTENSITY STANDARDS.
   Division 3 of this Article provides the intensity standards for each of the
Non-Residential/Resource Zoning Districts.
   (1)   INSTRUCTIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
      a.   Step 1 - Check Planning Recommendations for the Subject Property:
The City’s Comprehensive Plan should be checked for implications related to the
subject property,    particularly the future Land Use and Transportation Plan
Chapters.
      b.   Step 2 - Check the Zoning of the Subject Property : The potential
amount and type of development any given site may contain is directly related
to the zoning district in which the    site is located. The subject property
should be identified on the City’s Official Zoning Map, and the current zoning
designation should be compared with the description of that district
   provided in this Article.
      c.   Step 3 - Complete a Natural Resources Site Evaluation for the Site :
The effect of    protected natural resources on the development potential of
the subject property should be evaluated. All resources listed in Sec.
35-3602(c)(2), Required Natural Resources Site Evaluation, should be identified
on the subject property, located on a map (or air photo) of the subject
property, and the total area of the property (in acres) covered by those
resources, known as Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) should be
determined, as should Gross    Site Area (GSA) and the Net Developable Area
(NDA) of the subject property. The Zoning Administrator should be contacted if
assistance is desired in completing the calculations in Sec.
35-3602(c)(3).
   d.   Step 4 - Determine What Types of Land Uses Are Permitted : Division 3
of this Article should be checked to determine which types of land uses are
permitted within the zoning district designated on, or proposed for, the
subject property. A complete description of each land use is presented in
Division 4 of this Article.
   e.   Step 5 - Check the Minimum Lot Area Requirement Against the Gross Site
Area    Present on the Subject Property: The required Minimum Lot Area (MLA),
given for the applicable zoning district identified in
Table 35-3301.1., should be compared with the Gross Site Area (GSA) required on
the subject property as determined under the Natural Resources Site Evaluation
in Step 3, above. If the GSA is less than the MLA required by the zoning
   district, then additional property should be acquired.
   f.   Step 6 - Check Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio Requirement Against the
Required    Resource Protection Area Present on the Subject Property : The
required Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR), given for the applicable zoning
district identified in
Table 35-3301.1, should be multiplied by the Gross Site Area (GSA) used in Step
5, above. The resulting product is the area of the site which must be
permanently protected as green space. This area should be compared with the
Required Resource Protection Area (RPA) required on the subject property as
determined under the Natural Resource Site Evaluation in Step 3, above. If the
area of the site containing sensitive natural resources exceeds the area of
permanently protected landscape surface required, then more floors may have to
be used in order to    approach maximum development potential on the site.
   g.   Step 7 - Determine Maximum Floor Area Ratio Permitted on the Site : The
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) given for the applicable zoning district
identified in
Table 35-3301.1, should be noted. This number will be used in Step 8, below.
   h.   Step 8 - Determine the Maximum Floor Area Permitted on the Site : The
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR), identified in Step 7 above, multiplied by the
Gross Site Area (GSA) calculated in Step 5, above, equals the maximum square
footage of gross floor area permitted    on the subject property within that
zoning district. The ability to actually develop this amount of floor area is
not guaranteed by the provisions of this Chapter. Inefficient site design, poor
property configuration, and other factors may result in a smaller amount of
area actually fitting on the site.
   i.   Step 9 - Check the Maximum Building Size Requirement: The Maximum
Building Size (MBS) requirement given for the applicable zoning district
identified in
Table 35-3301.1, is the largest size building permitted within the non-
residential/resource districts without a special use permit. The MBS must equal
or be greater than the building size proposed for the project in Step 8, above.
If the MBS permitted in the district is smaller than the proposed building size
calculated in Step 8, above, then a smaller building must be built, or the use
of additional buildings should be considered, otherwise a special use permit
will be required.
   Rationale: The combinations of Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and Minimum
Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) requirements within each zoning district are
designed to result in a consistent community character of development within
that district. The Minimum Lot Area (MLA) requirements for each zoning district
are used to ensure that a consistency of neighborhood character within each
zoning district is maintained and attainable, under efficient site design
practices. The Maximum Building Size (MBS) requirements ensure that development
within the Neighborhood Office and Neighborhood Business Districts retain a
neighborhood function and maintains a scale which is compatible with nearby
residential development.
DIVISION 7. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 35-3700.   PURPOSE.
   The planned unit development (PUD) zone applies to mixed-use and unique
single-use projects where design flexibility is desired and is not available
through applications of the standard zoning districts established in Division 2
and 3 of this Article. Planned unit development zoning should be used only when
long-term community benefits, which may be achieved through high quality
planned development, will be derived. The process for PUD review and approval
is contained in Sec.
35-2205. Specific benefits that would support a PUD zoning include, but are not
limited to:
   (1)   More efficient infrastructure;
   (2)   Reduced traffic demands;
   (3)   A greater quality and quantity of public and/or private open space;
   (4)   Other recreational amenities;
   (5)   Needed housing types and/or mix;
   (6)   Innovative designs; and/or
   (7)   Protection and/or preservation of natural resources.
SEC. 35-3701.   DEFAULT STANDARDS.
   The use, bulk, development, improvement and other standards for each planned
unit development shall be derived from the underlying zoning district. In a
planned unit development context, those standards shall be referred to as
default standards or default zone. The PUD shall be consistent with the default
zone upon which the planned unit development is based. Deviations from any of
the default standards may be approved only as provided in this Division and
shall be explicitly stated in the zoning/rezoning ordinance.
SEC. 35-3702.   ESTABLISHMENT OF USES.
   (a)   USES ALLOWED . At the time of zoning a parcel to PUD, the City Council
shall determine the specific allowed uses. Only uses consistent in type and
intensity/density with the Comprehensive Plan may be allowed within a PUD. The
type and intensity/density of allowed uses should generally be limited to uses
allowed in the default zoning, except as noted herein.
   (b)   ADOPTION AND MODIFICATION OF AUTHORIZED USES . The City Council, at
the time of establishing a PUD zone, shall list uses that are authorized by
right or by special use permit. All uses, whether by right or special use
permit, shall be subject to all applicable permit and approval processes
established in this Code.
SEC. 35-3703.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   GENERALLY . Planned unit developments shall minimally comply with the
development standards of the default zone and all other applicable Code
provisions, except when the City Council specifically finds that a standard or
standards should not be applied.
   (b)   RESIDENTIAL DENSITY . Dwelling unit densities in a planned unit
development shall comply with the maximum densities of the Comprehensive Plan
or default zone.
   (c)   NON-RESIDENTIAL INTENSITY . Non-residential planned unit development
intensity shall be established as a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) and maximum
building size (MBS) at the time of planned unit development rezoning approval.
In determining the maximum FAR and MBS, the Plan Commission and City Council
shall consider:
   (1)   The intensity of adjacent development;
   (2)   The demand for and/or mix of residential and non-residential
development in the proposed PUD and in the vicinity of the proposed PUD;
   (3)   The availability of transportation facilities; including streets,
parking, transit facilities, and    bicycle/pedestrian facilities;
   (4)   The adequacy of utilities and public services; and
   (5)   The maximum FAR permitted in the default zone.
   (d)   MIXED USE INTENSITY .
   (1)   Mixed-use developments, in areas designated for residential
development in the adopted Comprehensive Plan, shall not exceed the plan
density minus one dwelling unit per 1,000 square feet of non-residential
development or portion thereof within the development. In mixed-use
developments, no more than 20% of the land area may be dedicated to non-
residential uses.
   (2)   The maximum residential densities with mixed-use developments
designated for non-residential development in the adopted Comprehensive Plan
shall not exceed 36 dwelling units per acre, minus one dwelling unit per 2,000
square feet of non-residential development or portion thereof. In such
developments, residential uses shall not constitute more than 50% of total
floor area.
   (e)   MINIMUM DISTRICT SIZE . A minimum of five acres shall be required for
a planned unit development district unless the Plan Commission recommends, and
the City Council finds, that a smaller site is appropriate for the development
or redevelopment as a PUD. In approving a planned unit development district
smaller than five acres, the Plan Commission and City Council shall find that
the proposed development:
   (1)   Cannot be developed under conventional zoning;
   (2)   Is adequately buffered from adjacent residential property;
   (3)   Mitigates adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and
   (4)   Is consistent with the goals and policies of the adopted Comprehensive
Plan.
   (f)   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS . A planned unit development shall meet the
development standards of the default zone or the following, whichever is more
restrictive. Exceptions may be allowed only in accordance with this section.
   (1)   Setback Standards. Principal structure setbacks shall not be less than
the minimum setbacks for the default zone unless the applicant can demonstrate
that:
      a.   Buildings can be safely designed and that the design is compatible
with lesser setbacks. Compatibility shall be evaluated under the Moline
Building and Fire Codes and any other applicable life, health or safety codes;
      b.   Reduced setbacks are offset by increased screening or primary
recreation facilities in private or common open space;
      c.   Reduction of setbacks is required for protection of natural
resources.
   (2)   Open Space . All residential planned developments shall comply with
the minimum open space and minimum landscape surface area standards of the
default zone.
   (3)   Compatibility . Non-residential construction shall be compatible with
adjacent residential development.
   (4)   Landscaping . Landscaping shall meet or exceed the requirements of
Article V of this Code.
   (5)   Parking . Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
Article V of this Code.
   (6)   Street Development Standards . Street, alleys and easements shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Moline Subdivision Code and
other applicable city standards.
   (g)   DEVIATION FROM DEVELOPMENT DEFAULT STANDARDS . The Plan Commission may
recommend that the City Council deviate from the default district standards
subject to the provision of any of the community amenities listed below. In
order for the Plan Commission to recommend, and the City Council to approve, a
deviation from the default district standards, the listed amenities shall be
provided in excess of what would otherwise be required by this Code. These
amenities include:
   (1)   Transportation amenities including but not limited to, off-street
trails, bike and pedestrian amenities, or transit-oriented improvements,
including school and transit bus shelters;
   (2)   Open space, agricultural land reservations, or land dedication of 20%
or greater;
   (3)   Community facilities or provision of public services beyond those
required for development within the PUD;
   (4)   The provision of affordable housing for moderate, low and very low
income households    pursuant to HUD definitions for no less than 15 years; and
   (5)   Other amenities – including but not limited to public open space,
landscaping, buffering, screening, and quality building materials and design,
in excess of minimum standards required by this Code, that the City Council
specifically finds provide sufficient community benefit to offset the proposed
deviation.
SEC. 35-3704.   PUD TYPES.
   Section
35-2205 provides the procedures and review criteria for all PUD’s. These apply
to the following types of planned unit developments:
   (1)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. Under a planned unit development
district, a comprehensive set of development standards are approved that apply
to a lot or a subdivision, as opposed to a specific site plan showing building
footprints. In addition to including comparable standards to the default
district, the PUD district also includes standards for perimeter landscaping
and buffering, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and other standards as
necessary to ensure that future development will be of an intensity and quality
as represented by the applicant and envisioned by the City Council. Typically,
planned unit development districts are approved for larger developments
(greater than five acres), which include several different types of uses that
are expected to be built over a long period of time.
   (2)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SITE . Under a planned unit development site,
a detailed site plan showing building footprints, setbacks, parking areas and
other details is approved, with which all future development must comply. At
the time of planned unit development approval, standards for future building
additions or minor modifications may be included, but generally the approved
site plan controls all development on the lot indefinitely. Typically, planned
unit development sites are approved for smaller developments, which include a
small number of buildings that are expected to be built shortly after PUD
approval.
SEC. 35-3705.   PUD STAGES.
   The two PUD types described in Sec.
35-3704, above, may be approved in the following three stages:
   (1)   OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. An Outline Development Plan (ODP) is an
optional but encouraged first step prior to an application for a preliminary
development plan for a parcel of at least 20 acres. The purpose of an ODP is to
demonstrate conformance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, compatibility of
land use and coordination of improvements within and among individually platted
parcels, sections or phases of a development prior to the approval of a
preliminary plan. At ODP, the proposed zoning for the entire property or for
each “pod” designated for development on the plan is established. This step is
recommended for larger, more diverse projects that are expected to be developed
over a long period of time. Through this process, the general pattern of
development is established with a range of densities and intensities assigned
to individual “pods” that will be the subject of future, more detailed
planning.
      a.   Controlling Document . All subsequent preliminary and final plans
and all future development on the property shall be consistent with the
approved ODP.
      b.   Required Information . Detailed application requirements for ODP
approval are provided in Sec.
35-2205. At a minimum, plans and information submitted at this stage shall
include:
         1.   A conceptual (“bubble”) plan drawing of the general land use
layout and the general location of major public streets and/or private drives.
         2.   A general written description of the proposed PUD including:
            (a)   General project themes and images;
            (b)   The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
            (c)   Approximate residential densities and non-residential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio, maximum
building sizes, and    impervious surface area ratio;
            (d)   The underlying zoning district(s) for the PUD;
            (e)   The general treatment of natural features;
            (f)   The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
            (g)   The general relationship of the project to the Comprehensive
Plan;
            (h)   An initial draft of density and intensity, bulk, landscaping,
and parking and loading standards for the development;
            (i)   A development phasing schedule.
   (2)   PRELIMINARY PLAN.  
      a.   Approved ODP . If the property has an approved ODP, the purpose of
the preliminary    development plan is to ensure consistency with the uses,
density/intensity, bulk,    performance, and other standards of the approved
ODP and proposed PUD rezoning ordinance for the specific area included in the
preliminary plan. Unless specified otherwise with the ODP, the applicant shall
have the option of proposing either a planned unit development district or
planned unit development site. Typically, the PUD rezoning ordinance is acted
upon at this stage concurrent with action on the preliminary plan. However,
should the City Council find that a proposed planned unit development district
or    site lacks sufficient detail to ensure that future development will be of
the intensity and quality proposed by the applicant and envisioned by the City
Council, it may defer action on the PUD rezoning ordinance until the final plan
stage.
      b.   No Approved ODP . If the property has no approved ODP, the purpose
of this stage is to answer the question, “Should this use, with this specific
intensity/density, designed in this particular manner, be constructed on this
site?” In designing the plan, the applicant shall have the option of proposing
either a planned unit development district or planned unit development site.
Typically, the PUD rezoning ordinance is acted upon at this stage concurrent
with action on the preliminary plan. However, should the City Council find that
a proposed planned unit development district or site lacks sufficient detail to
ensure that future development will be of the intensity and quality proposed by
the applicant and as envisioned    by the City Council, it may defer action on
the PUD rezoning ordinance until the final plan stage.
      c.   Controlling Document . All subsequent final plans and all future
development on the property shall be consistent with the approved preliminary
plan.
      d.   Required Information. Detailed application requirements for
preliminary plan approval are provided in Sec.
35-2205. At a minimum, plans and information submitted at this stage shall
include:
         1.   A General Development Plan Drawing of the proposed project
showing at least the following information in sufficient detail to make an
evaluation against the criteria for approval provided in Sec.
35-2205.
            (a)   A conceptual plan drawing of the general land use layout and
the general    location of major public streets and/or private drives;
            (b)   Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities
and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for
public acquisition and use;
            (c)   Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the
approximate areas of large development lots and pads, density/intensity of
various parts of    the development floor area ratio, maximum building sizes,
impervious    surface area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various
land uses,    expected staging, and any other plans required by the Plan
Commission or City Council; and
            (d)   Notations relating the written information required in
subparagraph 4. below, to specific areas on the preliminary plan drawing.
         2.   A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject property,
noting approximate locations (where applicable) of foundation, street, yard and
paving, landscaping, and the compliance of development with all landscaping
requirements of this Code (except as noted in the listing of exceptions) and
the use of extra landscaping and bufferyards.
         3.   A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as street
light fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles) which are
proposed to vary from City standards or common practices.
         4.   A general written description of the proposed PUD including:
            (a)   General project themes and images;
            (b)   The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
            (c)   Approximate residential densities and non-residential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio, maximum
building size, and impervious surface area ratio;
            (d)   The underlying zoning district(s) for the PUD;
            (e)   The general treatment of natural features;
            (f)   The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
            (g)   The general relationship of the project to the adopted
Comprehensive Plan;
            (h)   A Statement of Rationale as to why PUD zoning is proposed.
This shall    identify barriers that the applicant perceives in the form of
requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for community
betterment the    applicant suggests are available through the proposed PUD
zoning;
            (i)   A general list of density and intensity, bulk, landscaping,
and parking and    loading standards for the development for the proposed PUD
and the location(s) in which they apply;
            (j)   A written report that provides general information about the
site conditions, development objectives, covenants, conservation easements, or
agreements    that will influence the use and maintenance of the proposed
development    may be required for larger or more complex projects; and
            (k)   A development phasing schedule.
         5.   All information required by the Moline Subdivision Code for a
preliminary plat, where applicable.
   (3)   FINAL PLAN.  The final development plan and final subdivision plat
where applicable, act as the blueprint for development of a PUD project. The
plan and the plat ensure consistency with the approved preliminary development
plan and specific development and construction requirements of various adopted
city codes. If the rezoning ordinance was not acted upon at the Preliminary
Plan stage it will be acted upon at the final plan stage. A final plan may
include all or only a portion of the area of the entire PUD, consistent with
the development phasing schedule approved with the preliminary plan.
      a.   Required Information . Detailed application requirements for final
plan approval are provided in Sec.
35-2205. At a minimum, plans and information submitted at this stage shall
include:
         1.   A final plan drawing of the proposed project showing at least the
following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against the
criteria for approval contained in Sec.
35-2205:
            (a)   For a prepared PUD site, a final site plan conforming to all
the requirements of Sec.
35-2105;
            (b)   For a PUD district final subdivision plan conforming to all
the requirements of the Moline Subdivision Ordinance;
            (c)   Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities
and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for
public acquisition and use;
            (d)   Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the
precise areas of all development lots and pads, density/intensity of various
parts of the development, floor area ratio, maximum building site, impervious
surface    area ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses,
expected staging, and any other plans required by the Plan Commission or City
Council; and
            (e)   Notations relating the written information required in
subparagraph e. below, to specific areas on the final plan drawing.
         2.   A landscaping plan for the subject property, specifying the
location, species, and installed size of all trees and shrubs. This plan shall
also include a chart that provides a cumulative total for each species, type
and required location (perimeter, foundation, yard, street, paved area or
bufferyard) of all trees and shrubs.
   3.   A series of building elevations for the entire exterior of all
buildings in the Planned Unit Development site, including detailed notes as to
the materials and colors proposed.
   4.   A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs, concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as street
light fixtures and/or poles or    street sign faces and/or poles), and signage
themes which are proposed to vary from City standards or common practices.
   5.   A written description of the proposed final plan that demonstrates the
full constraints of the proposed final plan with the approved preliminary plan.
DIVISION 8. ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES
SEC. 35-3800.   DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   (1)   Cannabis shall have the same definition as "cannabis" set forth in
Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
   (2)   Cannabis Business Establishment means a "cannabis business
establishment," "infuser organization," or "infuser," as defined in Section 1-
10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, and such other cannabis
business establishments authorized under the Act, as amended.
   (3)   Cannabis Dispensary means "dispensary" as defined in Section 1-10 of
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, as a facility operated by a
dispensing organization at which activities licensed by this Act may occur.
"Dispensing organization"" means a facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of selling or
dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia,
or related supplies under this Act to purchasers or to qualified registered
medical cannabis patients and caregivers. As used in this Act, dispensary
organization shall include a registered medical cannabis organization as
defined in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act or its
successor Act that has obtained an Early Approval Adult Use Dispensing
Organization License.
   (4)   Cannabis Cultivation Center means "cultivation center" as defined in
Section 1 -10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, as a facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport (unless otherwise limited by this
Act), and perform other necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-
infused products to cannabis business establishments.
   (5)   Cannabis Craft Grower means "craft grower" as defined in Section 1-10
of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, as a facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Department of Agriculture
to cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization. A craft grower may contain up to five
thousand (5,000) square feet of canopy space on its premises for plants in the
flowering state. The Department of Agriculture may authorize an increase or
decrease of flowering stage cultivation space in increments of three thousand
(3,000) square feet by rule based on market need, craft grower capacity, and
the licensee's history of compliance or noncompliance, with a maximum space of
fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet for cultivating plants in the flowering
stage, which must be cultivated in all stages of growth in an enclosed and
secure area. A craft grower may share premises with a processing organization
or a dispensing organization, or both, provided each licensee stores currency
and cannabis or cannabis-infused products in a separate secured vault to which
the other licensee does not have access or all licensees sharing a vault share
more than fifty percent (50%) of the same ownership.
   (6)   Cannabis Infuser means "infuser organization" or "infuser" as defined
in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, as a
facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis
concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis -infused product.
   (7)   Cannabis Transporter means "transporting organization" or
"transporter" as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, as amended, as an organization or business that is licensed by the
Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis
business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community
College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program.
   (8)   Cannabis Processer means a "processing organization" or "processer" as
defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, as
a facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds
to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate
into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product.
   (9)   On-Premises Cannabis Consumption Establishment means a cannabis
business establishment (e.g., "lounge" or "café") or other entity (e.g., retail
tobacco store) that is authorized or otherwise permitted by the State of
Illinois to allow the on-premises consumption of cannabis. The City of Moline
does not permit on-premises cannabis consumption establishments in any form
within its corporate boundaries.
SEC. 35-3801.   USES PERMITTED IN ZONES.
   (a)   The following cannabis business establishments are hereby authorized
in the City of Moline as follows:
Uses Districts                        Conditions
    AG- 2 B-1 NC B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2
Uses          Districts                                             Conditions
             AG- 2 B-1 NC      B-2 B-3     B-4     I-1     I-2
Cannabis                S-          S-      S-      S-      S-      Sec.
Dispensary              Overlay     Overlay Overlay Overlay Overlay 35-3803
On-Premises                                                         None -
Cannabis                                                            Prohibited
Consumption                                                         Use
Establishment
Cannabis                                            P       P       Sec.
Infuser                                                             35-3803
Cannabis                                            P       P       Sec.
Processor                                                           35-3803
Cannabis                                                            Sec.
Cultivation                                         P       P       35-3803
Center
Cannabis                            P       P       P       P       Sec.
Transporter                                                         35-3803
Cannabis                                            S       S       Sec.
Craft Grower                                                        35-3803
P = Permitted Use                   S = Special Use
 
   (b)   Number of authorized cannabis business establishments. The number of
each type of cannabis business establishments allowed in the City may be
established by resolution duly adopted by the City Council.
   (c)   CDOD - Cannabis Dispensary Overlay Districts
   Overlay districts are established to delimit areas of the City in which
supplementary or alternative regulation, standards or procedures are
established. Unless otherwise specified or unless otherwise approved pursuant
to the regulations governing special use or planned unit developments, the
regulations of the underlying use district shall remain in full force and
effect within the area covered by the overlay district.
   The City hereby establishes four (4) Cannabis Dispensary Overlay Districts
(CDOD John Deere Road Corridor; CDOD Airport Area Corridor; CDOD Avenue of the
Cities Corridor; CDOD Uptown Corridor). These overlay districts are established
to allow the construction, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of a
single cannabis dispensary within each respective Cannabis Dispensary Overlay
District.
   (1)    Cannabis Dispensary Overlay District John Deere Road Corridor shall
be comprised of the area depicted in the following map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4914.png]
   (2)    Cannabis Dispensary Overlay District Airport Area Corridor shall be
comprised of the area depicted in the following map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4916.png]
   (3)    Cannabis Dispensary Overlay District Avenue of the Cities Corridor
shall be comprised of the area depicted in the following map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4918.png]
   (4)    Cannabis Dispensary Overlay District Uptown Corridor shall be
comprised of the area depicted in the following map:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4920.png]
   (d)   Final Decision Making Authority over Special Use Permit Applications.
All special uses for adult cannabis uses shall be decided by the City Council
following a public hearing on the application before the Plan Commission.
Following closure of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council concerning the application. The City Council
may concur, reject or modify the recommendation of the Plan Commission by
majority vote.
(Ord. No. 3019-2022; Sec. 35-3801 amended; 8/30/22)
SEC. 35-3802.   APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Application Requirements. In addition to all other applicable requirements,
cannabis business establishments must submit all documents requested by the
zoning administrator for evaluation under the applicable standards, which may
include:
   (1)   A complete copy of all applications and plans submitted for required
state licenses;
   (2)   An odor control plan;
   (3)   A security plan;
   (4)   An inventory control plan;
   (5)   A floor plan and elevations;
   (6)   A traffic study;
   (7)   A plan for the recycling and destruction of cannabis waste;
   (8)   A site plan. A site plan for any cannabis dispensary use must show:
adequate public access; that the layout promotes the safe dispensing of
cannabis; the location is sufficient in size, power allocation, lighting,
parking, handicapped accessible parking spaces, accessible entry and exits as
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act; product handling; and storage;
and advertising and signage; and
   (9)   A recoverable costs agreement, in a form acceptable to the zoning
administrator, to reimburse the City for the actual costs incurred in
processing the application, including costs for legal publication, court
reporter services, administrative preparation and review, document preparation
and review, professional and technical consultants, legal review and
consultation, and document recording.
SEC. 35-3803.   CONDITIONS.
   In addition to all other required conditions, cannabis business
establishments must comply with the following conditions:
   (1)   Compliance with State Regulations and Rules. All cannabis business
establishments must comply with all applicable state and local laws, including
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended, and applicable administrative rules.
   (2)   Compliance with Plans. The development, use, operation, and
maintenance of the cannabis business establishment will be in substantial
compliance with all application documents and plans, except for minor changes
and site work approved by the zoning administrator in accordance with all
applicable City rules, regulations, and ordinances.
   (3)   Security. In addition to all state-imposed security requirements, the
City may require a cannabis business establishment to provide sufficient
additional safeguards in response to any special security concerns.
   (4)   Air Treatment. In addition to all state-imposed air treatment
requirements, the City may impose additional air treatment requirements on a
cannabis business establishment to promote compliance with City nuisance and
other ordinances.
   (5)   Traffic. The City may impose conditions requiring the design of the
cannabis business establishment to minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian
hazards, and adverse impacts on surrounding properties.
   (6)   Cannabis Waste. All cannabis business establishments must comply with
all state, county, and City regulations governing cannabis waste.
   (7)   Hours of Operation. Unless otherwise prescribed by state law, the City
Council may impose hours of operation for a cannabis business establishment as
a condition of any zoning certificate to reduce conflicts with surrounding land
uses.
   (8)   Drive-Through Windows. Cannabis business establishments may not have a
drive-through service.
   (9)   On-Premises Consumption. No cannabis business establishment may allow
the smoking, inhalation, or consumption of cannabis in any form anywhere inside
or outside the building on its property. A sign, at least eight and one-half by
eleven inches (8.5" x 11"), shall be posted inside the cannabis business
establishment in a conspicuous place and visible to patrons and shall include
the following language: "Smoking, eating, drinking or other forms of
consumption of cannabis products is prohibited on the premises of this
establishment."
   (10)   Principal Use. Cannabis business establishments are only permitted as
a principal use and are not allowed as an accessory use or temporary use.
   (11)   State License. Before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
otherwise opening to the public, cannabis business establishments must file
with the zoning administrator a copy of all required state licenses to operate
as a cannabis business establishment. Cannabis business establishments must
maintain all required state licenses in effect at all times and keep
satisfactory proof thereof on file with the zoning administrator.
   (12)   Non-Transferability. Unless otherwise expressly provided by
ordinance, the privileges, obligations, and provisions of any special use
permit issued for a cannabis business establishment:
      a.   are for the sole benefit of and will be binding on the applicant;
and
      b.   may not be transferred to any other person or entity without a new
application for approval for a person or entity other than the applicant.
   (13)   Inspections.
      a.   Cannabis dispensaries are subject to random and unannounced
inspections by local law enforcement.
      b.   Cannabis infusers are subject to random inspections by local law
enforcement.
      c.   Cannabis cultivation centers and craft growers are subject to random
inspections by local safety or health inspectors.
      d.   When reasonable cause of a violation exists, all cannabis business
establishments are subject to inspections by the zoning administrator with the
assistance of corporation counsel, the police department, or other City agents
and employees.
SEC. 35-3804.   DISTANCES FROM PRE-EXISTING SENSITIVE USES.
   Minimum Distance Limits. In addition to all state-imposed minimum distance
limits, any building used for a cannabis business establishment may not be
located within the distance of a pre-existing sensitive use listed in the
following table:
                           Cannabis Business
Pre-existing sensitive use Establishment building  Measured from
                           distance from sensitive
                           use
Preschool                  250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
Elementary school          250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
Secondary school           250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
Day care center            250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
State-licensed day care    250'                    Property line of sensitive
home                                               use
Park                       250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
Library                    250'                    Property line of sensitive
                                                   use
                                                   The primary entrance of the
Residence in a                                     adult use cannabis business
Residential Zoning         100'                    to the closest point of a
District                                           residential dwelling (not
                                                   including the garage).
 
SEC. 35-3805.   PARKING.
   The following parking requirements shall be imposed for cannabis business
establishments:
Cannabis Business Establishment Parking Requirements
Cannabis Dispensary             1 per 300 sf of GFA
Cannabis Infuser                1 per 500 sf of office + 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA,
                                then 1 per 2,000 sf of GFA in excess of 20,000
Cannabis Processor              1 per 500 sf of office + 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA,
                                then 1 per 2,000 sf of GFA in excess of 20,000
Cannabis Cultivation Center     1 per 500 sf of office + 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA,
                                then 1 per 2,000 sf of GFA in excess of 20,000
Cannabis Transporter            1 per 500 sf of office + 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA,
                                then 1 per 2,000 sf of GFA in excess of 20,000
Cannabis Craft Grower           1 per 500 sf of office + 1 per 1,000 sf of GFA,
                                then 1 per 2,000 sf of GFA in excess of 20,000
GFA = Gross Floor Area"   
 
(Ord. No. 3004-2020; enacted "DIVISION 8. ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES"; 02/
11/20)
DIVISION 9. MOLINE CENTRE DISTRICTS
SEC. 35-3901.   OVERVIEW.
   (a)   INTENT. The regulations of the Moline Centre districts are intended to
support development in the downtown, based upon the goals and vision
established in the City’s comprehensive plan and other downtown-specific plans.
Further, these districts are intended to achieve the following:
   (1)   SENSE OF PLACE. Enhance the sense of place specific to Moline Centre,
by:
      a.   Connecting to the riverfront, ensuring buildings are properly
oriented towards the river and downtown, and creating spaces along the
riverfront, accessible via pathways and sightlines.
      b.   Expanding and reinforcing the unique, vibrant urban character of the
historic, mixed-use downtown core throughout the downtown.
      c.   Ensuring new development consists of a variety of high-quality
buildings and civic spaces with well-designed landscape and streetscapes.
   (2)   WALKABLE, BIKEABLE URBAN DEVELOPMENT. Create walkable and bikeable
development that is comfortable, safe, and interesting for the pedestrian and
bicyclists throughout the downtown and connecting to the riverfront.
   (3)   PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO LIVE DOWNTOWN. Support a variety of housing types
throughout the downtown, along the riverfront, and on the edges as transitions
to neighborhoods, creating a 24-hour presence throughout Moline Centre.
   (4)   ADAPTABLE, SUSTAINABLE. Ensure Moline Centre continues to be
successful into the future through:
      a.   Development that promotes environmental sustainability goals, such
as reductions in vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions through pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly design.
      b.   Flexible categories of uses, including small-scale manufacturing and
production facilities in the form of maker and artisan spaces that fit within a
mixed-use downtown and recall the City's historic manufacturing economy.
   (b)   MAPS.
   (1)   ZONING MAP. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
defined in this division shall be shown on the City’s official zoning map,
which must be available per Sec.
35-3103.
   (2)   INTERPRETATION. If the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or
as recorded, differs from the street or lot lines as shown on the zoning map,
the zoning administrator is authorized to interpret the map in a way that will
best carry out the purposes and intent of this division for the subject area or
district.
   (3)   SPLIT-ZONED PARCELS.
      a.   The zoning map may not be amended to classify a single parcel into 2
or more Moline Centre districts.
      b.   No new parcel may be created that would result in a split-zoned
parcel. Approval of a zoning map amendment (rezoning) classifying any proposed
new parcel or parcels must be approved before the parcel is created.
      c.   No permits may be issued for a split-zoned parcel until the subject
parcel is rezoned into a single zoning district classification.
   (4)   PRIMARY STREETS MAP. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(4) for information on primary streets and their designation on the
primary streets map maintained by the City.
   (c)   OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (1)   GROUP DEVELOPMENTS. Development in any Moline Centre zoning district
is not subject to the group development regulations of Sec.
35-3419.
   (2)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS. The use of the planned unit development
(PUD) zone in Article III, Division 7, is not allowed within the boundaries of
any Moline Centre zoning district.
   (3)   CONFLICTING REGULATIONS. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all
regulations of the City of Moline apply. Where regulations conflict, the
regulations of this division shall rule.
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec.
35-3901 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3902   DISTRICTS.
   (a)   DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED. The Moline Centre zoning districts are listed
in
Table 3902-1. When this code refers to "Moline Centre districts," it is
referring to these districts.
   (b)   DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.
   (1)   SX, MIXED-USE STOREFRONT DISTRICTS. The SX districts are intended for
the corridors and nodes, where walkable Storefront Buildings include shopping,
eating and drinking, and services.
      a.   SX-1 is intended for the core of the downtown.
      b.   SX-2 is intended for the edges of the downtown adjacent to
neighborhoods, where lower-scale buildings fit within the context of the area.
   (2)   GX, GENERAL RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE DISTRICTS. The GX districts are
intended for locations where residential, office, and other low intensity
commercial and production uses can mix comfortably in General Buildings, and
Row Buildings can be used for live-work or residential uses.
      a.   GX-1 is for the core of the downtown and transitions to GX-2.
      b.   GX-2 is for the edges of the downtown adjacent to neighborhoods,
where lower-scale buildings fit within the context of the area.
   (3)   RX, RESIDENTIAL EDGE DISTRICT. The RX district is intended for single-
and multi-unit residential in a mix of building types located as transitions
between the downtown and the surrounding neighborhoods.
   (4)   CV, CIVIC-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT. The CV district is reserved for
civic-institutional uses.
      a.   CV-1 is for civic and institutional uses occurring within a
principal buildings on the lot.
      b.   CV-2 is for parks and recreational spaces that do not contain a
principal building.
   (c)   MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENTS. All developments over 3 acres in size must
submit a Master Plan Development (MPD) for development plan approval per Sec.
35-3909(c). See Sec.
35-3908 for MPD regulations and application of zoning districts within an MPD.
Table 3902-1. Moline Centre Districts
SYMBOL DISTRICT NAME
Table 3902-1. Moline Centre Districts
SYMBOL DISTRICT NAME
SX     SX-1 Mixed-Use Storefront Core
       SX-2 Mixed-Use Storefront Edge
GX     GX-1 General Residential-Office Mix Core
       GX-2 General Residential-Office Mix Edge
RX     RX   Residential Mix
CV     CV-1 Civic & Institutional - Buildings
       CV-2 Civic & Institutional - Parks
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3902 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3903   BUILDING TYPES.
   (a)   ALLOWED BUILDING TYPES. Building types regulated in this division are
allowed in the Moline Centre districts per
 Table 3903-1. All buildings and site development must comply with one of the
building types in this section, unless otherwise expressly stated in these
zoning regulations.
   (1)   EXISTING BUILDINGS AND LOTS.
      a.   Nonconforming Structures. See Sec.
35-3112 for buildings constructed and Sec.
35-3110 for lots established prior to the adoption of these regulations and
that do not conform to these regulations.
      b.   Expansions and Renovations. For expansions and renovations to
buildings existing on the effective date of this code, the zoning administrator
must approve the selection of a building type allowed in the district within
which the building is located. Refer to Table 3903-1. A design adjustment (see
Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for use of a building type allowed in another
district and specifically defined within this division.
   (2)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE REGULATIONS. Except as defined in the building
type regulations, accessory structures are subject to the regulations in Sec.
35-3905.
   (3)   EXEMPTIONS. Where the principal use on the lot is primarily outdoors,
the following applies:
      a.   Applicable Uses. Uses allowed for exemptions from building type
standards include parks and open space uses per Sec.
35-3904(e)(4) and public service and utility uses per Sec.
35-3904(e)(8).
      b.   Principal Buildings. Any principal use buildings on the site must
comply with the building regulations that apply to a building type allowed in
the subject district, except the regulation for minimum primary streetwall.
      c.   Rear Yards without a Principal Building. The rear yard location for
parking and accessory structures to the principal use (e.g. a restroom
structure is accessory to a principal outdoor recreation use) must be
determined by the zoning administrator.
      d.   Side and Rear Setbacks Apply. Side and rear setback regulations of
the building type must be met for all structures.
      e.   Height. The height of any structure is limited to no more than 2
stories, with story heights defined by the building type. Additional height may
be approved through a design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
      f.   Utility Structures. Larger utility structures may require additional
regulation per the zoning administrator, including front setbacks.
   (4)   MEASURING BUILDING TYPES. See Sec.
35-3903(m) and Sec.
35-3903(l) for definitions and methods for measuring building type
requirements.
   (b)   USES. See Sec.
35-3904 for allowed uses and any use-specific regulations within each district.
Table 3903-1. Allowed Building Types by District
               MOLINE CENTRE DISTRICTS
Building Types SX-1 SX-2 GX-1 GX-2 RX CV-1 CV-2 Reference
Table 3903-1. Allowed Building Types by District
                    MOLINE CENTRE DISTRICTS
Building Types      SX-1 SX-2 GX-1 GX-2 RX CV-1 CV-2 Reference
Storefront Building •  •  –  –  ––  –  35-3903(g)
General Building    –  –  •  •  ••  –  35-3903(h)
Row Building        –  –  •  •  •–  –  35-3903(i)
Yard Building       –  –  –  •  •–  –  35-3903(j)
Civic Building      –  –  •  •  –•  •  35-3903(k)
KEY: • = Allowed
 
   (c)   BUILDING & SITE DESIGN. See Sec.
35-3906 for building and Sec.
35-3907 for site design regulations applicable to all building types allowed in
this Division 9.
   (d)   PROCEDURES & APPROVALS. See Sec.
35-3909 for development approval procedures, including Sec.
35-3909(d) for administrative adjustments allowed to the building type
regulations and Sec.
35-3909(e) for the design adjustment process. Allowed design adjustments are
expressly defined throughout this code.
   (e)   OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS. The following regulations apply to all
sites zoned as Moline Centre districts. Any other applicable regulations
established by the City may also apply.
   (1)   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. See the City's map for the limits of the
Downtown Commercial Historic District and Article IV of Chapter 25 of the
City's code of ordinances for review and approval procedures of any project
within the historic district or projects designated as historic landmarks.
   (2)   PUBLIC ART CORRIDORS. Buildings located along Cultural Corridors must
meet the public art requirements for private development in Division 3, Article
IV of Chapter 35. See the City's Public Art Plan. Cultural corridors abutting
the Moline Centre districts include:
      a.   19th Street from 7th Avenue to the riverfront.
      b.   River Drive from 12th Street to 34th Street.
      c.   5th Avenue from 10th Street to 11th Street.
      d.   5th Avenue Place from 11th Street to 12th Street.
      e.   6th Avenue from 11th Street to 23rd Street.
      f.   12th Street from 6th Avenue to River Drive.
   (f)   APPLICABLE TO ALL BUILDING TYPES. The regulations of this subsection
apply to all building types in the Moline Centre districts, unless otherwise
stated.
   (1)   PERMANENT BUILDINGS. All buildings must be of permanent construction
without a chassis, hitch, or wheels, or other features that would make the
structure mobile, unless otherwise expressly stated in this code, and except
temporary buildings as allowed per Sec. 35-3418.
   (2)   STREET FRONTAGE. All lots must front a public street.
   (3)   NUMBER OF PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS. One principal building is allowed per
lot, unless otherwise stated in the building type regulations, Sec.
35-3903(g) through
35-3903(k).
   (4)   PRIMARY FRONTAGES. Primary frontages generally establish the fronts of
lots and buildings, and determine where to locate the principal entrance to the
building. Per the building type regulations, primary frontages require the
highest level of facade treatment and restrict the location of parking,
driveways, and garage entrances.
      a.   Primary Street Designation. Primary frontage treatments are required
along primary streets designated as follows:
         1.   Primary Streets. Primary streets in Moline Centre include River
Drive, 5th Avenue, 6th Avenue, 7th Avenue, 12th Street, 15th Street south of
5th Avenue, 17th Street, and 19th Street.
         2.   Master Plan Development (MPD). See Sec.
35-3908(b)(4) for new primary street designations within an MPD.
         3.   One Primary Street Frontage Required. All lots must treat at
least one street frontage as primary. For example, a lot frontage only by one
non-primary street must treat that frontage as primary. A lot fronted by two
non-primary streets must treat at least one frontage as a primary frontage.
      b.   Waterfront. Lots with frontage along the Mississippi River must
treat facades facing the waterfront as primary frontages in addition to any
primary street frontage.
         1.   Primary build-to zones must be measured from the edge of any
existing, established, or required trail easement into the lot.
         2.   Primary and non-primary facade regulations for each building type
(see Sec.
35-3903(g) through
35-3903(k), subsection (08) of each) must be met for primary facades, including
transparency, entrances, elevation, and facade divisions.
      c.   Civic or Open Space Frontage. Lots containing or abutting civic
spaces or public open spaces must treat frontages abutting that space as
primary frontages, unless otherwise approved by an administrative adjustment
(see Sec.
35-3909(d)). Civic spaces are any spaces required by a Master Plan Development
per Sec.
35-3908 and public open spaces include any parks, outdoor cultural spaces, or
CV-2 zoned parcels with outdoor plazas or other gathering spaces.
      d.   Through-Lots with Two Primary Frontages.
         1.   Where a parcel extends from one primary street through the block
to another primary street, each street must be treated as a primary frontage,
unless otherwise approved as a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
         2.   Any through-lot facing any residential zoning district per
Division 2 of Article III across a street must incorporate the following:
            i.   Within the first 30 feet of lot depth across from any
residential zoning district primary frontage, all regulations of a General or
Row Building type.
            ii.   Uses permitted in those building types except no retail or
consumer service category uses are allowed.
         3.   A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for a different configuration.
      e.   Intersecting Primary Streets. Where two primary streets intersect on
the subject lot, the following applies:
         1.   The following hierarchy of streets shall apply, in order: 19th
Street, 5th Avenue, 15th Street, 6th Avenue, 12th Street, 17th Street.
         2.   Except at intersections involving the above streets, the
development may treat either as the primary frontage.
      f.   Non-Primary Frontage. A non-primary frontage is a street frontage
that is not considered a primary frontage.
         1.   Non-primary frontages allow for a lower level of facade treatment
as well as permit locations for garage and parking lot driveways entrances.
         2.   Non-primary frontages may always be treated at the higher level
of a primary frontage.
      g.   Alleys. For the Moline Centre districts, alleys are not considered
"streets" and, therefore, cannot be a primary frontage, nor are they required
to be treated as non-primary or street frontages.
   (5)   MINIMUM STREETSCAPE AREA.
      a.   Purpose. A minimum area between the street pavement and the lot line
is required to ensure adequate pedestrian facilities are provided along all
streets, including, at a minimum, sidewalks and street trees.
      b.   Build-to Zone Measurement. Where the area from the back of curb to
the lot line along any portion of the frontage is less than 12 feet, the build-
to zone must be measured starting from 12 feet off the back of curb/edge of
pavement into the lot. The result is the building will be located such that the
pedestrian area is at least 12 feet deep. The back-of-curb measurement must be
taken along the typical street segment and must not include any bump-outs at
street corners. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(5) for measuring build-to zones.
      c.   Streetscape. The extended streetscape area must be treated with
streetscape per Sec.
35-3907(f).
      d.   Easement. When the sidewalk is less than 6 feet in clear width, an
easement is required to ensure a full 6-foot sidewalk is publicly available.
      e.   Adjustment. A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for this requirement, provided the resulting
streetscape area is at least 8 feet in depth.
   (6)   TREATMENT OF YARDS. All yards must consist of landscape areas, terrace
space, or sidewalk space, unless otherwise expressly stated, designed for
people. See Sec.
35-3907 for landscape and site design regulations and Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of yards. The following defines how vehicular areas
may occur in yards:
      a.   Parking Locations. Paved vehicular areas (parking lots, loading
areas, drives) are located per the building type regulations. Minimum side and
rear setbacks of parking must be landscaped.
      b.   Side Yard Parking Lots. Some building types allow side yard parking
lots. Side yard parking lots must not encroach into any street yard or minimum
side setback, except as otherwise expressly stated.
      c.   Driveways Crossing Yards. Paved vehicular areas are limited to
specific locations per the applicable building type regulations. Driveways may
cross through yards as follows:
         1.   Where access is allowed from a street to the lot, driveways may
cross perpendicularly through the primary or non-primary street yards, except
as otherwise expressly stated.
         2.   In all districts, driveways may cross perpendicularly through the
side and rear yards to connect to parking on adjacent lots.
   (7)   REFUSE & RECYCLING LOCATIONS. Unless otherwise defined by the building
type, all refuse, recycling, and other waste areas must comply with the
regulations of this subsection, Sec.
35-3903(f)(7). Recycling includes any donation collections containers for
clothing or goods.
      a.   Rear Yard. Refuse, recycling, and other waste areas must be located
in the rear yard of the lot, except as otherwise allowed by this subsection,
Sec.
35-3903(f)(7). See Sec.
35-3907(l) for required screening of refuse, recycling, and other waste areas.
      b.   Other Yards.
         1.   When no rear yard exists or when the rear yard is less than 5
feet in depth, refuse, recycling, and other waste areas may be located in the
rear portion of an interior side yard.
         2.   When no rear or side yard exists, refuse, recycling, and other
waste areas, a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for locating containers in the non-primary street
yard or in the street right-of-way with a license agreement per Sec. 28-2108.
In no case shall containers or a refuse, recycling, or other waste area be
located in a primary street yard.
         3.   See Sec.
35-3907(l) for required screening of refuse, recycling, and other waste areas.
      c.   Interior Location Access Doors. Refuse, recycling, and other waste
areas must be located inside the building with access doors off the rear or
interior side facade.
         1.   Access doors may be located off a non-primary street facade if no
other option exists.
         2.   Access doors must be opaque, screening a minimum of 80% of the
opening.
         3.   Carts, dumpsters, and containers must be located immediately
inside the access doors and stored inside until the process of emptying.
         4.   Carts, dumpsters, and containers may not be pulled out of the
storage area in advance of the arrival of the hauling truck.
   (8)   LOADING LOCATIONS. Unless otherwise expressly defined by the building
type, all loading areas must be located as follows.
      a.   Rear Yard. All loading activities must occur in the rear or interior
yard.
      b.   Access Doors and Docks. All loading docks and access doors must be
located on a rear facade or interior yard facade.
      c.   Screening. See Sec.
35-3907 for required buffers and Sec.
35-3907(l) for required screening.
   (g)   STOREFRONT BUILDING TYPE.
   (1)   DESCRIPTION AND INTENT. The Storefront Building type is intended for
use along corridors to accommodate shopping, services, and eating
establishments in a mixed-use building. Oriented to the street with narrow or
no side setbacks, this building type's streetwalls help define the public space
of the street. Ground-story storefront glass, entrances along the sidewalk, and
windows in upper stories facing the street make these buildings interesting and
inviting to pedestrians. Parking is located internally or in the rear yard.
   (2)   ILLUSTRATIVE IMAGES. The images shown in Figure
3903(g)-A are intended only to illustrate the general character of the building
type. The buildings and sites in each image may not fulfill all of the building
type regulations.
   (3)   BUILDING REGULATIONS. The following tables and illustrations regulate
this specific building type. See Sec.
35-3903(f) for general regulations for all building types. See Sec.
35-3903(m) and
35-3903(l) for definitions and measuring table regulations.
 
LINK        SUBSECTION
3903(g)(04) Building Siting
3903(g)(05) Parking & Accessory Structures
3903(g)(06) Height
3903(g)(07) Roofs
3903(g)(08) Primary & Non-Primary Facades
3903(g)(9)  Supplemental Regulations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5089.png]
Figure 3903(g)-A. Examples of Storefront Building Type
Figure 3903(g)-B. Storefront Building Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5101.png]
3903(g)(04)
Figure 3903(g)-C. Storefront Building Parking Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5103.png]
3903(g)(05)
Figure 3903(g)-D. Storefront Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5105.png]
3903(g)(06)
Figure 3903(g)-E. Storefront Building Facade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5107.png]
3903(g)(08)
   (9)   SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Primary Streetwall Variation. A courtyard or seating/dining area may
be provided on any building length provided the following regulations are met,
but either a courtyard or seating/dining area meeting the following must be
provided where any building streetwall is longer than 200-foot in width:
         1.   Courtyard. The courtyard must have a minimum of 30 feet in width
and a minimum of 30 feet in depth, per streetwall.
            i.   Streetwall. A courtyard may count towards primary streetwall
when abutting the build-to zone. See definition of courtyard in Sec.
35-3903(m).
            ii.   Parking. Parking is not allowed in any courtyards.
            iii.   Primary Frontages. Courtyard facades must be treated as
primary frontages per the facade regulations for the building type and any
design regulations in Sec.
35-3906.
            iv.   Corners. Courtyards may not be located on the corner of the
lot except as approved by a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)). No more than 2 corners of any street intersection may be occupied
by a courtyard.
            v.   Landscape Design. The courtyard must include special paving
materials and patterns, and landscape materials such as trees in grates or
planters and/or landscape beds.
            vi.   Required Seating. Temporary or permanent seating is required.
Temporary seating must be in place between April 30 and September 30, at a
minimum.
            vii.   Required Amenity. At least one other amenity must be
included as follows such as a pergola, series of wall trellises, catenary or
string overhead lighting, fountain, or artwork such as a sculpture or mural
must be included.
            viii.   Public Art. See Sec.
35-3903(e)(2) for public art requirements on cultural corridors that may be
utilized to meet the amenity requirement.
            ix.   Lighting. Lighting must be provided consistent with Division
3 of Article V and any abutting streetscape lighting.
            x.   Design Adjustments. Other amenities may be approved to meet
the amenity requirement through the design adjustments process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
         2.   Seating/Dining Areas. Where required, a minimum of length of at
least 50 feet along the primary build-to zone contiguously must be provided.
            i.   Build-to Zone. The seating/dining areas must be located within
the build-to zone, and the seating area must be a minimum of 8 feet deep.
            ii.   Streetscape Design. The seating/dining areas must be
consistent with the streetscape design per Sec.
35-3907(f). Special paving materials and patterns, landscape materials such as
trees in grates or planters and/or landscape beds must be included.
            iii.   Required Seating. Temporary or permanent seating is
required. Temporary seating must be in place between April 30 and September 30,
at a minimum.
            iv.   Required Amenity. At least one other amenity must be included
as follows such as a pergola, wall trellises, catenary or string overhead
lighting, fountain, or artwork such as a sculpture or mural must be included.
            v.   Public Art. See Sec.
35-3903(e)(2) for public art requirements on cultural corridors that may be
utilized to meet the amenity requirement.
            vi.   Lighting. Lighting must be provided consistent with Division
3 of Article V and any abutting streetscape lighting.
            vii.   Design Adjustments. Other amenities may be approved to meet
the amenity requirement through the design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
   (h) - GENERAL BUILDING TYPE
      (1)   DESCRIPTION AND INTENT.    The General Building is a basic urban
building, typically housing multiple residential units, office laboratory
spaces, classrooms, and similar spaces, usually with a central main entrance
off a lobby and with windows delineating each story. Parking is located in the
rear yard with attached garages entered from the rear of the building.
Buildings vary in height depending on the district with any half story located
within a pitched roof or in a visible basement.
      (2)   ILLUSTRIATIVE IMAGES.   The images shown in Figure
3903(h)- A are intended only to illustrate the general character of the
building type. The buildings and sites in each image may not fulfill all of the
building type regulations.
      (3)   BUILDING REGULATIONS. The following tables and illustrations
regulate this specific building type. See 35-3903(f) for general regulations
for all building types. See Sec. 35-39039(m) and 35-3903(l) for definitions and
measuring table regulations.
 
LINK        SUBSECTION
3903(h)(04) Building Siting
3903(h)(05) Parking & Accessory Structures
3903(h)(06) Height
3903(h)(07) Roofs
3903(h)(08) Primary & Non-Primary Facades
3903(h)(09) Supplemental Regulations
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5109.png]
Figure 3903(h)-A. Examples of General Building Type
Figure 3903(h)-B. General Building Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5111.png]
3903(h)(04)
Figure 3903(h)-C. General Building Parking Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5113.png]
3903(h)(05)
Figure 3903(h)-D. General Building Height and Roofs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5115.png]
3903(h)(06)
Figure 3903(h)-E. General Building Facade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5117.png]
3603(h)(08)
      a.   Primary Streetwall Variation. A courtyard or seating/dining area may
be provided on any building length provided the following regulations are met,
but either a courtyard or seating/dining area meeting the following must be
provided where any building streetwall is longer than 200-foot in width:
         1.   Courtyard. The courtyard must have a minimum of 30 feet in width
and a minimum of 30 feet in depth, per streetwall.
            i.   Streetwall. A courtyard may count towards primary streetwall
when abutting the build-to zone. See definition of courtyard in Sec. 35-3903
(m).
            ii.   Parking. Parking is not allowed in any courtyards.
            iii.   Primary Frontages. Courtyard facades must be treated as
primary frontages per the facade regulations for the building type and any
design regulations in Sec. 35-3906.
            iv.   Corners. Courtyards may not be located on the corner of the
lot except as approved by a design adjustment (see Sec. 35-3909(e)). No more
than 2 corners of any street intersection may be occupied by a courtyard.
            v.   Landscape Design. The courtyard must include special paving
materials and patterns, and landscape materials such as trees in grates or
planters and/or landscape beds.
            vi.   Required Seating. Temporary or permanent seating is required.
Temporary seating must be in place between April 30 and September 30, at a
minimum.
            vii.   Required Amenity. At least one other amenity must be
included as follows such as a pergola, series of wall trellises, catenary or
string overhead lighting, fountain, or artwork such as a sculpture or mural
must be included.
            viii.   Public Art. See Sec. 35-3903(e)(2) for public art
requirements on cultural corridors that may be utilized to meet the amenity
requirement.
            ix.   Lighting. Lighting must be provided consistent with Division
3 of Article V and any abutting streetscape lighting.
            x.   Design Adjustments. Other amenities may be approved to meet
the amenity requirement through the design adjustments process (see Sec. 35-
3909(e)).
         2.   Seating/Dining Areas. Where required, a minimum of length of at
least 50 feet along the primary build-to zone contiguously must be provided.
            i.   Build-to Zone. The seating/dining areas must be located within
the build-to zone, and the seating area must be a minimum of 8 feet deep.
            ii.   Streetscape Design. The seating/dining areas must be
consistent with the streetscape design per Sec. 35-3907(f). Special paving
materials and patterns, landscape materials such as trees in grates or planters
and/or landscape beds must be included.
            iii.   Required Seating. Temporary or permanent seating is
required. Temporary seating must be in place between April 30 and September 30,
at a minimum.
            iv.   Required Amenity. At least one other amenity must be included
as follows such as a pergola, wall trellises, catenary or string overhead
lighting, fountain, or artwork such as a sculpture or mural must be included.
            v.   Public Art. See Sec. 35-3903(e)(2) for public art requirements
on cultural corridors that may be utilized to meet the amenity requirement.
            vi.   Lighting. Lighting must be provided consistent with Division
3 of Article V and any abutting streetscape lighting.
            vii.   Design Adjustments. Other amenities may be approved to meet
the amenity requirement through the design adjustment process (see Sec. 35-3909
(e)).
   (i)   ROW BUILDING TYPE.
   (1)   DESCRIPTION AND INTENT. The Row Building is comprised of multiple
vertical units with shared side walls. Each unit is typically oriented to the
street with an entrance off the public sidewalk and can be solely residential
or a live-work unit, as allowed by the district. Parking is located in the rear
yard with either detached garages or attached garages entered from the rear of
the building.
   (2)   ILLUSTRATIVE IMAGES. The images shown in Figure 3903(i)-A are intended
only to illustrate the general character of the building type. The buildings
and sites in each image may not fulfill all of the building type regulations.
   (3)   BUILDING REGULATIONS. The following tables and illustrations regulate
this specific building type. For the purposes of the Row Building, a building
consists of a series of units. See Sec.
35-3903(f) for general regulations for all building types. See Sec.
35-3903(m) and
35-3903(l) for definitions and measuring table regulations.
 
LINK        SUBSECTION
3903(i)(04) Building Siting
3903(i)(05) Parking & Accessory Structures
3903(i)(06) Height
3903(i)(07) Roofs
3903(i)(08) Primary & Non-Primary Facades
3903(i)(9)  Supplemental Regulations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5122.png]
Figure 3903(i)-A. Examples of Row Building Type
Figure 3903(i)-B. Row Building Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5124.png]
3903(i)(04)
Figure 3903(i)-C. Row Building Parking Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5126.png]
3903(i)(05)
Figure 3903(i)-D. Row Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5512.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5537.png]
3903(i)(06)
Figure 3903(i)-E. Row Building Facades and Roofs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5514.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5535.png]
3903(i)(08)
   (9)   SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Multiple Buildings on a Lot. Multiple buildings may be located on a
lot with the following regulations:
         1.   The minimum space between buildings is met.
         2.   Each building must fulfill all of the requirements of the
building type unless otherwise expressly stated.
         3.   Each building must be located in the build-to zone, contributing
to the primary streetwall requirements, except one of every 2 units may front a
courtyard. See Figure 3903(i)-F. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(4) for measuring primary streetwall.
            i.   The courtyard counts as primary streetwall as long as 3 sides
are enclosed at the minimum primary streetwall percentage.
            ii.   Parking is not allowed in the courtyard.
            iii.   Primary facade requirements apply to courtyard facades.
            iv.   If a unit is located on the corner of the courtyard and the
street, the entrance must be located on the street.
            v.   All entrances must connect to the primary street sidewalk via
a minimum 4-foot wide sidewalk.
      b.    Garage Door Visibility. Garage doors must be screened from any
street by building or by a masonry wing wall off the building. The wing wall
must be faced in an allowed major material used on the adjacent building
facade.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5132.png]
Figure 3903(i)-F. Multiple Row Buildings on a Lot
   (j)   YARD BUILDING TYPE.
   (1)    DESCRIPTION AND INTENT. The Yard Building incorporates
characteristics typical of traditional houses such as small yards surrounding
the building, windows and doors on the front, and often a pitched roof. The
Yard Building, however, can accommodate a variety of uses, including single-
unit and multiple-unit residential as well office uses, where allowed by zoning
district. Parking is located in the rear yard and accessed off an alley.
   (2)   ILLUSTRATIVE IMAGES. The images shown in Figure 3903(j)-A are intended
only to illustrate the general character of the building type. The buildings
and sites in each image may not fulfill all of the building type regulations.
   (3)   BUILDING REGULATIONS. The following tables and illustrations regulate
this specific building type. See Sec.
35-3903(f) for general regulations for all building types. See Sec.
35-3903(m) and
35-3903(l) for definitions and measuring table regulations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5134.png]
Figure 3903(j)-A. Examples of Yard Building Type
Figure 3903(j)-B. Yard Building Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5136.png]
3903(j)(04)
Figure 3903(j)-C. Yard Building Parking Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5138.png]
3903(j)(05)
Figure 3903(j)-D. Yard Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5516.png]
Figure 3903(j)-E. Yard Building Facades
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5142.png]
3903(j)(08)
   (9)   SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   [reserved]
   (k)   CIVIC BUILDING TYPE.
   (1)   DESCRIPTION AND INTENT. The Civic Building is the most flexible
building type, but is limited to buildings with civic and institutional uses.
This building type is intended to allow distinctive buildings within the urban
fabric, set back within a landscape setting and/or designed as unique, iconic
structures.
      A front entrance on the street with a minimum amount of windows promotes
walking to the buildings, while parking is located on the side or in the rear.
   (2)   ILLUSTRATIVE IMAGES. The images shown in Figure 3903(k)-A are intended
only to illustrate the general character of the building type. The buildings
and sites in each image may not fulfill all of the building type regulations.
   (3)   BUILDING REGULATIONS.
      a.   Use of the Civic Building type is limited to principal uses in the
civic and institutional use group only, as defined in Sec.
35-3904(e).
      b.   The following tables and illustrations regulate this specific
building type. See Sec.
35-3903(f) for general regulations for all building types. See Sec.
35-3903(m) and 35-3903(l) for definitions and measuring table regulations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5144.png]
Figure 3903(k)-A. Examples of Civic Building Type
Figure 3903(k)-B. Civic Building Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5146.png]
3903(k)(04)
Figure 3903(k)-C. Civic Building Parking Siting
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5148.png]
3903(k)(05)
Figure 3903(k)-B. Civic Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5150.png]
3903(k)(06)
Figure 3903(k)-E. Civic Building Facades
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5152.png]
3903(k)(08)
   (9)    SUPPLEMENTAL CIVIC BUILDING REGULATIONS
      [reserved]
   (l)    M E A SURING BUILDING TYPE REGULATIONS. The following measuring
instructions and additional information applies to the building type
regulations in this Division 9.
   (1)   FRACTIONS AND ROUNDING GENERALLY. When calculations required under
this Division 9 result in fractions, any fractional result of less than one-
half of the unit of the regulation is rounded down to the whole number and any
fractional result of one-half or more of the regulation unit is rounded up to
the whole number. For example, if the maximum regulation is 2 feet, a
measurement of 1.5 feet (or 1-foot, 6 inches) is rounded up to 2 feet and a
measurement of 1.25 feet (or 1-foot, 3 inches) is rounded down to 1 foot. If
the maximum regulation is in inches, fractions are rounded to the nearest inch.
   (2)   GENERALLY PARALLEL & PERPENDICULAR. "Generally parallel," when stated
related to lot lines or building facades, means less than 45 degrees off the
lot line or facade. "Generally perpendicular," when stated related to lot lines
or building facades, means 45 or more degrees off the lot line or facade in any
direction.
   (3)   LOT WIDTH. Lot width is the horizontal distance measured along the
minimum front setback line between the side lot lines of a lot. If no minimum
front setback is required, lot width is measured along the front lot line.
   (4)   PRIMARY STREETWALL.
      a.   Definition. The minimum amount of building facade required along and
generally parallel to a primary street frontage, and built within the build-to
zone. A streetwall refers to the building facade along the street, creating an
edge to the streetscape area.
      b.   Measurement: Primary Streetwall Minimum Percentage. The primary
streetwall percentage is measured as the width of the principal structures
within the primary build-to zone, divided by the length of the lot line
parallel to the primary street, minus the minimum side setbacks. The streetwall
percentage must be greater than or equal to the minimum required percentage in
the building type regulations. See Figure 3903(l)-A.
      c.   Measurement: Maximum Primary Streetwall. The primary streetwall
width is measured as the width of the principal structures within the primary
build-to zone. The streetwall width must be less than or equal to the maximum
streetwall width allowed in the building type regulations.
      d.   Height. The streetwall or building facade being measured must meet
the minimum height required for the building type. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(9)a.
      e.   Courtyard and Other Allowances. Courtyards and other allowances may
be listed in the supplemental regulations for the building type as required or
allowed, and may be counted towards the streetwall as expressly stated. The
length of the courtyard opening or any allowed, expressly stated expanded
build-to zone is measured in the build-to zone, generally parallel to the
primary facade.
   (5)   SETBACKS AND BUILD-TO ZONES.
      a.   Measurement: Buildings. Required setbacks and build-to zones are
measured from the applicable lot line, right-of-way line, or specific location
referred to in the applicable regulation, into the lot. For minimum setbacks,
the nearest exterior building walls generally parallel to the subject line are
used. For build-to zones, the entire facade must be located in the allowed
zone, no closer than the minimum required dimension and no farther from the lot
line than the maximum required dimension.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5155.png]
Figure 3903(l)-A. Measuring Primary Streetwall
         1.    Street (primary and non-primary) setbacks and build-to zones are
measured from the actual right-of-way line of the street or street lot line
into the lot. For example, a build-to zone range of 5 to 10 feet would start 5
feet from the street lot line and end 10 feet from the street lot line,
resulting in a 5-foot deep zone. (Alleys are not considered streets and
typically abut side or rear lot lines.)
         2.    Side or interior-side setbacks are measured from the nearest
side lot line that does not abut a street into the lot.
         3.   Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line into the lot.
         4.   On corner lots, the required primary or non-primary setback must
be provided for each street frontage, depending on whether the abutting street
is a primary or non-primary street. The lot line opposite of the primary street
is the rear lot line, requiring a rear setback. The lot line generally
perpendicular to the primary street is the side lot line, requiring a side
setback.
         5.   On through-lots, the required primary or nonprimary setback must
be provided for each street frontage, depending on whether the abutting street
is a primary or non-primary street. (See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definitions.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5157.png]
Figure 3903(l)-B. Build-to Zones
      b.    Minimum Required Streetscape Area. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(5) for regulations requiring a minimum streetscape area. Where the
minimum area does not exist, the build-to zone is measured from the edge of the
expanded streetscape area into the lot.
      c.   Exceptions to Build-to Zones. Upper-story recessed balcony facades
are not required to be located within the build-to zone.
      d.   Allowed Encroachments. Allowed encroachments into setbacks or beyond
build-to zones are as follows, unless otherwise established in the building
type regulations:
         1.   Minor Building Projections in All Yards for All Building Types.
Roof overhangs, eaves, chimneys, bays, and other architectural features, such
as cornices, may encroach up to 18 inches into any yard no closer than 1 foot
from the lot line.
         2.   Steps and Ramps in Front Yards. Steps and ramps in front yards
may encroach fully into any yard up to within 1 foot of any lot line.
      e.   Setbacks on Irregular Lots. Setbacks are measured from lot lines
towards the center of the lot as follows:
         1.   When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks must be measured
parallel to the curvilinear lot line.
         2.   When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback must be
measured from each of rear lot lines.
      f.   Waterfront. A river or trail frontage build-to zone or setback is
measured from the required trail easement or right-of-way into the lot
perpendicular to the easement or lot line. See Sec.
35-3907(h) for waterfront frontage trail easement.
      g.   Measurement: Elements Other than Buildings. Minimum setbacks that
apply to elements other than buildings (e.g. parking areas, fences, storage
areas) are measured from the lot line, right-of-way line, or specific location
referred to in the applicable regulations, to the nearest point of the feature.
   (6)   SITE COVERAGE. Site coverage is measured as the percentage of a lot
covered by impervious surfaces. See Figure 3903(l)-E.
      a.   Impervious Surfaces. Any land or portion of a site covered by
constructed features that prevent the direct percolation of surface water into
the underlying earth. Examples include buildings, paved parking and roadways,
masonry walls and terraces, swimming pools, sidewalks, hard surface playing
courts, and paved driveways.
      b.   Semi-Pervious Materials. Semi-pervious materials, such as semi-
pervious pavers, semi-pervious asphalt, and semi-pervious concrete, counts
towards the site coverage at a lower rate. The area of the semi-pervious
materials is added into the overall site coverage at 75% of the actual area.
For example, if the area of semi-pervious materials measures 1,600 sq. ft.,
1,200 sq. ft. (75% of 1,600) contributes to the lot's maximum site coverage.
      c.   Green Roofs. Green, or vegetated, roofs count towards the site
coverage, calculated at 75% of the area of the green roof. For example, if the
surface of the green roof measures 13,000 sq. ft., then 9,750 sq. ft. (75% of
1,600) contributes to the lot's maximum site coverage.
   (7)   INTERNAL PARKING OR ATTACHED GARAGE PARKING.
      a.   Intent. The setback is intended to promote the use of the area
directly behind the primary facade of any building for people and not the
parking of vehicles.
      b.   Internal Parking or Attached Garage Setback Measurement. Internal
parking or attached garage setbacks are defined in the building type
regulations.
      c.   Dimensional Setback. When the building type regulation includes a
dimensional setback for internal parking or an attached garage, the setback is
measured from the primary facade of the building, located generally parallel
and facing the primary lot line.
      d.   Setback Use. The use of the space of the building within the setback
must be occupied space. See definition.
      e.   Internal Parking Door Location. Any garage door must be located on
one of the designated facades of the building.
   (8)   LIMITED SIDE YARD PARKING. Where allowed, limited side yard parking is
located in the interior side yard and must be configured as one double- or
single-loaded aisle of parking with the centerline of the aisle located
perpendicular to the street.
   (9)   BUILDING HEIGHT. See Figure 3903(l)-C.
      a.   Minimum Height. Each building type requires a minimum number of
stories. The building must meet the minimum required height along all primary
street facades and for a depth of at least 30 feet into the building. All
building facades located within the build-to zone must meet the required
minimum building height, occupying the same plane. For example, with a minimum
height of 2 stories, the street facade of the second story may not be set back
from the first story.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5159.png]
Figure 3903(l)-C. Measuring Building Height
      b.   Maximum Height. Maximum heights are specified in number of stories.
This requirement applies to the entire building. The maximum number of stories
may not be exceeded due to sloped sites. Heights must step with the grade in
order to not exceed the maximum allowable height. See Figure 3903(l)-F.
      c.   Towers. When expressly allowed in the building type tables, towers
may exceed the overall maximum height of the subject building type (see Sec.
35- 3906(b)(6)).
      d.   Height to Eaves. Eave height is measured from the floor elevation of
the first floor to the eave.
      e.   Roof Type. Roof types per Sec.
35-3906(b) allowed by building type regulations add additional height to the
building.
      f.   Half Stories. Half stories are stories either located fully within
the roof type or in a visible basement.
         1.   Roof. Where occupied building space is allowed within the roof
type (see Sec.
35-3906(b)), any space within the roof and within the floor-to-floor height
counts as a half story towards the overall allowable height.
            i.   The occupiable footprint of half stories in the roof is
limited to no more than 65% of the footprint of story below.
            ii.   Dormers or gabled ends of roofs on half stories are limited
to no more than 50% of the facade length of the story below, and must be set
back from any street facade a minimum of 9 feet.
         2.   Visible Basement. See Figure 3903(l)-D. for a diagram and
explanation of a visible basement and Sec.
35-3903(m) for definitions of basements and visible basements.
         3.     Two Half Stories. If a building has both a half story within
the roof and a half story that is a visible basement, the combined height of
the two half stories is considered one full story in terms of measuring overall
height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5161.png]
Figure 3903(l)-D. Basements & Visible Basements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5163.png]
Figure 3903(l)-E. Site Coverage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5165.png]
Figure 3903(l)-F. Measuring Height along a Sloped Street
      g.    Basements. See Figure 3903(l)-D. for ill ustration of ba sements
and Se c.
35- 3903 (m) for definitions of basements and visible basements.
         1.    A basement that is not a visible basement does not co unt
towards the minimum or maximum height of a building.
         2.   A basement may contain any use allowed within the building,
including those allowed only in upper stories.
      h.   Story Height. Each story is measured with a range of permitted
floor-to-floor heights. See Figure 3903(l)-C.
         1.   Measurement. All story heights are measured in feet between the
floor of a story to the floor of the story above it. Minimum and maximum floor-
to-floor heights are required along a minimum of 80% of each facade's
horizontal length for each story.
         2.   Ground Story. When noted as a separate story height, the ground-
story height must extend from the primary street facade into the building a
minimum of 30 feet. The remainder of the groundstory may meet either the
primary frontage groundstory heights or the height range permitted for all
stories.
         3.   Single-Story Buildings and Top-Story Measurement. For single-
story buildings and the uppermost story of a multi-story building, the floor-
to-floor height is measured from the floor of the story to the ceiling, unless
a specific height is provided for a single-story building.
         4.   Mezzanines. Mezzanines may be included within the allowed floor-
to-floor height of any story per the building types, provided the following:
            i.   Mezzanines extending above the story’s allowable floor-to-
floor height must count as a full story in addition to the story below.
            ii.   Mezzanines occupying more than 30% of the floor area below
must count as a full story in addition to the story below.
            iii.   Where the mezzanine story is located adjacent to a street
facade, the street facade transparency requirements of the subject building
type must be applied to both the mezzanine floor and the story the mezzanine
overlooks.
         5.   Taller Spaces. Spaces exceeding the allowable floor-to-floor
heights of the building type are permitted for a maximum of 20% the length of
street facades.
   (10)   TRANSPARENCY. Governed by the building type regulations, the
transparency of a facade is measured for each story separately using 2
regulations: (1) an overall minimum transparency percentage per story, and (2)
where applicable per building type, maximum blank-wall segments (per Sec.
35-3903(l)(10)c., below).
      a.   Definition of Transparency. For the purposes of the Moline Centre
districts, transparency is the measurement of the percentage of a facade that
contains highly transparent, low-reflectance glass.
         1.   Storefront. When transparency is required separately for primary
street ground-story facades, glass must be a minimum of 60% transmittance
factor and a reflectance factor of not greater than 0.25.
         2.   All Other Windows. Transparency for all window, door glass, and
other storefront glass must be a minimum of 50% transmittance factor and a
reflectance factor of not greater than 0.25.
         3.   False Windows. The use of false or faux windows, where the window
is visible from the exterior with no opening from the interior, to meet the
transparency requirement is not allowed.
      b.   Measurement. Minimum facade transparency is measured from floor-to-
floor of each story separately, except for required minimum ground-story
transparency as defined below. See the building type regulations for required
transparency by building type.
         1.   Transparency requirements must be met with windows or glass in
doors that comply with applicable transmittance and reflectance factors.
         2.   The measurement may include the frame, mullions, and muntins, but
may not include trim or casing.
      c.   Blank-Wall Segments. Where applicable per the building type
regulations, blank-wall segments on all facades must meet the following:
         1.   No rectangular areas greater than 30% of a story’s facade, as
Measured floor to floor, may be blank wall, without transparency. See Figure
3903(l)-H.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5167.png]
Figure 3903(l)-G. Measuring Transparency Floor-to-Floor
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5525.png]
Figure 3903(l)-H. Blank-Wall Segments (1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5171.png]
Figure 3903(l)-J. Measuring Transparency on Taller Stories
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5520.png]
Figure 3903(l)-K. Entrances
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5523.png]
         2.    No horizontal segments of a story’s facade greater than 15 feet
in width may be blank wall, without transparency. See Figure 3903(l)-H.
      d.   Minimum Ground-Story Transparency. When a separate minimum ground-
story transparency is required per the building types requirements, the ground-
story transparency is measured between 2 feet and 10 feet from the average
grade at the base of the facade.
      e.   Mezzanines. Mezzanines treated as a separate story per Sec.
35-3903(l)(9) must include upper-story transparency required per building type.
      f.   Tall Stories. Stories that are 18 feet or taller in height must
include additional transparency consistent with the following standards. See
Figure 3903(l)-J.
         1.   Separate Ground-Story Transparency Required. When a separate
minimum ground-story transparency is required per building type, the facade
design must fulfill that requirement in addition to the minimum transparency
for the remainder of the ground-story.
         2.   No Separate Ground-Story Transparency Required. Where no separate
ground-story transparency is required per building type, a tall story is
treated as 2 separate stories, divided in half horizontally, with the minimum
transparency applied to each half.
      g.   Half Stories. All half-story facades located within the roof
structure and within visible basements must meet the minimum required
transparency.
   (11)   BUILDING ENTRANCES. Entrances must be provided consistent with the
entrance location and number requirements established for the subject building
type and consistent with Figure 3903(l)-K.
   (m)   DEFINITIONS. The following definitions apply to the Moline Centre
districts in this Division 9.
      ALLEY. For the purposes of the Moline Centre districts, an ally is a
right-of-way providing vehicular access, loading, and service access to the
rear or side of a building; and an alley is not considered a street.
      BASEMENT. That portion of a building having more than 3 feet of its
floor-to-ceiling height below the average finished grade of the adjoining
ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of 7.5 feet or more. See Figure 3903
(l)-D.
      BASEMENT, VISIBLE. A basement having more than 3 feet of its floor-to-
ceiling height above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground. See
Figure 3903(l)-D.
      BUILD-TO ZONE. An area in which the street facade of a building must be
placed, dictated by the minimum and the maximum distance a structure may be
placed from the lot line. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(5).
      COURTYARD. A courtyard is any open air, uncovered landscape, sidewalk,
terrace, and/or deck area, enclosed on at least 3 sides and with a maximum
opening of 50% of any street facade.
      FACADE, NON-PRIMARY. A building facade generally parallel to and facing
the right-of-way line along a nonprimary street.
      FACADE, PRIMARY. A building facade generally parallel and facing the
right-of-way line along a primary street.
      FACADE, REAR. Any facade of a building generally parallel to and facing
the rear lot line.
      FACADE, SIDE. Any facade of a building generally parallel to and facing a
side or interior side lot line.
      FACADE, STREET. Any facade of a building generally parallel to and facing
any street right-of-way and including bays or minor walls perpendicular to the
facade. A street facade may be a primary or non-primary facade, depending on
whether it is facing a primary or non-primary street, respectively.
      FRONTAGE, NON-PRIMARY. The portion of a lot or building abutting or
directly adjacent to a non-primary street right-of-way.
      FRONTAGE, PRIMARY. The portion of a lot or building abutting or directly
adjacent to a primary street right-of-way.
      FRONTAGE, STREET. The portion of a lot or building abutting or directly
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
      GREEN ROOF. The roof of a building that is partially or completely
covered with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing
membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and
drainage and irrigation systems.
      OCCUPIED BUILDING SPACE. Interior building space occupiable by people,
not including storage, mechanical, utility, or garage space.
      SHADOW LINE. An architectural feature consisting of a typically
decorative, 3-dimensional, linear element, horizontal or vertical, protruding
or indented at least 1.5 inch in depth from the exterior facade of a building,
and creating a shadow on the facade with light overhead, and extending, with
limited interruption, the length or height of the designated story. Examples
may include cast stone cornices or lintels, pilasters, or stepped brick
coursing.
      STORY, GROUND. Also called ground floor. The story closest to the ground
level that does not meet the definition of a basement.
      STORY, HALF. See measuring of building height, Sec.
35-3903(l)(9).
      STREET LOT LINE. A line dividing a lot from a public right-of-way.
      STREETSCAPE AREA. The area behind the back of curb designed for
pedestrian travel, including the sidewalk and buffer zone between the sidewalk
and street for street planting and/or street furnishings.
      STREETWALL. The portion of the building facade that is located generally
parallel and facing the street right-of-way line.
   For the purposes of the Moline Centre districts, all "yard" definitions are
as follows:
      YARD. An actual (as opposed to “required”) open, unoccupied space that
exists on a lot between a building and a lot line.
      YARD, INTERIOR. On lots with multiple buildings, a yard between any
buildings that does not abut any lot line.
      YARD, NON-PRIMARY. A street yard extending between the principal building
and a non-primary street right-of-way and lying between the primary yard and
the rear lot line.
      YARD, PRIMARY (FRONT). A street yard extending along the full width of
the lot and lying between the principal building and a primary street right-of-
way.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full width of the lot, except any
street yard, and lying between the rear of the principal building and the rear
lot line.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
lying between the side of the principal building and the side lot line.
      YARD, STREET. Any yard between the principal building and a street right-
of-way.
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3903 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3904.   PRINCIPAL USES.
   (a)   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (1)   USE TABLE. Principal uses are allowed in accordance with Table
3904-1. Multiple principal uses as allowed may be located on one lot or one
tenant space.
   (2)   INTERPRETING THE USE TABLE.
      a.   Use Classification System. Uses are listed in the first column of
Table
3904-1. This section classifies uses into categories and subcategories, as
explained in Sec.
35- 3904(b).
      b.   Permitted Uses. Uses identified with a “•” are permitted as-of-right
in the subject zone, subject to compliance with all other applicable
regulations of this section.
      c.   Permitted in Upper Stories and Rear of Ground Story Only. Uses
identified with a “[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]” are permitted
as-of-right in the subject zone but only when located above the ground-floor in
upper stories of the building or in the rear of the ground story, a minimum of
20 feet from the primary facade. The 20 feet behind the primary facade must
contain an allowed occupied use. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied use.
      d.   Permitted in Limited Portion of Building Footprint. Uses identified
with a “[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]”are permitted
as-of-right in the subject zone in any floor of the building, provided that the
total cumulative floor area occupied by such uses does not exceed 25% of the
ground-story building footprint. A special use permit (see Sec.
35-2206) may be requested for a larger portion of the footprint, provided the
use is located within a building existing prior to the adoption of the Moline
Centre districts and the project meets the intent of the code and any adopted
City plans.
      e.   Special Uses. Uses identified with a “°” are allowed only if
reviewed and approved in accordance with the special use permit procedures of
Sec.
35-3401(3).
      f.   Prohibited Uses. Uses identified with a “–“ are expressly
prohibited. Uses that are not listed in the use table and that cannot be
reasonably interpreted (as stated in Sec.
35-3904(b)) to fall within any defined use category or subcategory are also
prohibited.
      g.   Accessory Uses & Structures. Many customary accessory uses and
structures are allowed in conjunction with principal uses. See Sec.
35-3905 for regulations.
   (b)   USE CLASSIFICATIONS. This section, Sec.
35-3904, establishes and describes the use classification system used to
categorize principal uses under this section.
   (1)   USE GROUPS. This Division 9 classifies principal uses into 3 major
groupings. These are referred to as “use groups.” The use groups are as
follows:
      a.   Residential (see Sec.
35-3904(c));
      b.   Commercial (see Sec.
35-3904(d));
      c.   Civic & Institutional (see Sec.
35-3904(e)); and
      d.   Other (see Sec.
35-3904(f)).
   (2)   USE CATEGORIES. Each use group is further divided into more specific
categories. Use categories classify principal uses and activities based on
common functional, product or physical characteristics, such as the type and
amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services
are sold or delivered, or relevant building or site conditions.
   (3)   USE SUBCATEGORIES. Some use categories are further broken down to
identify specific subcategories of uses.
   (4)   CLASSIFICATION OF USES. The zoning administrator is authorized to
classify individual uses on the basis of the use group, category, and
subcategory descriptions of this article. When a use cannot be reasonably
classified into a use group, category, or subcategory, or appears to fit
multiple groups, categories, or subcategories, the zoning administrator is
authorized to assign the use to the most similar and thus most appropriate
group, category, or subcategory based on the actual or projected
characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use
group, category, or subcategory descriptions. In making such determinations,
the zoning administrator must consider:
      a.   The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the use;
      b.   The types of equipment and processes to be used;
      c.   The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or
employees;
      d.   Parking demands associated with the use; and
      e.   Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
      f.   If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple groups,
categories, or subcategories, the zoning administrator is authorized to
categorize each use in the category, subcategory that provides the most exact,
narrowest and appropriate “fit.”
      g.   Appeals of use classification determinations may be taken to the
plan commission in accordance with the appeal procedures of Sec.
35-2208.
   (c)   RESIDENTIAL USE GROUP. The residential use group includes uses that
provide for long-term residential occupancy by individual households or by
groups of people living together in a non-household setting.
   (1)   HOUSEHOLD LIVING. The household living use category is characterized
by a single household occupying a single dwelling unit for the long term.
Single and multiple units may be located within the same building, provided
each unit is self-contained, with facilities for cooking, eating, sleeping, and
hygiene. Housing that includes shared facilities (e.g., assisted living
facilities, co-housing, and intentional communities) is considered household
living if residents occupy self-contained dwelling units.
   (2)   GROUP LIVING. The group living use category is characterized by
residential occupancy of all or a portion of a building by a group other than a
household. Individuals typically occupy rooms or areas that do not include
separate cooking, eating, or bathroom facilities necessary to provide for self-
contained living. Group living uses typically have a common eating area for
residents. Tenancy is typically 30 days or longer. Buildings or spaces occupied
by group living uses contain individual rooms with private or shared bathroom
facilities and may also contain shared kitchen facilities, and/or common dining
and living areas for residents. Residents may or may not receive any
combination of care, training, or treatment, but those receiving such services
must reside at the site. Examples of group living uses include, but are not
limited to, retirement homes, hospice, nursing homes, residential care
facilities, convents, fraternity and sorority houses, co-ops, and the following
subcategory:
      a.   Group Institutional Residence. Group residences including, but not
limited to, such uses as child welfare agencies, group homes for children, and
community based residential facilities.
         1.   Small Group Institutional Residences uses are those occupied by 8
or fewer residents (not counting caregivers).
         2.   Large Group Institutional Residences uses are those occupied by 9
or more residents (not counting caregivers).
         3.   All Group Institutional Residences are subject to the regulations
established in Sec.
35-3405(m).
   (d)   COMMERCIAL USE GROUP. The commercial use group includes uses that
provide a business service or involve the selling, leasing or renting of
merchandise to the general public.
   (1)   ARTISAN PRODUCTION & SALES. The artisan production & sales use
category includes indoor work spaces used by artists for creation of art or the
practice of their artistic endeavors or by craftspeople that produce consumer
goods by hand manufacturing, involving the use of hand tools and small-scale,
light mechanical equipment in a completely enclosed building with no outdoor
operations, storage or regular commercial truck parking. Typical uses include,
but are not limited to, woodworking; custom furniture shops; cabinet-making;
upholstery shops, ceramic studios; jewelry manufacturing; confections and
custom-made food items; micro-breweries and micro-distilleries; and artwork
including painting, printmaking and sculpture. The following supplemental
regulations apply:
      a.   In SX districts, a minimum of 200 square feet of accessory retail
sales or service is required for artisan manufacturing and production, located
within the primary frontage of the building.
      b.   In all districts, no outdoor operations or storage may occur. All
activities must be performed indoors, subject to the performance measures in
Article V, Division 4.
      c.   In all districts, limited storage of products or goods produced in
or associated with the establishment is allowed, provided the storage is
subordinate to the principal use.
      d.   Limited loading and distribution via small commercial trucks is
allowed; no commercial loading bay is allowed.
   (2)   CONSUMER SERVICE. The consumer service use category includes
establishments that provide personal or small business-oriented services to
individuals or small businesses. Typical uses in the consumer service use
category include the following:
Table 3904-1. Principal Use Table
USE GROUP    DISTRICTS                         Reference
Use Category SX- 1 SX- 2 GX- 1 GX-2 RX CV1 CV2
USE GROUP     DISTRICTS                                                                                                                                                                          Reference
Use Category  SX- 1                                     SX- 2                                     GX- 1                                     GX-2                                      RX CV1 CV2
RESIDENTIAL                                                                                                                                                                                      3904(c)
Household     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(c)
Living, 1+    4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       •– – (1)
units         IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Group Living, [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(c)
except as     4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       •– – (2)
below         IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Group         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Institutional 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       •– – 3904(c)
Residential,  IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                                                                                                                   (2) a
Small
Group
Institutional –                                       –                                       °                                        °                                        ° – – 3904(c)
Residential,                                                                                                                                                                                     (2) a
Large
COMMERCIAL                                                                                                                                                                                       3904(d)
Artisan                                                                                                                                                                                          3904(d)
Production &  •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       –– – (1)
Sales
Consumer      •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       –– – 3904(d)
Service                                                                                                                                                                                          (2)
Day Care      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(d)
Center        4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –– – (3)
              IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Eating &                                                                                          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                   3904(d)
Drinking      •                                       •                                       4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ –– – (4)
Places                                                                                            IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]
Entertainment •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       –°  °  3904(d)
Venue, Indoor                                                                                                                                                                                    (5)
Funeral &                                                                                                                                                                                        3904(d)
Mortuary      –                                       –                                       –                                       •                                       –– – (6)
Service
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(d)
Lodging       4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –– – (7)
              IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(d)
Office        4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –– – (8)
              IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Personal                                                                                                                                                                                         3904(d)
Credit        °                                        °                                        –                                       –                                       –– – (9)
Establishment
Retail Sales,                                                                                     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                   3904(d)
General       •                                       •                                       4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ –– – (10)
                                                                                                  IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]
Retail Sales, °                                        °                                        –                                       –                                       –– – 3904(d)
Intensive                                                                                                                                                                                        (11)
Vehicle Sales –                                       –                                       –                                       –                                       –– – 3904(d)
and Service                                                                                                                                                                                      (11)
CIVIC & INSTITUTIONAL                                                                                                                                                                            3904(e)
Community     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(e)
Assembly,     4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –• – (1)
General       IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Community                                                                                                                                                                                        3904(e)
Assembly,     °                                        –                                       °                                        –                                       –°  – (1)
Intensive
Cultural      •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       –• °  3904(e)
Facility                                                                                                                                                                                         (2)
Hospital      –                                       –                                       •                                       –                                       –– – 3904(e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (3)
Parks & Open  •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       •• • 3904(e)
Space                                                                                                                                                                                            (4)
Passenger     •                                       –                                       •                                       –                                       –• – 3904(e)
Terminal                                                                                                                                                                                         (5)
Government    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(e)
Services      4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –• – (6)
              IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Schools,
Colleges,     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(e)
Universities  4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –• – (7)
- non-        IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
commercial
Public
Services and  •                                       •                                       •                                       •                                       •• • 3904(e)
Utilities,                                                                                                                                                                                       (8)
Distribution
Public
Services and  –                                       –                                       °                                        °                                        ° °  °  3904(e)
Utilities,                                                                                                                                                                                       (8)
Transmission
OTHER                                                                                                                                                                                            3904(f)
Agriculture   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/                                                                                                       3904(c)
Cultivation,  4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ 4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/ •                                       •                                       –– °  (1)
Indoor        IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]
Parking Lot   °                                        °                                        °                                        °                                        –°  – 3904(c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (1)
   KEY: • = permitted as-of-right [https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/IMAGES/0-0-0-5539.png]= Permitted as-of-right in upper stories only [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/IMAGES/0-0-0-5541.png]= Permitted as-of-right (floor area not to exceed 25% of building footprint) ° = Special use permit approval
required – = Prohibited
 
      a.   Improvement Service. Establishments that provide personal grooming,
cosmetic, or well-being-related services. Typical uses include, but are not
limited to, barbers, hair and nail salons, pet grooming establishments, tanning
salons, day spas, health clubs, and body art services (e.g., tattoo and
piercing).
      b.   Studio, Artist or Instructional Service. Establishments that focus
on providing individual or small group instruction or training in fine arts,
music, dance, drama, fitness, language or similar activities, such as, but not
limited to, dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts
instruction, tutoring, artist studios and photography studios.
      c.   Business Support Service. Establishments that provide printing,
copying, package (delivery) drop-off, photographic services or communication
services to businesses or consumers. Examples include, but are not limited to,
copy and print shops, delivery/courier service drop-off location for consumers,
and photo developing labs.
      d.   Consumer Maintenance & Repair Service. Establishments that provide
maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods on a site other
than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the
repair/maintenance business). Examples include, but are not limited to, laundry
and dry cleaning pick-up shops, tailors, bicycle repair, taxidermists,
dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops, locksmiths, vacuum repair
shops, electronics repair shops and similar establishments.
   (3)   DAY CARE CENTER. See Sec.
35-3407(e) for a description of and any specific regulations for day care
centers.
   (4)   EATING & DRINKING PLACES. The eating & drinking places use category
includes establishments that prepare and serve food or beverages for on- or
off-premise consumption. The category includes, but is not limited to, full-
service restaurants, take-out restaurants, ice cream and yogurt shops, bars,
taverns, and banquet halls. Brewpubs, wineries, and distilleries may be allowed
where artisan production is allowed. Eating and drinking places with drive-up
or drive-through service are not allowed in the Moline Centre zoning districts.
   (5)   ENTERTAINMENT VENUE. Establishments that provide commercial indoor
gathering places for participant or spectator entertainment, such as cinemas,
bowling centers, game rooms, pool halls, and video arcades, as well as event
venues for special events such as graduations, weddings, anniversaries, holiday
gatherings, trade shows, corporate functions or parties, concert settings, and
general get-togethers. Includes accessory outdoor seating areas, but general
entertainment uses with significant outdoor operations are classified in the
Entertainment, Outdoor use category per Sec.
35-3408(l) and are not allowed in the Moline Centre zoning districts. For
accessory outdoor entertainment types of uses, see the Outdoor Dining, Outdoor
Participant Sports & Games, and Incidental Live Music categories of accessory
uses in Sec.
35-3905.
   (6)   FUNERAL & MORTUARY SERVICE. The funeral and mortuary service use
category includes establishments that provide services related to the death of
a human or domestic, household pet, including funeral homes and mortuaries. May
include cremation if approved in accordance with the special use permit
procedures of Sec.
35-3401(3).
   (7)   LODGING. Establishments that provide temporary lodging for less than
30 days to transient guests who maintain a permanent place of residence
elsewhere. Rooms must be accessed from an interior corridor accessed through a
lobby and primary street entrance. Examples include hotels, bed & breakfast
inns, and short-term rentals.
   (8)   OFFICE. The office use category includes workplaces of private
companies, organizations (for-profit and non-profit), and public agencies
providing professional, executive, management, medical, administrative, or
design services, including the following subcategories:
      a.   Business & Professional Office. Workplaces of firms, organizations,
or agencies, as well as individuals in a co-working environment, providing
professional, executive, management, administrative, financial, accounting, or
legal services, but excluding walk-in offices. Examples of business and
professional offices include, but are not limited to, accounting, architecture,
computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design,
investment, insurance, and law offices.
      b.   Broadcast or Recording Studio. Establishments that provide for audio
or video production, recording or broadcasting.
      c.   Business Training. Commercial establishments and facilities,
including classrooms, providing vocational, trade, business or professional
training services in a completely enclosed building.
      d.   Financial Service. Establishments involved in the exchange, lending,
borrowing and safe-keeping of money. Examples include banks and credit unions.
Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar facilities that do not have on-
site employees or amplified sound are not classified as financial service uses
if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use. Personal
credit establishments are not considered financial service uses (see Sec.
35-3904(d)(9)).
      e.   Medical or Dental Office or Clinic. Workplaces of medical doctors,
dentists, veterinarians and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts
licensed for such practice by the state. This subcategory includes outpatient
clinics, but excludes medical services provided in hospitals.
      f.   Research Service. Establishments engaged in scientific research and
testing services leading to the development of new products and processes.
Research service uses do not include the mass production, distribution or sale
of products or that produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external
impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property.
      g.   Walk-In Office. Workplaces primarily providing direct services to
patrons or clients, typically not requiring appointments. This subcategory
includes, but is not limited to, employment agencies, insurance agencies, real
estate agent offices, travel agencies, utility company offices, social
services, and offices for elected officials. It does not include medical or
dental offices or uses more specifically classified as financial services.
   (9)   PERSONAL CREDIT ESTABLISHMENT. The personal credit establishment use
category includes the following:
      a.   Check Cashing Establishment. Any use, except a bank, trust company,
savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, industrial loan and
thrift company, engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders
or traveler's checks for a fee.
      b.   Pawnbroker. An establishment that is engaged to any extent in any of
the following business or activities:
         1.   The lending of money upon personal property, goods, wares, or
merchandise pledge, stored or deposited as collateral security.
         2.   The purchase of personal property either from an individual,
another pawn business or any other business with an expressed or implied
agreement or understanding to offer the property for sale to the public, and if
that sale is unsuccessful, then to sell it back to the previous owner at a
subsequent time at a stipulated price or negotiated price.
         3.   The purchase of precious metals with the intent to melt down,
provided that such activity is not clearly incidental to the principal use of
the establishment.
      c.   Payday Lender. Any person or entity that is substantially in the
business of negotiating, arranging, aiding, or assisting a consumer in
procuring payday loans.
      d.   Use-Specific Conditions. Personal credit establishments are subject
to the following use-specific regulations:
         1.   A personal credit use may not be established within 1,500 feet of
any lot with another personal credit establishment.
         2.   A personal credit establishment may not be established within 150
feet of an R or CV zoning district.
         3.   A personal credit establishment may not be open or in operation
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (10)   RETAIL SALES, GENERAL. The general retail sales use category includes
uses that sell or otherwise provide goods, such as, but not limited to,
alcohol, pharmaceuticals, groceries, sundry goods, convenience goods, consumer
shopping goods, household goods, plants and flowers, or hardware, and does not
include the sale or display of firearms or ammunition. This category includes
consignment sales and retail sales of used merchandise, including antiques.
   (11)   RETAIL SALES, INTENSIVE. The intensive retail sales use category
includes uses that sell or otherwise provide firearms and ammunition, and
services of those goods in a controlled, indoor environment.
      a.   Use-Specific Conditions. Retail sales, intensive, uses are subject
to the following use-specific regulations:
         1.   An intensive retail sales use may not be established within 600
feet of any other lot with another intensive retail sales establishment.
         2.   An intensive retail sales establishment may not be established
within 300 feet of an R or CV zoning district.
         3.   An intensive retail sales establishment may not be open or in
operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (12)   VEHICLE SALES & SERVICE. The vehicle sales and service use category
includes uses that provide for the sale, rental, ordinary maintenance, or
limited repair of new or used passenger vehicles. Examples of vehicle sales and
service uses include minor vehicle repair and maintenance, not including body
work, frame work, welding, and major painting services; personal vehicle sales
and rentals where vehicles are stored onsite; car detailing and washing
services and facilities; and retail fueling stations for personal vehicles,
including conventional fuels and not including electric vehicle charging.
   (e)   CIVIC & INSTITUTIONAL USE GROUP. The civic and institutional use group
includes public, quasi-public, and institutional uses that provide services
that benefit the public at-large.
   (1)   COMMUNITY ASSEMBLY. The community assembly use category includes
facilities for hosting public or private meetings including senior centers;
community centers; live theaters; performing arts centers for theater, music,
dance, and events; clubs, lodges, meeting halls; council chambers; and
religious institutions.
      a.   Community Assembly, General, uses are those occupying 20,000 square
feet or less of gross floor area.
      b.   Community Assembly, Intensive, uses are those occupying more than
20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (2)   MUSEUMS & LIBRARIES. Facilities dedicated to the exhibition,
preservation, loaning, or study of a collection of books and/or artistic,
historic, or scientific objects, to serve and promote aesthetic and educational
interest in the community, and that are open to the public on a regular basis.
   (3)   HOSPITAL. State-licensed public, private, and non-profit facilities
providing inpatient medical, surgical, mental health, or emergency medical
services. Hospitals may also provide outpatient treatment.
   (4)   PARKS & OPEN SPACE. The parks and open space use category includes
recreational, social, or multi-purpose uses associated with public parks,
public open spaces, public play fields, public or private golf courses, or
other outdoor open space or recreation areas. It also includes urban
agriculture uses, such as community gardens, permanent farmer's markets,
outdoor urban farms, and beekeeping. The parks and open space use category
includes the following subcategories:
      a.   Community Garden. An area of land managed and maintained by a public
or non-profit organization or a group of individuals to grow and harvest food
crops and/or ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use,
consumption, or donation. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots
for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by
members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group
members. Community gardens may be principal uses or accessory to other public
or semi-public uses, such as parks, schools, community centers, or community
assembly uses. This classification does not include gardens that are accessory
to residential uses when access is limited to those who reside on the subject
property. Sales of products produced in association with a community garden is
permitted as an accessory use in zones in which retail sales are allowed.
      b.   Parks and Recreation. Parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and
related open spaces that are open to the general public. This subcategory also
includes but is not limited to, playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, swimming
pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, boat docks, and golf courses, as well
as related food concessions or clubhouses within a principal structure or in an
accessory structure on the same site.
   (5)   PASSENGER TERMINAL. See Sec.
35-3409 for description and regulations.
   (6)   GOVERNMENT SERVICES. Government offices and services that provide
fire, police, or public safety services, and support for other municipal
departments. Includes incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles.
Typical uses include government offices, fire stations, police stations,
ambulance services and storm or civil defense shelters.
      a.   Use-Specific Conditions. Government service uses are subject to the
following use-specific regulations:
         1.   Police and fire facilities shall be housed only in a permitted
building type, but internal parking access doors are allowed on any facade and
the facility is exempt from driveway access and width regulations.
   (7)   SCHOOLS & COLLEGES. Public and private schools at the primary,
elementary, middle, or high school level that provide basic, compulsory, state-
mandated education outside of a residence, and institutions of higher learning
that offer courses of general or specialized study and are authorized to grant
academic degrees. The schools & colleges use subcategory includes classrooms
and instructional spaces, as well as other customary accessory and support
functions for schools, college, or university uses.
   (8)   PUBLIC SERVICES & UTILITIES. The public services and utilities use
category includes utilities and essential public service uses and facilities.
See Sec.
35-3409(e) and
35-3409(f) for description and regulations.
   (f)   OTHER USES.
   (1)   AGRICULTURE, CULTIVATION, INDOOR. Growing, washing, packaging and
storage of fruits, vegetables, and other plant products in enclosed buildings.
Typical operations include greenhouses, vertical farming, hydroponic systems
and aquaponic systems. Composting is limited solely to materials generated on
site. May include accessory retail sales areas limited to 3,000 square feet in
area. Use types more specifically defined and regulated under the Cannabis
Sales, Cultivation, or Production use subcategory of Article III, Division 8
are not classified or regulated as urban farm uses.
   (2)   PARKING LOTS & STRUCTURES. The parking lot use category includes all
parking lots and parking structures located on lots or sites that are not
occupied by a principal building or use, including public parking lots, parking
lots that provide required parking spaces for land uses that are located on a
different site than the use served by such parking (i.e., off-site parking),
and parking lots for electric vehicle charging without another principal use
on-site. Use-specific regulations are as follows:
      a.   Location. Parking lots and structures, with the exception of parking
lots and structures publicly owned by the City or MetroLink, must not be
located on a primary street frontage.
      b.   Structure Design. Any portion of a parking structure fronting a
street or visible from any street must meet the design requirements of Sec.
35-3906(e)(11).
      c.   Height. The height of any parking structure must be lower than any
part of an abutting or adjacent principal structure by a minimum of 6 feet.
      d.   EV Charging. For electric vehicle (EV) charging supply equipment,
see Sec.
35-3905(b).
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3904 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3905.   ACCESSORY USES & STRUCTURES.
   (a)   ACCESSORY USES. Accessory uses and structures are allowed only in
connection with lawfully established principal uses.
   (1)   ALLOWED ACCESSORY USES & STRUCTURES. Allowed accessory uses are
limited to those expressly identified in Sec.
35-3411 through
35-3417, not including those listed as prohibited in Sec.
35-3905(a)(2), as well as those that in the determination of the zoning
administrator satisfy all of the following criteria:
      a.   They are customarily found in conjunction with the subject principal
use and structure;
      b.   They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of
the property;
      c.   They are operated and maintained by the owners or lessees of the
principal use; and
      d.   They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort,
safety or convenience of the owners or lessees of the principal use.
   (2)   PROHIBITED ACCESSORY USES. In the Moline Centre districts, the
following accessory uses are prohibited:
      a.   Kennel, Private Residential. See Sec.
35-3411(5).
      b.   Recreational Vehicle Storage. See Sec.
35-3411(7).
      c.   Fleet Vehicle Storage. See Sec.
35-3414(5).
      d.   Outdoor Display and Storage, Permanent. See Sec.
35-3414(10).
      e.   In-Vehicle Sales or Service. Delivery or purchase of goods or
services to customers while remaining in their motor vehicle (see Sec.
35-3408(g)), except as allowed in Sec.
35-3905(b).
      f.   Fuel Pumps. Fuel pumps and canopies associated with vehicle service
uses (see
35-3408(g)). This prohibition does not apply to electric vehicle charging
equipment.
   (3)   GENERAL REGULATIONS. The regulations of this section, Sec.
35-3905, apply generally to all accessory uses and structures unless express
provisions of this section or Division 4 establish more specific regulations
for a particular type of accessory structure. Where the regulations of this
section, Sec.
35-3905, conflict with Division 4, the regulations of Sec.
35-3905 shall rule.
      a.   Location. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same
lot as the principal use and principal structure to which they are accessory.
In the Moline Centre districts, accessory uses are allowed anywhere within a
principal or accessory structure, unless otherwise specifically stated.
      b.   Yard. Accessory buildings and structures are allowed in the rear
yard only, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      c.   Maximum Height. The maximum overall height of accessory buildings
and structures is 15 feet, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      d.   Time of Establishment. No accessory building or structure other than
a fence or temporary construction office or may be placed on a lot before
construction of the principal building.
      e.   Buildings & Structures. Accessory buildings and structures are
subject to the same regulations that apply to principal buildings and
structures on the subject lot, unless otherwise expressly stated.
      f.   Separation from Principal Structure. Accessory buildings must be
separated by a minimum distance of 10 feet from the principal building on the
lot.
   (b)   ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT.
   (1)   WHERE ALLOWED.
      a.   Accessory Use. Electric vehicle supply equipment is permitted in all
districts when accessory to the principal use. When such stations are accessory
to residential uses, they must be designated as private, restricted-use
charging stations.
      b.   Principal Use. If the principal use of the subject property is
electric vehicle charging, then the use is considered a parking lot for zoning
purposes and restricted to zoning districts in which parking lots are allowed
as a principal use.
   (2)   LOCATION ON LOT. EV supply equipment may be located anywhere where a
parking space is allowed.
   (3)   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Height. Canopies may not exceed 16 feet in height.
      b.   Materials. The roof of the canopy must match the principal building
in type and material. Columns and supports must be clad in a major material
used on the principal building facade.
      c.   Canopy Lighting. All luminaires mounted or recessed into the lower
surface of canopies shall be shielded and utilize flat lenses.
   (c)   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY.
   (1)   APPLICABILITY. The regulations of this section govern accessory drive-
through uses and facilities, which are structures or portions of a building
that permit customers to purchase goods or receive services while remaining in
their motor vehicle.
   (2)   BUILDING TYPE REGULATIONS. The key accessory structure tables for each
building type identify the zones in which drive-through facilities are allowed
(see Sec.
35-3903(g) through
35-3903(k)).
   (3)   LOCATION. Drive-up windows and drive-through facilities must be
located in the rear yard or on the rear or interior side facade of the
building. See Figure 3905(h)-A, for one example of a drive-through.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5175.png]
Figure 3905(h)-A. Drive-Through Facility
   (4)   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Vehicle Stacking. Vehicle stacking lanes must be located in the rear
yard or an interior side yard.
      b.   Adjacent to R District. When a drive-through facility is located on
a lot that abuts a residential zoning district to the side or rear, the
following applies:
         1.   The drive-through facility, including the window, any canopy, and
any stacking area for vehicles, must be set back at least 25 feet from the
abutting R district lot line.
         2.   The drive-through facility may not be located closer to any
street than any principal building on the lot or an abutting lot.
      c.   Structure. Drive-through canopies and roofs must match the roof of
the principal building. Materials used for the drive-through supports or other
features must be repeated from the principal building design.
      d.   Conditions. Where allowed only with a special use permit per the
building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903(g) through
35-3903(k), drive-through facilities may be approved only as with the following
conditions:
         1.   The use is accessory only to an allowed financial service
subcategory principal use per Sec.
35-3904(d)(2)d or pharmacy principal use per Sec.
35- 3904(d)(10).
         2.   The drive-through facility is staffed by an on-site person.
         3.   Amplified sound is allowed only at the window.
   (d)   OUTDOOR DINING. Outdoor dining is an accessory use to principal eating
and drinking establishments where the use extends to an outdoor yard area or on
the public sidewalk.
   (1)   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Separation from Parking. Dining areas shall be separated from any
vehicular parking or circulation area by a curb, allowed fence, or by a planter
or planting bed area per Sec.
35-3907(c).
      b.   Visibility at Intersections. Furniture, equipment, signs, screening,
or enclosures shall not be located within the visibility triangle defined in
Sec.
35-5210.
   (2)   OUTDOOR DINING IN YARDS. Outdoor dining areas may be located in any
yard area, except within any buffers required by Sec.
35-3907.
      a.   Structures and Surfaces. See Sec.
35-3907(e) for allowed landscape terraces and decks. Any impervious surface
area counts towards any maximum site coverage per the building type regulations
in Sec.
35-3903.
   (3)   OUTDOOR DINING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALK. A licensing agreement is required
per
Chapter 6 of the municipal code for outdoor dining within the street right-of-
way. Additional regulations may apply per the zoning administrator and
department of public works.
   (e)   OUTDOOR DISPLAY, REMOVABLE. Outdoor display is an accessory use to a
principal retail,  general use. Removable outdoor display includes portable or
semi-portable racks, displays and merchandise which are placed outside only
during business hours in any street yard. Outdoor displays within any
courtyards, rear, or interior side yard are allowed and must meet these
regulations only if the materials are visible from the street.
   (1)   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Display items must be goods sold by the principal use or an
affiliated use. All items must be easily removable and not permanently affixed.
Items must be on display, fully assembled, out of boxes, and not stored or
stacked.
      b.   All items, including display racks and other fixtures, shall be
stored in a fully enclosed building when the business is closed.
      c.   Display areas must be located on a paved sidewalk, terrace, or patio
area with pedestrian clearance of at least 5 feet in width through the area.
Visibility at Intersections. Furniture, equipment, signs, screening, or
enclosures shall not be located within the visibility triangle defined in Sec.
35-5210.
   (2)   OUTDOOR DISPLAYS ON PUBLIC SIDEWALK. A licensing agreement is required
per Chapter 6 of the municipal code for outdoor displays on a public sidewalk.
Additional regulations may apply per the zoning administrator and director of
engineering.
   (f)   OUTDOOR PARTICIPANT SPORTS & GAMES. Outdoor participant sports and
games are incidental and accessory activities to any principal eating and
drinking uses or other principal entertainment uses, and may include a variety
of activities, such as volleyball courts, horseshoe pits, bocce ball.
   (1)   AREA. The area of such uses must not exceed 35% of the floor area of
the principal use.
   (2)   HOURS OF OPERATION. Outdoor entertainment activities may occur between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., local time.
   (3)   BACKGROUND MUSIC. Prerecorded background music played from a
preselected playlist over a permanently installed sound system of the
establishment is allowed outdoors only between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00
p.m., local time, any day of the week.
   (4)   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Compliance is required with the performance
standards in Article V, Division 4.
   (5)   TEMPORARY OUTDOOR EVENTS. Temporary outdoor events may be approved per
Sec.
35-3418.
   (g)   INCIDENTAL LIVE MUSIC. Music activities are incidental and accessory
to any principal eating and drinking uses or other principal entertainment
uses, and include amplified music, such as live bands, DJ music, or karaoke.
   (1)   INCIDENTAL LIVE MUSIC, INDOORS. Amplified music activities occurring
fully inside a building is allowed as follows:
      a.   Hours of Operation. Incidental live music may occur indoors during
the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      b.   Performance Standards. Compliance is required with the performance
standards in Article V, Division 4.
      c.   Special Use Permit. Expanded hours of operation may be approved
through a special use permit per Sec.
35-2206. A Noise Mitigation Plan is required per 5.06(02)b.
   (2)   INCIDENTAL LIVE MUSIC, OUTDOORS. Amplified music activities occurring
fully outside a building is allowed as follows:
      a.   Special Use Permit. A special use permit is required for all
Incidental Live Music, Outdoors, uses. See Sec.
35-2206.
      b.   Noise & Lighting Mitigation Plan. A mitigation plan detailing
measures to be taken to maintain acceptable noise and lighting levels at a
distance of 100 feet or greater from any opening of that establishment is
required. See the General Performance Standards in Article V of the zoning
regulations.
      c.   Hours of Operation. The hours of operation will be established by
the special use permit process, based upon proximity to residential uses and
clarity and comprehensiveness of the Noise Mitigation Plan.
   (3)   TEMPORARY OUTDOOR EVENTS. Temporary outdoor live music events may be
approved per Sec.
35-3418.
   (h)   PARKING STRUCTURES.
   (1)   APPLICABILITY. The regulations of this section apply to stand-alone,
accessory structures occupied by decked, multi-level motor vehicle parking.
   (2)   BUILDING TYPE REGULATIONS. The accessory structure tables for each
building type identify which zones allow accessory parking structures.
   (3)   LOCATION. Accessory parking structures must be located on the same lot
as the principal structure.
   (4)   YARD. Accessory parking structures must be located in the rear yard
and be screened from view of any primary street by the principal building.
Parking structures on lots with multiple designated primary street frontages
must be screened from view of all designated primary streets.
   (5)   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
      a.   Setbacks. Parking structures may not be located closer to any street
or interior side lot line than the principal structure.
      b.   Height. The overall height of a parking structure must be at least
one story lower than the tallest principal structure.
      c.   Facade Design. On street frontages, accessory parking structures
must meet the parking facade design regulations per Sec.
35-3906(e)(11) .
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3905 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3906.   BUILDING DESIGN.
   (a)   GENERAL.
   (1)   APPLICABILITY. The regulations of this section apply to all buildings
in the Moline Centre districts.
   (2)   INTENT. The regulations of this section, Sec.
35-3906, along with the building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903, are intended to improve the physical quality of buildings, improve the
long-term value and durability of buildings, enhance the pedestrian experience,
and protect the historic form and scale of the City.
      a.   Durable, High Quality. Ensure the use of well-tested, high-quality,
durable, weather-resistant, exterior-grade materials on the majority of
finished building surfaces, while permitting a wider range of materials for
details. High quality materials can improve how well buildings weather, reduce
material failure rate, require lower maintenance, have a longer life cycle and
sense of permanence, and maintain longer term value.
      b.   Clearly Articulated, Human-Scaled Facades. Promote clearly
articulated, well-organized facades that are easy to understand, have a clear
hierarchy, and yield building proportions and details comfortable to and in
line with the scale of people.
   (3)   DESIGN ADJUSTMENTS. Modifications to specific building design
regulations expressly defined throughout this section, Sec.
35-3906, may be approved through the design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), provided the design meets the intent of the building design
regulations in Sec.
35-3906(a)(2).
   (b)   ROOF TYPES.
   (1)   REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ROOF TYPES.
      a.   Major Roof Components. The major components of any roof shall meet
the requirements of one or a combination of the roof types allowed per the
building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903.
      b.   Minor Roof Components. Roofs for bay or bow windows and dormers are
not required to meet a roof type.
      c.   Rooftop Outdoor Facilities. Terraces, green roofs, rooftop gardens,
and other outdoor facilities are allowed on any roof and are not considered a
roof type, except as follows:
         1.   Any permanently covered, open-air area applies to the overall
height as regulated by the building type regulations (Sec.
35-3903), or may be treated as an interior building tower per Sec.
35-3906(b)(6).
         2.   Any fully enclosed structure on a roof must meet the tower
regulations per Sec.
35-3906(b)(6).
         3.   Where any canopy or cover is visible from any public way or open
space, the cover must comply with a roof type per this section, Sec.
35-3906(b).
      d.   Roof Encroachments. Roofs, including all eaves or overhangs, must be
fully located within the property lines of the lot except as encroachments into
yards allowed per Sec.
35-3903(l)(5). See building types in Sec. 35-3903 for setback regulations.
   (2)   OTHER ROOF TYPES. Other roof designs not defined in this section may
be approved through a design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) with the following requirements:
      a.   Occupied Building Space. The roof type must not create additional
occupiable floor space beyond that permitted by the building type. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
      b.   Other Design. The shape of the roof should be different from those
defined in this section, Sec.
35-3906(b), such as a dome, spire, or vault, and not an allowed pitched roof,
parapet roof, or flat roof, except as otherwise expressly stated in this
section, Sec.
35-3906.
      c.   Warrant. The building should warrant a separate status from the
majority of buildings in the district, with a correspondence between the form
of the roof and the building use or location. For example, a dome for
planetarium or a unique, singular roof for a more distinctive museum or
cultural facility.
   (3)   PARAPET ROOF TYPE. A parapet is a low wall projecting above a
building’s roof along the perimeter of the building on all street facades and
other primary facades. The roof beyond the parapet may be flat, vaulted, or
pitched, but should not be visible above the parapet from the street. See
Figure 3906(f)-A Example of a Parapet Roof.
      a.   Parapet Height. Height is measured from the top of the upper story
to the top of the parapet.
         1.   Minimum height is 1.5 feet and maximum height is 6 feet.
         2.   Roof slope beyond the parapet must not be visible above the
parapet.
         3.   A shadow line must be located within 2 feet of the top of the
uppermost story. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of shadow line.
         4.   A shadow line must be located at the top of the parapet. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of shadow line.
      b.   Occupied Building Space. Occupied building space shall not be
incorporated behind this roof type. See Sec. 35-3903(m) for definition of
occupied building space.
      c.    Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels and wind
energy systems, any rooftop appurtenances must be located towards the rear or
interior of the parapet roof. Rooftop appurtenances may be located within a
tower per Sec.
35-3906(b)(6) or located such that the parapet blocks their view from the
sidewalk across the street or see Sec.
35-3906(f)(4) for additional regulations of mechanical equipment.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5177.png]
Figure 3906(f)-A. Example of a Parapet Roof Type
   (4)   PITCHED ROOF TYPE. This roof type is a sloped or pitched roof, where
the slope appears on all street and other primary facades. Slope is measured
with the vertical rise divided by the horizontal span or run. See Figure 3906
(f)-B Examples of Pitched Roof type.
      a.   Pitch Measure. The roof may not be sloped less than a 4:12 (rise:
run) or more than 14:12. Slopes less than 4:12 are allowed to occur on second
story or higher roofs.
      b.   Configurations.
         1.   Hipped, gabled, and combination of hips and gables with or
without dormers are allowed.
            i.   When the ridge line runs parallel to any primary frontage,
either a gabled end or perpendicular ridge line must occur at least every 100
feet of roof; or one dormer must be provided for every 15 feet of ridge line on
any street or primary frontage with at least one dormer per frontage.
            ii.   Occupied building space within the roof is allowed and counts
as a half or full story. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(9) for definition of half story and any half-story limitations per
the building type regulations. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
         2.   Gambrel and mansard roofs are allowed per the following:
            i.   Gambrel roofs with the ridge line perpendicular to the street
are allowed.
            ii.   Gambrel roofs with the ridge parallel to the street and
mansard roofs are allowed only when one dormer is provided for every 20 feet of
ridge line on any street or primary frontage with at least one dormer per
frontage.
            iii.   The roof height must be no greater than the tallest allowed
height of one upper story per the building type regulations, Sec.
35-3903.
            iv.   Occupied building space is required beneath this roof type
and counts as a half or full story, based upon the percentage of footprint
allowed for a half story within the building type regulations. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(9) for definition of half story. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
         3.   Butterfly (or inverted gable or V-shaped roof) and shed roofs are
allowed only with approval of a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) and provided:
            i.   Negative impacts on neighboring properties, such as shading or
glare, are mitigated
            ii.   The butterfly or shed roof must not exceed 8 feet in total
height, inclusive of overhang.
            iii.   The roof must not be significantly higher than the
surrounding context, unless the visibility of the roof is screened from the
street and neighbors by the building.
            iv.   Occupied building space within the roof is allowed and counts
as a half or full story. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(9) for definition of half story and any half-story limitations per
the building type regulations. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5179.png]
Figure 3906(f)-B. Examples of Pitched Roof Type
      c.   Maximum Roof Height. Roofs without occupied building space must have
a maximum height on primary and non-primary frontage facades equal to no more
than 1.5 times the upper-story floor-to-floor height utilized on the building.
      d.   Half Stories in Roof. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(9) for definition of half story.
      e.   Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels and wind
energy systems, any rooftop appurtenances must be recessed within the pitched
roof with no visibility from anystreet or adjacent open space. See Sec.
35-3906(f)(4) for additional regulations of rooftop mechanical equipment.
   (5)   FLAT ROOF TYPE. The flat roof type is a visibly flat roof with
significant eaves extending beyond the facade. See Figure 3906(f)-C Example of
a Flat Roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5181.png]
Figure 3906(f)-C. Example of a Flat Roof Type
      a.   Maximum Slope. The maximum slope of the roof is 2:12; however, the
roof must not appear to be visibly sloped from the street or other primary
frontage.
      b.   Eaves. Eaves are required on all street and other primary frontages.
         1.   Eave Depth. Eaves must have a depth of at least 14 inches. Eave
depth is measured from the building facade to the outside edge of the eave.
         2.   Eave Thickness. Eaves must be a minimum of 6 inches thick. Eave
thickness is measured at the outside edge of the eave, from the bottom of the
eave to the top of the eave.
      c.   Interrupting Vertical Walls. Vertical walls may interrupt the flat
roof and extend above the top of the eave with no discernible roof type.
         1.   No more than one-third or 30 feet, whichever is less, of any
primary facade may consist of an interrupting vertical wall.
         2.   Vertical walls shall extend no more than 8 feet above the top of
the eave.
      d.   Occupied Building Space. Occupied building space shall not be
incorporated within this roof type, including the flat roof and vertical wall.
See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
      e.   Rooftop Appurtenances. With the exception of solar panels and small
wind energy systems, rooftop appurtenances may not be located on the flat
portion of this roof type. Any rooftop appurtenances may be located behind the
interrupting vertical wall with no visibility from the sidewalk across the
street per Sec.
35-3906(f)(4) or may be located within a tower per Sec.
35-3906(b)(6).
   (6)   TOWERS. A tower is a vertical element in addition to the roof type(s)
applied to the building. See Figure 3906(f)-D Example of Tower.
      a.   Degree of Enclosure. A tower occurring on a street facade must be
fully enclosed. Any interior building tower may be partially or fully enclosed.
A fully open structure, such as a rooftop pergola is not a tower.
      b.   Quantity. Unless otherwise defined in the building type regulations,
the following is allowed:
         1.   Street Facade Towers. A maximum of 2 towers located within 15
feet of any street facade is permitted on any building. Street facade towers
are intended to enhance the facade design.
         2.   Interior Building Towers. Two additional interior building towers
are allowed in addition to the street facade towers, provided the interior
building towers are located a minimum of 30 feet from any street facade.
Interior towers are typically functional, providing housing for utilities or
access to the roof.
      c.   Tower Height.
         1.   Maximum height, measured from the top of the uppermost floor of
the building to the top of the tower shaft, not including the tower roof, is
the equivalent of the height of one upper floor of the building to which the
tower is applied.
         2.   A tower allows up to one additional story of height within the
tower footprint to any building type where permitted and is not included in the
overall maximum height of the building allowed by the building type.
      d.   Tower Footprint.
         1.   A tower footprint may be polygonal (simple, e.g. hexagonal or
octagonal), rectilinear, or cylindrical in plan.
         2.   The maximum width in any direction of the footprint of any tower
is 1/3 the width of any street or primary facade or 20 feet, whichever is less.
      e.   Tower Spacing.
         1.   Street facade towers, within 15 feet of any street facade, must
be spaced a minimum of 120 feet from other street facade towers.
         2.   Interior building towers must be located a minimum of 60 feet
from any other tower.
      f.   Transparency.
         1.   Street Facade Towers. Street facade towers must meet the
transparency requirements of the building type.
         2.   Interior Building Towers. Interior building towers with facades
taller than 5 feet above the roof must meet the minimum primary street, upper-
story transparency requirement of the building type.
      g.   Horizontal Shadow Lines. If the tower extends the building up to a
5th or higher story, a shadow line is required between the 4th and 5th stories
on any tower street facade. Shadow lines required by the roof type used on the
tower also apply.
      h.   Occupied Building Space. Towers may be occupied by the same uses
allowed in the building type to which it is applied. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of occupied building space.
      i.   Tower Roof. The tower must be roofed by any roof type defined in
this subsection
35-3906(b) or approved as an other roof type per Sec.
35-3906(b)(2).
      j.    Rooftop Appurtenances. No rooftop appurtenances are permitted on
tower roofs. Roof appurtenances may be housed within a tower.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5184.bmp]
Figure 3906(f)-D. Example of Tower
   (c)    ENTRANCE TYPES. The following applies to entrance types in street
yards on the exterior of any building type.
   (1)    REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ENTRANCE TYPES. Entrance types are
allowed per building type, see Sec.
35-3903. The following applies to entrance types on any street or courtyard
facades.
      a.   Retaining Walls. See Sec.
35- 3907(e)(2)) for retaining walls located in any street yard.
      b.   Railings. Railings for all porches or ramps must be constructed of
steel or cast stone on all building types.
      c.   Accessibility. All development must comply with the Illinois
Accessibility Code.
      d.   Step Layout. The following applies to exterior steps associated with
an entrance type:
         1.   When located perpendicular to the facade and street, steps must
be a minimum of 6 feet in width.
         2.   In narrower front yards, step runs longer than 4 feet should be
located with the centerline parallel to the building.
         3.   Step runs should be limited to no more than 5 risers with
landings in between for ease of use.
         4.   Step Sizes. Risers on exterior steps associated with an entrance
type must be the minimum height required to reach the required height, ideally
between 4 and 7 inches. Treads must be as deep as possible for a comfortable
walk, typically between 10 and 12 inches.
      e.   Design Adjustment. Other configurations for any entrance type may be
approved through the design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), provided the intent of the entrance type is maintained.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5187.png]
Figure 3906(f)-E. Example of a Storefront Entrance
Figure 3906(f)-F. Example of Stoop Entrance
Figure 3906(f)-G. Example of Porch Entrances
   (2)   STOREFRONT ENTRANCE TYPE.
      a.   Intent. Storefront entrance types are intended to provide at or
close to grade access between the store and adjacent sidewalk creating a high
level of permeability. See Figure 3906(f)-E.
      b.   Recessed Entrance. Where the sidewalk outside the storefront is less
than 7 feet in width, measured perpendicular to the facade, entrances must be
recessed as follows:
         1.   The door must be recessed between 3 and 8 feet deep, measured
from the facade.
         2.   The maximum width of the recess is 10 feet.
         3.   The recess must only occur on the ground story.
      c.   Transparency. A minimum amount of ground-story storefront glass is
required per the building type regulations.
         1.   The storefront entrance must meet the minimum transparency
requirements.
         2.   The glass shall turn the corner of any recessed entry as shown in
Figure 3906(f)-E.
         3.   Transom windows. Transom windows above doors and windows are
required where the top of the door is lower than the top of the window.
Existing transom windows must be retained as transparent windows.
         4.   See Sec.
35-3906(e)(1) for general window regulations.
      d.   Bulkhead. Where a bulkhead is incorporated, the maximum height is 24
inches. A bulkhead is the lower set of panels or low wall upon which the
storefront windows rest. See Figure 3906(f)-E. The bulkhead may be constructed
of wood, metal, concrete, spandrel glass, or masonry. Concrete masonry units
may not be exposed. See Sec. 35-3906(d) for allowed facade materials.
      e.   Security Shutters. External roll down shutters are not allowed. Any
necessary security grills must be located inside the shop windows, and shall
not be solid. Preferred security systems are glass shock or breaker sensors, or
electronic alarms.
   (3)   STOOP ENTRANCE TYPE. A stoop is a small, open platform that may
include a canopy or roof cantilevered off the building. See Figure 3906(f)-F.
      a.   Location. Stoops on any street facades in the Moline Centre
districts may encroach up to within one foot of the front or street-side lot
line, except the stoop may not encroach into any expanded streetscape area
required per Sec.
35-3903(f)(5).
      b.   Stoop Size. Stoops must be a minimum of 4 feet wide and 3 feet deep.
      c.   Canopy. Any canopy or roof over a stoop must be located within 3
feet of the top of the ground story.
      d.   Ramps. Ramps required by any accessibility regulations must be
designed as part of the stoop.
   (4)   PORCH ENTRANCE TYPE. A porch is a raised, roofed platform open on all
sides not abutting the building. See Figure 3906(f)-G.
      a.   Location. Porches on any street facades in the Moline Centre
districts may encroach up to within 3 feet of the front or street-side lot
line, except the stoop may not encroach into any expanded streetscape area
required per Sec.
35-3903(f)(5).
      b.   Porch Size. Minimum porch size is 5 feet deep and 8 feet wide.
      c.   Height. Porch roof height shall be a maximum of 2 stories, each
story meeting the floor-to-floor story height of the building type.
      d.   Unenclosed. At least 50% of the exterior wall area shall be open;
mesh screened areas, glazing and guardrails shall be considered enclosed.
      e.   Ramps. Ramps required by any accessibility regulations must be
designed as part of the stoop.
   (5)   FLOODPLAIN LOCATIONS. For all entrance types, where new construction
is located in a regulated floodplain and the flood elevation requires the
ground story to be elevated more than 6 inches and treated for flooding, the
following applies to all entrance types:
      a.   Treatment below Ground Story. Where the ground story must be
elevated to accommodate potential flood waters, one of the following
configurations used:
         1.   Steps and Retaining Walls. A combination of steps, ramps, and
retaining walls may be used in the landscape for access to the ground story.
See Sec.
35-3906(c)(1).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5189.png]
Figure 3906(f)-H. Examples of a Elevated Storefront
         2.   Visible Basement. Any building facade below the ground story and
above grade a maximum of 4 feet is a visible basement and the following
applies:
            i.   In the case of a regulated floodplain, the visible basement
half story does not count towards the overall building height allowed in the
building type regulations.
            ii.   Allowed major facade materials and upper building
transparency requirements apply to all visible basements.
            iii.   Where required below base flood elevation (BFE), breakaway
walls or enclosures with louvers may be substituted for street facade
transparency requirements. Breakaway walls on street facades may not be solid
and may be constructed of wood or PV open lattice, slats, slanted louvers, or
shutters. All lattice, slats, and louvers must be within a frame, constructed
as panels.
            iv.   Openings without glass or louvers are not allowed on a
primary street visible basement facade.
            v.   Decorative concrete or masonry work on the base, such as
shallow alcoves, archways, or brick patterns, is encouraged.
         3.   Storefront Entrance Types. The following applies to Storefront
buildings in floodplains:
            i.   The ground story elevation may be increased above that allowed
per the building type to accommodate floodplain regulations.
            ii.   A storefront platform elevated above the public sidewalk and
extending parallel to the building facade is required.
            iii.   Platform Material. Any platform must be a masonry or
concrete structure, faced with an allowed major facade material if exposed.
Wood decking or open metal platforms attached to the building are not allowed
on primary facade except through approval of a design adjustment per Sec.
35-3909(e).
   (d)   FACADE MATERIALS.
   (1)   MAJOR FACADE MATERIALS. Allowed major facade materials are listed in
Table 3906-1. Figure 3906(f)-I illustrates major and minor facade materials.
      a.   Street and Other Primary Facades. Major materials are required on
all street and other primary facades, unless otherwise stated, and are intended
to serve as the main surface material on street-facing and other primary
facades. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(4) for other primary facades including courtyard facades. Major
materials must be used on a minimum of 65% of applicable facades, not including
window and door areas.
      b.   Simplicity of Facade Materials. The intent of these regulations is
the use of fewer facade materials resulting in simpler, clearer building
designs.
         1.   Single Major Material. A single major facade material must be
used for the street and other primary facades of the building.
         2.    Design Adjustment. A design adjustment may be approved for
dividing the building into segments with at least one segment 120 feet or
greater so that each segment may utilize a different major facade material.
Figure 3906(f)-I illustrates major and minor facade materials.
            i.   Building segments must be separated by a minimum 3-foot
setback.
            ii.   Courtyards may count as a separate building segment.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5191.png]
Figure 3906(f)-I. Example of Major and Minor Materials on a Facade
      c.   Side and Rear Facades.
         1.   For any rear and side facades that are generally perpendicular to
a street or other primary facade, allowed major materials on the street or
primary facade must extend along that side or rear facade a distance equal to
the horizontal distance to the side facade of the adjacent building or 30 feet,
whichever is less.
         2.   All major materials may be used on side and rear facades.
         3.   See Table 3906-2 for facade materials that may be used on side
and rear facades in addition to major materials.
      d.   Original Facade Materials. Where brick or stone is an existing
building's original major facade material, the following applies:
         1.   The original brick or stone may be maintained if in good
condition or repaired, or the brick or stone may be replaced by new brick or
stone.
         2.   A different major material may not be installed over the original
brick or stone except as approved through the design adjustment process (see
Sec.
35-3909(e)).
   (2)   MINOR FACADE MATERIALS.
      a.   Maximum Minor Materials for Street Facades. A maximum of 35% of each
street or other primary facade surface, not including window and door areas,
may be composed of minor facade materials per Table 3906-3.
      b.   Accents and Details. Additional materials are allowed for trim,
accents, and details per Table 3906-4, not included in the maximum facade area.
   (3)   PITCHED ROOF MATERIALS. The following materials are allowed on pitched
roofs: dimensional asphalt composite shingles, wood shingles and shakes, metal
tiles or standing seam, slate, ceramic tile, and engineered wood or slate.
   (4)   APPROPRIATE GRADE OF MATERIALS. All doors, windows, and hardware must
be of commercial grade quality with the exception of those on Row or Yard
buildings.
   (5)   MATERIAL INSTALLATION. The following material installation
requirements are intended to advance the quality of construction, durability,
and aesthetics of new buildings, specifically related to application and
detailing of facade materials.
      a.   Changes in Facade Materials. Changes in facade materials, whether
major materials or minor materials, should occur mainly at concave corners or
changes in building planes.
      b.   Materials Hierarchy. A hierarchy of materials must be maintained on
the building facade, where "heavier," articulated unit materials (brick,
concrete masonry units, stone) are located at the base of the facade and
"lighter," constant surface materials with fewer seams (stucco, panels) are
located above those on the facade.
      c.   Shadow Lines on Surfaces. Shadow lines must delineate changes in
materials with solid materials of a thickness that is greater than 1.5 inches,
such as cast stone, masonry, or stone. For example, cast stone elements or
brick may be offset to create a shadow.
   (6)   OTHER MATERIALS. Materials that are not listed in this section as
allowed major, minor, accent/detail, or roof materials may not be installed on
any facade or roof unless approved through the design adjustment process (see
Sec.
35-3909(e)).
      a.   Intent. Other materials may be allowed if the applicant demonstrates
the material in its proposed application meets the intent of the facade
material standards.
      b.   Examples. Samples and examples of successful high-quality
installation in the region and the manufacturer’s warranty and industry ratings
must be provided by the applicant.
      c.    Prohibited Materials. Materials listed as prohibited on Table 3906-
5 may not be approved as other materials.
Table 3906-1. Allowed Major Materials on Street & Primary Facades
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5193.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5201.png]
Table 3906-2. Allowed Side & Rear Facade Materials
Table 3906-3. Allowed Minor Facade Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5203.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5199.png]
Table 3906-4. Allowed Detail & Accent Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5529.png]
Table 3906-5. Prohibited Materials
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5531.png]
   (e)    FACADE ELEMENTS.
   (1)    WINDOWS. Wind ows on street and other prima ry facades of all
buildings must be consistent with the following requirements:
      a.   Amount. Each building must meet the transparency requirements per
the building type regulations. See Sec.
35-3903.
      b.   Recessed. All windows, with the exception of ground-story storefront
systems and glass curtain wall systems, must be recessed with the glass a
minimum of 1.5 inches from the facade surface material or adjacent trim.
      c.   Vertically Oriented. A minimum of 70% of street facade windows must
be individually vertically oriented, but may be grouped in a set. See Figure
3906(f)-J.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5205.png]
Figure 3906(f)-J. Vertically Oriented Windows
 
      d.   Operable Windows. With the exception of ground-story storefront
glass and glass curtain wall systems, operable windows are required as follows:
         1.   A minimum of 70% of all street facade windows on all buildings
must be operable.
         2.   Examples include single-hung, double-hung, pivot, casement, and
awning windows; fixed or picture windows are not operable.
      e.   Visibility Through Glass. Reflective glass and glass block are
prohibited on street and other primary facades. Windows must meet the
transmittance and reflectance factors established in the transparency
definition. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(10)).
      f.   Expressed Lintels. For masonry construction, the expression of
lintels must be included above all windows and doors by a change in brick
coursing or by a separate detail or element. See Figure 3906(f)-J for
illustrations of expressed lintels on masonry facades.
      g.   Garage Doors. Garage doors utilized for patio access, open air
dining, or display and not utilized for vehicular access, may be used for
storefronts or other window requirements on any building type, provided the
doors contribute to and meet the transparency requirements. Garage doors do not
count as an entrance.
      h.   Unobstructed Windows. Ground-story, street-facade windows, other
than those for residential uses, must be unobstructed. Window displays on the
inside of the building may be used, blocking up to 70% of the window area, but
the surfaces of windows must be clear. The remaining window area must have
views into the occupied space of the building. See
Chapter 3, Article II for window signs.
   (2)   DOORS. Doors on street and other primary facades of all buildings must
be consistent with the following requirements:
      a.   Amount. Each building must meet the entrance requirements per the
building type regulations. See Sec.
35-3903.
      b.   Recessed. All doors, with the exception of those in ground-story
storefront systems and glass curtain wall systems, must be recessed with the
door panel a minimum of 3 inches from the facade surface material or adjacent
trim.
      c.   Visibility Through Glass. Doors on streets facades must include at
least 35% transparent glass, meeting the transmittance and reflectance factors
established in the transparency definition. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(10). A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for a lower transmittance, such as frosted glass
for all doors except a principal entrance to the building.
      d.   Open, Operable Doors. All doors on a primary facade must be fully
operable as follows:
         1.   False doors are not allowed.
         2.   The minimum number of required doors on a facade per the building
type regulations must be open and operable during the business hours of the
tenant behind the door.
         3.   A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for an alternative to the open door requirement
based upon the use in the building.
   (3)   SHUTTERS. When shutters, whether functional or not, are utilized on a
street or other primary facade of any building type, the shutters must meet the
following requirements. See Figure 3906(f)-K.
      a.   Size. All shutters must be sized for the windows, so that, if the
shutters were to be closed, they would not be too small for complete coverage
of the window.
      b.   Materials. Shutters must be wood, metal, or fiber cement. Synthetic
and engineered woods are allowed provided that the applicant submits a sample
and examples of high-quality, local installations of the material.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5208.png]
Figure 3906(f)-K. Examples of Shutters
   (4)   AWNINGS & CANOPIES. Removable awnings and canopies attached to
buildings and located on any street or primary facade must be constructed
consistent with the requirements of this section. See Figure 3906(f)-L for
examples of awnings.
      a.   Material. All awnings and canopies shall be canvas or metal. Plastic
awnings are prohibited.
      b.   Lighting. Backlighting is allowed only on metal awnings.
      c.   Structures. Frames must be metal and wall-mounted. Support poles
from the ground are prohibited except where the awning is over 8 feet in depth
and utilized for outdoor eating areas or entrances.
      d.   Canopies & Light Shelves. Permanent canopies, projections, or
overhangs used as architectural features, light shelves, or shading devices are
allowed and not intended to be regulated by this subsection 35-3906(e)(3),
except as follows:
         1.   Shingled permanent canopies are not allowed on the first floor,
primary facades.
      e.   Right-of-Way. Awnings or canopies extending into any right-of-way
require a license agreement per the municipal code, Chapter 6, Article II.
      f.   Clearance. All portions of any awning or canopy shall provide at
least 7 feet of vertical clearance over any walkway and 15 feet of vertical
clearance over vehicular areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5210.png]
Figure 3906(f)-L. Examples of Awnings
      g.   Signs. See Chapter 3, Article II for signs on awnings and canopies.
   (5)   BALCONIES. Balconies on a facade facing any street or other primary
facade shall be consistent with the requirements of this subsection. See Figure
3906(f)-M for examples of balconies.
      a.   Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, Sec.
35-3906(e)(5), the following definitions apply:
         1.   Balconies. Balconies include any roofed or unroofed platform that
projects from the wall of a building above grade more than 18 inches and that
is enclosed only by a parapet or railing. This definition does not include
false balconies, Juliet balconies, or balconettes.
         2.   Balconettes. Balconettes are false balconies, sometimes referred
to as Juliet balconies, consisting of a rail and door, either without an
outdoor platform or with an outdoor platform less than 18 inches in depth.
      b.   Balconettes. Balconettes are allowed and not subject to any of the
balcony regulations in this subsection.
      c.   Size. Balconies must be a minimum of 4 feet deep and 5 feet wide.
      d.   Facade Coverage. A maximum of 35% of street facades, calculated
separately for each facade, may be covered by balconies. The balcony area is
calculated by drawing a rectangle on the facade elevation around the following:
the platform or floor of the balcony; any rails, walls, columns, or
indentations; and any ceiling, roof, or upper balcony.
      e.   Integrated Design. Balconies must be integrated within the design of
the facade, avoiding tacking the balconies onto the facade after the elevation
has been designed.
         1.   A minimum of 50% of the perimeter of each balcony must abut an
exterior wall of the building, partially enclosing the balcony.
         2.   The balcony support structure must be integrated with the
building facade; separate columns or posts supporting any balcony from the
ground are not allowed.
      f.   Platform. The balcony platform must be at least 3 inches thick and
any underside of a balcony that is visible from any street or public way shall
be finished.
      g.   Build-to Zone Exemption. When the balcony is in the build-to zone,
the portion of the facade behind it is exempt from meeting the build-to zone
requirement.
      h.   Design Adjustment. A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for an alternative balcony design, provided the
design meets the intent of these regulations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5212.png]
Figure 3906(f)-M. Examples of Balconies
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5533.png]
Figure 3906(f)-N. Examples of Defined Principal Entryways
   (6)   PRINCIPAL ENTRYWAY. See Figure 3906(f)-N for examples of defined
principal entryways. Principal entrances to all buildings or units, except
storefronts, must be visible from the street and clearly delineated through one
or more of the following design features:
      a.   Roof or Canopy. The entryway is covered by a roof or canopy
differentiating it from the overall building roof type.
      b.   Porch. The entryway is through a porch on any building type except a
Storefront building.
      c.   Sidelights and Transom. Sidelights or transom windows are included
around the entryway.
      d.   Articulation. The entryway is included in a separate bay of the
building that extends up at least 2 stories or in a recessed bay with a change
in material.
      e.   Design Adjustment. Other structural methods of substantially
differentiating the entrance from the facade similar in scope to the examples
of this subsection and not including paint, trim, or materials change may be
approved through the design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
   (7)   GROUND STORY AT SLOPING FRONTAGES.
      a.   Intent. Grade transitions on any building facade along a
significantly sloped street sidewalk must be designed to minimize blank walls
and maximize pedestrian-scale frontages between waist and eye level. See Figure
3906(f)-O for examples of positive facades along slopes.
      b.   Storefronts. The following regulations apply to storefront facades
along sloping streets or other primary frontages:
         1.   The interior floor level must step to match the exterior grade
within 3 feet and/or changes in grade may be accommodated by a storefront
window display space.
         2.   Knee walls and bulkheads must not exceed 24 inches in height
except a maximum 10% or one 10-foot section, whichever is greater, may be up to
36 inches in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5214.png]
Figure 3906(f)-O. Examples of Ground Story along Slopes Streets and Sidewalks
         3.   Retaining walls at sloped facades must not exceed 18 inches in
height except a maximum 10% or one 10-foot section, whichever is greater, of
walls may be up to 30 inches in height.
         4.   If the grade change is more than 9 feet in height along a single
block face, entrance requirements may be increased to one entrance per 90 feet
of building frontage.
         5.   If the grade change is more than 9 feet along a single block
face, building entrances adjacent to the street must be within 3 feet of the
grade of the adjacent sidewalk.
   c.   Non-Storefronts. The following regulations apply to all non-storefront
facades along sloping streets:
         1.   Multiple front entrances along the street must activate each
segment of building section at each grade.
         2.   The interior floor level must step to match the changes in
exterior grade within a 3-foot range and/or deeper transition zones between the
sidewalk and building facade of porches, terraces, and landscape areas may be
used assist with grade changes.
         3.   Changes may be accommodated by terraced planters and retaining
walls. Retaining walls must not exceed 18 inches in height except a maximum 10%
or one 10-foot section, whichever is greater, of walls may be up to 30 inches
in height.
         4.   When the elevation of the first floor is more than 3 feet above
grade, windows must be provided into the basement or lower floor elevation. See
definition of visible basement in
35-3903(m).
   d.   Design Adjustment. An alternative method of addressing significant
slopes along street and primary frontages may be approved as a design
adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), provided the design meets the intent of these regulations.
   (8)   VISTAS. Views down streets that terminate at parcels must be
considered when locating buildings, parking, and building elements on those
parcels. See Figure 3906(f)-P.
      a.   Rears of Buildings. The location of open space and streets shall not
create views of the rear of buildings or parking behind buildings from primary
streets and open or civic space.
      b.   Parking. Parking structures and surface parking lots are not
permitted at the termination of a street vista.
      c.   Street Termini. When a street terminates at a parcel, the parcel
must be occupied by one of the following:
         1.   Courtyard or Open Space. A courtyard or other open space must be
located at the street terminus for the width of the subject street right-of-
way. A vertical element shall terminate the view. Acceptable vertical elements
include, but are not limited to, a stand or group of trees, a sculpture, a
pergola or other public structure, or a fountain. Any open space must be
treated as expanded streetscape per Sec.
35-3907(f).
         2.   Building. The facade of a building, whether fronting a primary
street or not, must terminate the view for the width of the subject street
right-of-way. The building must incorporate one of the following treatments to
terminate the view: an allowed tower per Sec.
35-3906(b)(6), a bay, an allowed courtyard per the building type regulations
(Sec.
35-3903), or an articulated, principal entryway per Sec.
35-3906(e)(6). That portion of the facade must be treated as a primary facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5216.png]
Figure 3906(f)-P. Examples of a Terminated Vista
 
   (9)   BUILDING ARTICULATION. See Figure 3906(f)-Q for examples of building
facade variety. Buildings 120 feet in length or greater, as measured along any
street frontage, must fulfill the following requirements:
      a.   Building Variety. Each street and other primary facade shall be
varied in segments less than or equal to 60 feet. Each facade segment must vary
by at least one of the following:
         1.   The proportion of recesses and projections within the build-to
zone;
         2.   The location of the entrance and window placement, unless
storefronts are utilized;
         3.   Roof type, plane, or material, unless otherwise stated in the
building requirements;
         4.   Building height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5218.png]
Figure 3906(f)-Q. Examples of Building Articulation
      b.   Articulation of Stories. Stories shall be articulated on street and
other primary facades.
         1.   Fenestration. Fenestration or window placement on street facades
shall be organized by stories per the building type facade transparency
regulations.
         2.   Shadow Lines. Horizontal shadow lines and lintels over openings
may be used to delineate stories with minimum shadow lines required per
building type.
         3.   Mezzanines. Mezzanines that fall within the range of floor-to-
floor heights of the building type shall be articulated on the facade and
require separate calculation for transparency per Sec.
35-3903(l)(10) on tall stories.
         4.   Taller Spaces. Spaces exceeding the allowable floor-to-floor
heights of the building type shall be articulated as multiple stories on the
street facade.
   (10)   GARAGE DOORS. The following requirements apply to garage doors
provided on any street facade.
      a.   Location. Allowed locations for vehicular garage doors on street and
non-street facades are regulated by the building types in Sec.
35-3903.
      b.   Recessed from Facades. Garage doors located on street-facing facades
must be recessed a minimum of 3 feet from the dominant facade of the principal
building facing the same street.
      c.   Design. Garage doors facing a street or visible from a street must
meet the following:
         1.   The doors must be clad with high-quality materials in a color
used in the building facade.
         2.   The minimum transparency of the building must be met on the
garage door, unless otherwise approved by a design adjustment.
         3.   Upgraded architectural doors or carriage-style doors are required
on Row buildings.
   (11)   PARKING FACADES ALONG STREETS. See Figure 3906(f)-R for one
illustration of a parking facade on a street. Parking facades are allowed only
on non-primary street facades per the building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903 and either as a separate accessory structure on the lot or in the rear
of the building. The following standards apply to any parking facade visible
from any street or other public way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5220.png]
Figure 3906(f)-R. Example of a Parking Structure
 
      a.   Materials. Major and minor material requirements, per Sec.
35-3906(d) shall be met on all street facades. An additional permitted minor
material is stained, finished concrete on any story.
      b.   Ramps and Slopes. Ramps and slopes shall not be located on any
street facades.
      c.   Re-Use. Consider providing horizontal floors at the floor-to-floor
heights of one of the building types allowed in the zoning district to allow
future conversion to another use.
      d.   Vertical Divisions. Vertical divisions extending the full height of
the structure are required every 30 feet to de-emphasize the horizontal decks.
Divisions shall be a minimum of 2 feet in width with a minimum projection of 3
inches.
      e.   Screening of Vehicles. Visibility of parked motor vehicles must be
screened from the street by walls with a minimum opacity of 50%. Alternative
screening may be approved through a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
      f.   Blank Wall Limitations. No rectangular area greater than 30% of any
story’s facade, as measured from floor to floor, and no horizontal segment of a
story’s facade greater than 15 feet in width may be solid wall without an
opening.
      g.   Entrances.
         1.   For all Storefront buildings, a pedestrian entrance directly into
the parking structure from the street is required.
         2.   Unless provided through a building lobby, all pedestrian
entrances directly into the garage must be separate from the vehicular entrance
and directly accessed from the sidewalk.
         3.   All exterior pedestrian entrances into any garage must meet the
principal entryway regulations in Sec.
35-3906(b). Stairwells must be located inside a tower per Sec.
35-3906(b) with windows at a transparency rate of 65%.
      h.   Cap. The top story of the parking structure shall include a parapet
or other roof type along all facades. Refer to roof types defined in Sec.
35-3906(b).
      i.   Vehicular Entrances. Drive access location and width is regulated by
the building type in
35-3903.
   (f)   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT. Mechanical equipment is necessary for any
building design, but can have a negative visual impact and detract from the
quality of the design of a building. The purpose of the regulations in this
section, Sec.
35-3906(f), is to ensure that the visual impact of mechanical equipment and
appurtenances is minimized to the maximum extent feasible.
   (1)   "MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT" DEFINED. When the following regulations refer
to "mechanical equipment," any mechanical equipment or utility appurtenance,
such as but not limited to HVAC systems, boilers, condensers, transformers,
generators, vents, meters, ducts, are being referenced, except solar energy
systems, subject to Sec.
34-3415.
   (2)   DESIGN ADJUSTMENT. Alternate locations for mechanical equipment other
than those defined in this subsection,
35-3906(f), may be approved as a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), provided the applicant proves the equipment cannot function in the
locations allowed by these regulations and the equipment is screened to the
maximum extent possible by methods other than only landscape.
   (3)   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT IN BUILDING. Mechanical equipment must be located
within the building, unless the applicant demonstrates that locating the
equipment within the building would conflict with the equipment’s function. See
tower regulations in Sec.
35-3906(b)(6), as allowed per building types (Sec.
35-3903), for rooftop building structure to potentially accommodate mechanical
equipment.
   (4)   ROOFTOP MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT. Any rooftop mechanical equipment shall
be located consistent with the following. See Figure 3906(f)-S for an example.
      a.    Incorporate equipment into the roof design consistent with the
applicable standards of roof types in Sec.
35-3906(b)
.      b.   Set the equipment back a minimum of 15 feet from any street, trail,
or alley facade.
      c.   Rooftop equipment must be screened from any street or trail.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5222.png]
Figure 3906(f)-S. Rooftop Utilities Screened from the Public Way by a Parapet
   (5)   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT ON STREET FACADES.
      a.   Mechanical equipment must not be located on a street facade unless
the applicant demonstrates that locating the equipment in a different location
would conflict with the equipment’s function.
      b.   Any mechanical equipment approved on a facade must be located
consistent with the following standards:
         1.   Street Facade. The mechanical equipment may be located on a
street facade only if all of the following requirements are met:
            i.   The equipment is located on a surface perpendicular (and not
parallel) to the adjacent street. The equipment may be located on a facade
parallel to the street only with approval of a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
            ii.   The equipment extends from the facade surface no more than 3
inches.
            iii.   The equipment must be designed as part of the facade,
integrating with windows and materials. See examples in Figure 3906(f)-T.
         2.   Air Vents or Grills. Air vents and grills may be successfully
incorporated into storefront window systems, provided the transparency
requirements are met by the actual windows in the system.
         3.   Alignment. Multiple pieces of mechanical equipment must be
organized on the facade in a regular pattern and aligned. Compliance with this
standard must be illustrated on the drawing elevations submitted as part of the
application.
         4.     Material Coordination . To the extent practicable, facade-
mounte d mechanical appurtenances shall be located on a material that limits
their visibility. For example, dark colored vents will be more visible on light
colored fiber cement panels than a textured, darker surface such as brick.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5226.png]
Figure 3906(f)-T. Utility Appurtenances located on Facades
   (6)   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT ON OTHER HORIZONTAL SURFACES. Mechanical
equipment, such as electrical transformers and air conditioners, located on the
ground, decks, or horizontal surfaces other than the roof must be located
consistent with the following standards:
      a.   No Encroachment. Mechanical equipment shall not extend into any
right-of-way or any easement, unless otherwise approved by the City.
      b.   Allowed Yard Location. See Sec.
35-3903(m) for definition of yards.
         1.   Primary Street Yard. Mechanical equipment and appurtenances must
not be located in the primary street yard, except as defined in Sec.
35-3906(f)(6)e.
         2.   Non-Primary Street Yard. Mechanical equipment may be located in
the non-primary street yard only when the equipment cannot function or be
located in a rear or side yard, and provided the equipment is screened from the
street per Sec.
35-3907(l).
         3.   Rear and Side Yard. Mechanical equipment may be located in any
rear or side yard.
      c.   Screening from Streets or Open Spaces. All equipment must be
screened from view from any streets or civic open space per the following:
         1.   Walls for screening must be consistent with the building design,
colors, and materials, faced with an allowed major-facade material.
         2.   Where landscaping only is employed, the following must be met:
            i.   The utility must be located in a larger landscape area and the
landscape screen designed as part of the larger planting bed design.
            ii.   Shrubs must fully screen the equipment within 1 year of
installation. Grasses that go dormant during winter months, but do not die to
the ground are acceptable.
            iii.   The zoning administrator may require additional landscape
materials to fully screen the equipment.
      d.   Screening from Adjacent Parcels. All equipment must be screened from
adjacent parcels using the side and rear buffers in Sec.
35-3907(j).
      e.   Street or Primary Yard Location. Mechanical equipment located in a
street yard or other primary frontage yard is allowed only if all of the
following are met:
         1.   The applicant demonstrates that the equipment cannot be located
in a rear yard, non-primary street yard, or in a side yard.
         2.   No other utility cabinets, boxes, or other appurtenances are
within 100 feet along the same side of the street as the proposed utility
appurtenance.
         3.   The equipment is located a minimum of 15 feet from a street
intersection, measured from the intersection of the curb line, and does not
impact the visibility at intersections governed by Sec.
35-5210.
          4.    The equipment is fully screened in a manner that is consistent
with the building design, colors, and materials; the screen height is the
minimum to adequately screen the equipment; and the equipment and screening
does not block any facade transparency. See Figure 3906(f)-U for examples of
poorly located, unscreened equipment on primary streets
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5228.png]
Figure 3906(f)-U. Examples of Poorly Located Utility Appurtenances on Primary
Streets
Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3906 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3907.   LANDSCAPE & SITE DESIGN.
   (a)   GENERAL. This section replaces the landscaping system in the current
code Article V, Division 2.
   (1)   PURPOSE. The landscape and site design regulations of this section are
intended to provide the following:
      a.   To increase the comfort and safety of pedestrians and provide for a
positive walking experience that supports the goal of a walkable downtown.
      b.   To protect the appearance of the City through context-sensitive,
high-quality landscape and streetscape design.
      c.   To increase the compatibility of adjacent uses and minimize the
adverse impacts created by adjoining or neighboring uses.
      d.   To reduce energy demands through the shading of buildings and
pavement, reducing urban heat island effects.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. The regulations of this section Sec.
 35-3907, apply to all Moline Centre districts as follows:
      a.   New Development and Expansions. New buildings constructed or
whenever an existing building is enlarged or expanded by 5,000 square feet or
more, unless otherwise stated in this article.
      b.   New Landscape and Site Elements. New landscape and site development
elements to be constructed on an existing site that previously did not exist
and are regulated by this section, Sec.
35-3907, such as landscaping, parking or loading areas, outdoor seating or
dining areas, and other vehicular areas (e.g. new parking lot, new loading
area).
      c.   Expansion of Existing Parking, Loading Areas, or other Vehicular
Areas. Whenever an existing parking, loading, or other vehicular area is
enlarged or expanded by more than 2,500 square feet, parking lot landscape,
frontage buffers, and side and rear buffers must be applied per this article.
      d.   Expansion of Outdoor Seating/Dining Areas. Whenever an existing
outdoor seating or dining area is enlarged or expanded by more than 500 square
feet.
   (3)   SIGHT LINES AT INTERSECTIONS. See Sec.
35-5210 for regulations requiring clear sight lines at street intersections.
   (4)   STORMWATER. Stormwater detention, retention, or filtration systems,
such as bioswales or rain gardens, may be located in any street yard or other
required site landscape area, provided all other regulations are met.
   (b)   LANDSCAPE INSTALLATION.
   (1)   INTENT. The following provisions aid in ensuring that all required
landscaping is installed and maintained properly.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. These provisions apply to landscape installation
required by this section, Sec.
35-3907.
   (3)   GENERAL INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
      a.   National Standards. Best management practices and procedures
according to the nationally accepted standards must be practiced. All landscape
and trees must be installed in conformance with the practices and procedures
established by the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery
Stock (ANSI Z60.1) as published by the American Association of Nurserymen.
      b.   Timing. All landscape materials must be fully installed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
         1.   If seasonal conditions preclude the complete installation, a bond
and guarantee letter must be filed, equal to 1.5 times the installation costs
as estimated by a qualified professional, is required.
         2.   Complete installation is required within 180 days of the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy or the cash escrow or letter of credit may be
forfeited.
      c.   Tree Measurement. Caliper is the measured diameter (inches) of the
tree trunk for trees to be installed as follows:
         1.   Caliper measurement of the trunk must be taken 6 inches above the
ground or top of the root ball up to and including 4 inch caliper size.
         2.   If the caliper at 6 inches above the ground exceeds 4 inches, the
caliper should be measured at 12 inches above the ground or top of the root
ball.
      d.   Plant Size Requirements. Plant material must be sized according to
Table 3907-1 unless otherwise noted in this section.
      e.   Condition and Selection of Planting Materials. The plant materials
used must be free from visible signs of disease, infestation, or physical
defect at the time of planting. Plant materials must:
         1.   Be appropriate for the conditions of the location, including sun
and wind exposure, air quality, salt exposure, soil type, expected moisture
content of soil, and slope.
         2.   Not be an invasive or a potentially invasive species.
         3.   Be, wherever possible, native or naturalized to the region.
      f.   Compost, Mulch, and Organic Matter. Compost, mulch, and organic
matter must be utilized within the soil mix to reduce the need for fertilizers
and increase water retention.
      g.   Maintenance. All installed plant material must be fully maintained,
including watering, mulching, fertilizing, and replacement as necessary for
establishment.
   (4)   URBAN TREE INSTALLATION.
      a.   Permeable Surface. For each tree planted, a minimum amount of
permeable surface area is required, unless otherwise stated in this code. See
Table 3907-2 for estimated tree canopy sizes at maturity, soil volumes, and
minimum permeable area required per tree.
         1.   Permeable area for one tree cannot count towards that of another
tree.
         2.   Recommended permeable surface area is provided for information
purposes.
      b.   Suspended Pavement System. When the required soil surface area of a
tree (see Table 3907-2) will extend below any pavement, a modular suspended
pavement system (Silva Cells, Root Space, or an approved equivalent), must be
used below that pavement to ensure root growth and access to air and water.
   (c)   PLANTERS, PLANTING BEDS, & LAWNS.
   (1)   PLANTERS & PLANTING BEDS. All planters and planting beds must include
shrubs, ornamental grasses (not turf or lawn grass), ground cover, vines,
annuals, or perennials.
      a.   A minimum of 65% of any bed area must be covered in plant material
at maturity. The remaining portion of the bed may be covered with natural, non-
living permeable materials, such as mulch or pine straw. Colored rock is not
allowed.
      b.   Annual beds must be maintained seasonally, replanting as necessary.
      c.   All species in planting beds must be native or naturalized for the
area, and non-invasive per the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
   (2)   LAWNS. Seeded, plugged, or sodded grass may be planted throughout
landscaped lawn areas. Grass must be established within 90 days of planting or
the area must be reseeded, replugged, or resodded.
Table 3907-1. Plant Material Size at Installation
Table 3907-1. Plant Material Size at Installation
PLANT MATERIAL TYPE            MINIMUM SIZE
Deciduous Shade/Overstory Tree 1.5 in. caliper/8 ft. height
Evergreen Tree                 8 ft. height
Understory Tree                6 ft. height
Ornamental Tree                1.5 in. caliper
Shrubs - Deciduous             5 gallon container or 18 in. balled & burlapped
Shrubs - Evergreen             5 gallon container or 18 in. balled & burlapped
Groundcover                    3 in. height
 
 
Table 3907-2. Estimated Canopy & Permeable Surface Area by Tree Size
          ESTIMATED MATURE MINIMUM REQUIRED        RECOMMENDED PERMEABLE
TREE SIZE CANOPY SIZE      PERMEABLE SURFACE AREA  SURFACE AREA (70% OF
                                                   CANOPY SIZE)
Small     300 sq. ft.      100 sq. ft. (e.g. 4 ft. 210 sq. ft. (e.g. 4 ft.
                           x 25 ft.)               x 52.5 ft.)
Medium    700 sq. ft.      225 sq. ft. (e.g. 4 ft. 490 sq. ft. (e.g. 5 ft.
                           x 56.25 ft.)            x 98 ft.)
Large     1,000 sq. ft.    400 sq. ft. (e.g. 4 ft. 700 sq. ft. (e.g. 7 ft.
                           x 100 ft.)              x 100 ft.)
 
   (d)   SIDEWALKS. The following applies to all streetscape and on-site
sidewalks referenced in this section, Sec.
35-3907.
   (1)   WAIVER. A waiver or modification to the regulations in this subsection
35-3907(d) may be requested per Sec.
35-2211.
   (2)   PAVEMENT WIDTH. A minimum of 5 feet of pavement area must be clear for
all sidewalks.
   (3)   MATERIALS. Sidewalks must be composed of concrete. Other materials may
be approved through an administrative adjustment per Sec.
35-3909(d) with engineering and public works approval. Concrete sidewalks must
be at least 4 inches thick.
   (4)   ON-SITE SIDEWALK CONNECTIONS.
      a.   Continuous sidewalks or paved pathways dedicated to pedestrians and
bicyclists must connect all building entrances to public sidewalks via the
shortest possible route.
      b.   Building entrances located in the rear are exempt from this
requirement when directly opening onto a public alleyway.
   (5)    CONNECTIONS THROUGH THE I-74 R.O.W. Continuous sidewalks or paved
pathways dedicated to pedestrians and bicyclists must connect the public
sidewalks from 5th Avenue at the I-74 elevated highway south to 6th Avenue as
close to the I-74 r.o.w. as practicable. The intent is to provide as much
connectivity between the east and west sides of I-74 as practicable. See Figure
3907(m)-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5230.png]
Figure 3907(m)-A. Pedestrian Connections at I-74
   (6)   VEHICULAR CROSSINGS. Where sidewalks intersect with driveways, parking
areas, and loading areas, the following applies:
      a.   Sidewalk paving material must continue through the vehicular area
and the crossing area must be clearly differentiated from the vehicular area.
      b.   If the material of the pedestrian and vehicular area is similar, the
pedestrian area must be differentiated through the use of elevation changes,
speed bumps, another paving material, scoring, or other similar method.
   (e)   SITE STRUCTURES.
   (1)   FENCES & FREESTANDING WALLS. The following applies to all fences and
freestanding walls in the Moline Centre Districts:
      a.   Lot Line. Fences and walls must be constructed a minimum of 4 inches
off any lot line towards the interior of the lot, except when replacing an
existing fence while retaining the existing fence posts.
      b.   Face Direction. All fences must be erected with the “good,”
“decorative,” or “finished” side facing outward.
      c.   Unauthorized Placement Prohibited. No post, rail, fence, wires or
other similar obstruction may be placed upon any street, sidewalk, or public
right-of-way, except as otherwise expressly provided in these regulations (e.g.
outdoor dining areas located on a sidewalk as allowed in Sec.
35-3905(d)).
      d.   Visibility at Intersections. Fences and walls must conform to the
visibility triangle requirements of Sec.
35-5210.
      e.   Prohibited Fencing Types. Chained link, barbed wire, concertina
wire, razor wire or ribbon, or any other similar type of wire, is not allowed.
Electrified fencing is not allowed.
      f.   Measuring Fence Height. All fences must be measured as follows:
         1.   Street Yard Fences. Primary and non-primary yard fence height
must be measured from the elevation of the adjacent public sidewalk, or, where
no sidewalk exists, the back of curb or edge of pavement.
         2.   Side and Rear Yard Fences. All side and rear yard fence height
must be measured from the natural existing grade at base of the fence.
      g.   Street Yard Fences. With the exception of any buffer fences required
by this section, Sec.
35-3907, fences within or along the perimeter of any street yard must meet the
following regulations:
         1.   Opacity. Street yard fences and walls over 30 inches in height
must be less than 40% opaque.
         2.   Materials. Primary yard fences may be constructed of wood, steel,
aluminum, or PVC. Brick-faced masonry may be used on walls 30 inches or less in
height.
         3.   Height. Primary yard fences may not be more than 4 feet high in
any zone.
      h.   Side and Rear Yard Fences. With the exception of any buffer fences
required by this section, Sec.
35-3907, fences within or along the perimeter of any side or rear yard must
meet the following regulations:
         1.   Materials. Non-primary street, side, and rear yard fences may be
constructed of wood, steel, aluminum, brick-faced masonry, and PVC. Chain link
is allowed along the perimeter of any side or rear yard where it is not visible
from any street and with approval of an administrative adjustment. Masonry
walls are allowed in side and rear yards.
         2.   Height. The maximum height of any fence in or on the perimeter of
a rear or interior side yard is 6 feet except as otherwise stated in this
subsection.
      i.   Design Adjustments. In CV districts, a design adjustment may be
approved for additional height and other fence materials for designated sports
field or ball court fencing.
   (2)   RETAINING WALLS. The following applies to all retaining walls in any
street yard:
      a.   Height. Retaining walls must be no more than 30 inches in height
above grade, ideally 18 inches to also serve as seatwalls. Where more than 30
inches of grade needs to be retained, a series of walls may be used. A design
adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for an alternate design that meets the intent of
these regulations.
      b.   Material. Retaining walls must be faced in an allowable major facade
material.
      c.   Steep Slopes. Multiple retaining walls with sloped landscape in
between may be used to accommodate taller elevations. Landscape beds may not be
sloped greater than 3:1.
      d.   Design Adjustment. Alternative retaining wall designs may be
approved through a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) provided the walls are necessary for development of a site.
   (3)   DECKS.
      a.   Yard Location. Decks may not be located in any primary street yard.
      b.   Non-Primary Street Yards. In non-primary street yards, the following
applies:
         1.   Decks must be located a minimum of 1 foot from any lot line with
landscape planting bed between any public streetscape sidewalk and the deck.
         2.   Deck floors may not be located more than 12 inches above any
public sidewalk.
         3.   Deck rails must be metal, or a metal frame with wood slats. Deck
rails may be no higher than 42 inches.
      c.   Rear or Side Yards. In rear or side yards, the following applies:
         1.   Decks must be set back a minimum of 3 foot from any lot line.
         2.   Decks may be no higher than 3 feet above the grade of the
abutting lot line.
   (4)   TERRACES.
      a.   Definition. Terraces include any hard-surfaced outdoor area designed
for people to dine, sit, or gather, and that is not designed for the storage or
access of motor vehicles.
      b.   Street Yards. Terraces may be located in any street yard only when
constructed within the following parameters:
         1.   Terraces contribute to any site coverage regulated by the
building type in Sec.
35-3903.
         2.   Terraces may not exceed 12 inches above grade in any street yard.
         3.   All materials must be of high quality, such as cut stone, brick
pavers, or decorative concrete.
         4.   Terraces in street yards must either be designed as a
continuation of the streetscape pavement or be separated from the streetscape
pavement by a planter or planting bed.
      c.   Side and Rear Yard. In any interior side or rear yard, terraces must
be set back a minimum of 1 foot from any lot line.
   (f)   STREETSCAPE & STREET YARDS.
   (1)   INTENT. To treat the space between the building and street curb, the
streetscape plus the street yard, as a cohesive landscape design that enhances
the pedestrian experience. See Figure 3907(f)-A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5232.png]
Figure 3907(f)-A. Streetscape & Street Yard Areas
   (2)    APPL ICABILITY . The regulations of this section, Sec.
35- 3907(f), apply to all buildings and sites in the Moline Centre districts,
unless otherwise stated.
   (3)   DEFINITIONS.
      a.   Streetscape. Streetscape is the pedestrian area abutting the back-
of-curb of the street and including the parkway or street tree area and the
continuous public sidewalk. The streetscape area may extend onto the lot if the
pedestrian area of the public right-of-way is not large enough, per Sec.
35-3903(f)(5).
      b.   Street Yards. Street yard landscape addresses treatment of the
private street yard, the area between any building facade and streetscape area
defined above in a.
   (4)   MINIMUM STREETSCAPE AREA.
      a.   Easement Required. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(5) for streetscape areas less than 12 feet in depth (back of curb to
edge of r.o.w.), where an easement is required to accommodate the full
streetscape.
      b.   Design Adjustment. Where existing buildings are located such that
the full streetscape area cannot be accommodated, a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for an alternate design, based upon the existing
and desired context of the area. The alternate design, however, must include
sidewalk and street trees at the back of curb.
   (5)   MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE STREET YARDS. Landscape areas, decks per Sec.
35-3907(e)(3), and terraces per Sec.
35-3907(e)(4) may be incorporated into street yards, but the site must not
exceed the maximum site coverage area. See building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903.
   (6)   STREETSCAPE DESIGN CONTINUITY. Streetscapes along corridors must be
coordinated and designed for continuity.
      a.   Existing City-Installed Streetscape. Where streetscape has been
installed by the City within the last 10 years, the applicant must coordinate
with the zoning administrator to replace or repair any existing streetscape
improvements.
      b.   Planned Streetscapes. Where streetscape is planned for the area,
adjacent developments, or the corridor, the applicant must coordinate with the
zoning administrator to ensure any streetscape installed is consistent and
designed for continuity with other plans. See the City's most recent
streetscape plans for Moline Centre.
      c.   Streetscape Design Continuation. An approved streetscape design for
the subject site may be utilized by the City for the extension of the design in
the surrounding district or along adjacent corridors to provide continuity.
      d.   Adjustments. A design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved to allow for an alternative method for providing
the required streetscape, such as a fee-in-lieu or temporary provision during
street construction. Pedestrian continuity must be provided within reasonable
amount of time.
   (7)   STOREFRONT STREETSCAPE. For all Storefront buildings, the following is
required along all primary frontages.
      a.   Streetscape Design. The entire streetscape and street yard area from
building facade to the back of curb must be designed as a combination of
hardscape, tree wells, and/or planter areas.
      b.   Pavement. Concrete pavement is required from back of curb to the
street yard with a clear path defined per Sec.
35-3907(c).
      c.   Street Tree Zone. The street tree zone must include tree wells or
planters for street trees per Sec.
35-3907(g).
      d.   Sidewalk Cafe. Sidewalk cafes may be incorporated into the
streetscape and street yard area per the Outdoor Dining regulations, Sec.
35-3905(d).
   (8)   GENERAL STREETSCAPE. For all street frontages except primary frontages
along Storefront buildings, the following is required:
      a.   Sidewalk. A minimum clear streetscape sidewalk is required along
street frontages per Sec.
35-3907(c), located a minimum of 7 feet off the back of curb or edge of
pavement.
      b.   Street Tree Zone. A minimum 7-foot wide street tree zone, between
the back of curb and the sidewalk, is required.
         1.   Planting Areas. The street tree zone in non-storefront locations
may be treated as a landscaped parkway or paved with tree wells. See Sec.
35-3907(c) for planters, planting beds, and lawns.
         2.   Street Trees. Street trees per Sec.
35-3907(g) must be provided within the street tree zone.
      c.   Additional Elements. Additional streetscape elements beyond those
required in this section may be required per the zoning administrator, based on
plans in place for the street, downtown, or the City.
   (9)   ENHANCED STREETSCAPE. The requirements of this section apply to any
new streets and to development on all lots with 200 feet or more of street
frontage on existing streets. The following additional elements are required
for the full streetscape area:
      a.   Pavement Design. Special pavement design is required for all
required minimum sidewalks, other hardscape defined by the base or storefront
streetscape, and connections to on-site sidewalks. A palette of designs may be
provided for each streetscape.
      b.   Street Furnishings. For a full block development, benches and/or
seatwalls, planters, planter fences, tree grates, tree guards, and trash
receptacles must be specified and quantities and locations listed for each
street. For each block face, a minimum of 2 benches and 1 trash receptacle is
required within the streetscape area.
      c.   Public Art. Along any cultural corridors defined in the City's most
recent public art master plan, public art is required within either the
streetscape or street yard. See Article V, Division 3.
      d.   Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking must be supplied to meet the
minimum bicycle parking requirements of the blockface uses per Sec.
35-3907(m). Bicycle parking location must be coordinated with the zoning
administrator.
      e.   Landscape Design. Ground plane vegetation per Sec.
35-3907(c) must be designated for any landscape bed areas, planter areas, and
open tree wells.
      f.   Lighting. Both pedestrian and vehicular lighting must be specified
and locations and quantities noted. All lighting must meet any requirements of
the director of engineering and samples must be submitted upon request of the
zoning administrator.
   (10)   STREET YARD AREAS. All areas between the lot line abutting the street
right-of-way and the building must be designed as an extension to the existing
public streetscape, but may include varying degrees of landscaped and paved
areas as follows:
      a.   Street Yards. General yard areas located between the building facade
and the streetscape.
      b.   Courtyards. Courtyards in the street yard are allowed or required as
part of the building type. See Primary Streetwall Variation in supplemental
regulations of certain building types, Sec.
35-3903.
      c.   Outdoor Seating Areas. Outdoor seating or dining areas in the build-
to zone are allowed or required as part of the building type. See Primary
Streetwall Variation in supplemental regulations of certain building types,
Sec.
35-3903.
   (11)   STREET YARD LANDSCAPE ELEMENTS. The following applies to landscaped
and paved areas in any street yard:
      a.   Paving. Additional paving materials may be introduced, provided the
design incorporates elements of and coordinates with the streetscape. For
example, expansion or control joints in concrete in the streetscape and street
yard must align.
      b.   Courtyards and Seating Areas. Courtyards and outdoor seating or
dining areas in the supplemental regulations for each building type (Sec.
35-3903) have specific requirements for furnishings and other amenities.
Additionally, one of the following landscape area requirements must be
utilized:
         1.   Plaza. Where 60% or more of the area is paved, a minimum of 5% of
the area must include landscape planters or pots, tree wells, or in-ground or
raised planter beds.
         2.   Green. Where less than 60% of the area is paved, a minimum of 30%
of the area must include landscape planters or pots, tree wells, or in-ground
or raised planter beds.
      c.   General Street Yard Planting Bed. The following applies to any
street yard area outside of a courtyard or seating/dining area, per the
building type:
         1.   When any unpaved street yard area is shallower than 6 feet, the
entire area must be planting bed per Sec.
35-3907(c).
         2.   When any unpaved street yard area is deeper than 6 feet, the
unpaved area must include a minimum of 30% planting bed planting bed per Sec.
35-3907(c).
      d.   Courtyard Trees. Street yard areas must include at least one tree
per every 1400 square feet of courtyard area. See Sec.
35-3903 for allowed courtyards in building types. See Appendix A for allowed
trees.
      e.   Fences and Walls. Metal fences or masonry walls may be incorporated
into any street yard area to separate distinct seating areas.
         1.   Primary Street Yard. In the primary street yard, fences and walls
may not exceed 24 inches in height.
         2.   Non-primary Street Yard. In the non-primary street yard, fences
and walls may not exceed 48 inches in height.
         3.   Fence Materials. Metal fences must be steel or iron, and have a
maximum opacity of 60%.
         4.   Design Adjustment. Other fence or wall designs may be approved as
a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
   (g)   STREET TREES.
   (1)   INTENT. To line all streets with a consistent and appropriate planting
of trees, establishing tree canopy for environmental and aesthetic benefits.
   (2)   REQUIRED STREET TREES.
      a.   Street trees must be installed as required and as a component of the
streetscape area regulations in Sec.
35-3907(f).
      b.   Street trees must be installed along all new or existing streets,
with the exception of alleys, where street trees or streetscape do not exist.
      c.   The zoning administrator may exempt locations where street trees
exist or may require replacement of street trees in poor condition.
   (3)   STREET TREE TYPE. A list of permitted street tree types is located in
Appendix A of
Chapter 35.
      a.   Street trees must be medium or large trees.
      b.   Where more than 4 trees are planted, a combination of permitted
species should be considered.
   (4)   SPACING AND LOCATION.
      a.   Spacing. Each lot is required to have one tree for every 40 feet of
street frontage with a minimum of one street tree per street frontage.
      b.   Location. Street trees must be located in the street tree zone and:
         1.   2 feet minimum and a maximum of 10 feet off the back of curb,
measured perpendicular to the curb, between the curb and sidewalk.
         2.   15 feet minimum from any street light.
         3.   20 feet minimum from intersection of two street curbs.
         4.   5 feet minimum from any driveway or building wall.
         5.   2 feet minimum from any utility valves or fire hydrant.
   (5)   TREE WELLS. For trees not installed in a planter area or parkway (Sec.
35- 3907(f)), the tree well must meet the following requirements:
      a.   Size. The tree well must be a minimum of 4 feet wide (the distance
perpendicular to the curb) and 8 feet in length; however, the regulations for
permeable area must be met in Sec.
35-3907(b)(4).
      b.   Opening. The opening of such tree well must include one of the
following:
         1.   The tree well opening may be covered with an expandable iron tree
grate, flush with the sidewalk;
         2.   The tree well opening may be rimmed with a continuous curbing
approximately 4 inches wide and 6 inches above the height of the sidewalk;
         3.   The tree well opening may be surrounded by a masonry seat wall,
18 inches in height above the sidewalk grade; or
         4.   The tree well opening may be protected by other methods
appropriate for the given site conditions and approved as an administrative
adjustment with engineering and public works approval.
   (6)   CLEAR BRANCH HEIGHT. Minimum clear branch height is 7 feet for the
portion of trees overhanging sidewalks and 12 feet for the portions of trees
overhanging streets. The clear branch height of a tree is the distance between
the ground plane and the lowest branch of the tree at maturity.
   (h)   WATERFRONT.
   (1)   INTENT. To enhance, provide, and protect visibility of the river and
access to the waterfront via sight lines to the water from nearby streets,
continuous landscape buffers, and continuous public-access paths along the
waterfront.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. This section applies to lots in all zones abutting the
waterfront.
   (3)   RIPARIAN EDGE.
      a.   20-foot Required Edge. A minimum 20-foot deep riparian edge must be
provided along all waterfronts, measured from the ordinary high water mark,
inland, perpendicular to the water's edge. Access paths may not be located in
the riparian edge, except boardwalks and piers.
      b.   Landscape. Any existing, established vegetation, may be maintained
per Sec.
35-4108. The riparian edge must be landscaped with native or naturalized
shrubs, grasses, and other ground level vegetation per Sec.
35-3907(c) and appropriate, acclimated, and conducive to being located at the
water's edge.
   (4)   WATERFRONT BUFFER. A minimum 75-foot waterfront buffer must be
provided along the waterfront, measured from the ordinary high water mark (see
Sec.
 35-1203 for definition), inland, perpendicular to the water's edge. Refer to
Figure 3907(m)-B for illustration of these requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5234.png]
Figure 3907(f)-B. Waterfront Buffer
      a.   Riparian Edge. The riparian edge, required per Sec.
35-3907(h)(3), may be located within the buffer area.
      b.   Landscape. The waterfront buffer must be landscaped with a minimum
of 1 tree per 3000 square feet of buffer area. Shrubs, grasses, and other
ground level vegetation must be provided per Sec.
35-3907(c).
   (5)   WATERFRONT ACCESS. Within the waterfront buffer, a minimum 10-foot
wide pedestrian and bicycle access path must be provided, extending along the
waterfront.
      a.   Continuous. The path must be continuous, connecting to existing or
planned paths on abutting properties.
      b.   Location. On-grade pathways must be a located outside the minimum
riparian zone.
      c.   Marinas and Boat Launches. The continuous waterfront access path may
utilize boardwalks through marinas or continue inland from marinas and boat
launches as close to the waterfront as feasible.
      d.   Path Material. The path must be constructed of a material that will
accommodate both pedestrians and bicycles, including concrete; asphalt;
mechanically compacted crushed aggregate; or other fixed, solid, permanent
materials approved by the zoning administrator. Wood chips, gravel, and other
loose materials are not allowed.
      e.   Boardwalks and Piers. Boardwalks and piers may be utilized for a
portion of the access. When boardwalks or piers are utilized, the following
applies:
         1.   An alternate route within the buffer must be provided for bicycle
access.
         2.   Boardwalks and piers may be located in the required riparian
edge, up to a maximum of 50% of the edge area.
         3.   Bulkheads (retaining walls along the water's edge) existing prior
to the effective date of this code may be retained or rebuilt in their current
location.
   (6)   UPLAND CONNECTIONS. For properties with 400 linear feet or more of
waterfront, a continuous 10-foot sidewalk or multi-use trail must connect an
existing public street to the waterfront access.
      a.   At least one upland connection must be provided for every 600-foot
long increment of waterfront.
      b.   The path must be constructed of a permanent material per Sec.
35- 3907(h)(5).
      c.   The number of vehicular crossings (streets or driveways) of the
connection must be limited to the fewest number practicable.
   (7)   DEDICATED PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENT. When access is required per Sec.
35-3907(h)(5) and
35-3907(h)(6), a dedicated public easement must be established. Easements must
be dedicated on the deed to the property for both the waterfront access and
connections through the property.
   (8)   VIEWS THROUGH THE SITE. For every 150 linear feet of waterfront, one
open sightline, minimum 20 feet in width, must be provided through the lot
towards the water from a publicly accessible street. An upland connection may
be used to meet this requirement, provided the sightline is maintained.
   (9)   OTHER CONNECTIONS.
      a.   Buildings. Building facades along the waterfront buffer must be
treated as primary frontage per Sec.
35-3903(f)(4) with pedestrian connections from building entrances to the
waterfront access path.
      b.   Parking. Parking along the waterfront buffer must provide the
frontage buffer per Sec.
35-3907(i) between the waterfront and the parking lot.
   (i)   FRONTAGE BUFFER.
   (1)   INTENT. To lessen the visual impact of on-site vehicular parking,
loading, and other activities from the street.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. The frontage buffer is required on all lots for all
building types in accordance with the following:
      a.   Vehicular Areas along Street Frontages. Along the perimeter of any
off-street surface parking, driveway, loading, drive-through, or other
vehicular areas fronting a street right-of-way, not including along any alley.
      b.   Vehicular Areas along Open Space. Along the perimeter of any off-
street surface parking, driveway, or loading areas abutting any CV-1 zoning
district or other open or civic space.
   (3)   REQUIREMENTS. Refer to Figure 3907(i)-A for illustration of these
requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5236.png]
Figure 3907(i)-A. Frontage Buffer Plan & Section
      a.   Buffer Depth. The required buffer area must be a minimum 5 feet in
depth, measured from the streetfacing lot line into the lot.
      b.   Buffer Location. The required buffer area must extend the width of
the vehicular area, but may allow for the perpendicular crossing of driveways.
      c.   Fence. A continuous fence is required in the frontage buffer as
follows:
         1.   Fence Location. The fence must be located 2 feet from the back of
curb or edge of the vehicular area into the buffer and a minimum of 3 feet from
the front of the buffer.
         2.   Fence Alignment. The fence must be either aligned directly with
any adjacent buildings or deeper into the lot than the building. In order to
align the fence with the building, the buffer may need to be located deeper
into the lot to maintain the fence location requirements in (1), above.
         3.   Gate or Opening. One pedestrian opening, maximum 4 feet in width,
is permitted for every 30 feet of fence.
         4.   Fence Materials. The fence must be black, gray, or dark green
aluminum, steel or colored PVC. Masonry columns (maximum 2.5 feet in width) and
base (maximum 18” in height) are allowed, but not required.
         5.   Fence Height. The fence must be a minimum of 3 feet and a maximum
of 4 feet in height.
         6.   Fence Opacity. The fence must be a minimum of 25% and a maximum
of 60% opaque.
      d.   Buffer Landscape. The following landscape is required within the
buffer.
         1.   Shade Trees. If no street trees exist in the streetscape abutting
the buffer area, medium or large shade trees are required at a minimum of 40
feet on center, with at least one shade tree required for each segment of
buffer. If street trees exist, any buffer trees provided should alternate
spacing with street trees.
         2.   Shrubs. A single row of shrubs is required on the street side in
front of and along the fence.
            i.   The shrubs must have a minimum mature width and height of 24
inches.
            ii.   The height of the shrubs must be maintained at no more than
36 inches.
            iii.   The shrubs must be spaced no more than 36 inches on center.
         3.   Existing Vegetation. The zoning administrator may credit existing
vegetation toward meeting buffer requirements.
   (j)   SIDE & REAR BUFFERS.
   (1)   INTENT. To minimize the impact that one zoning district may have on a
neighboring district and to provide a transition between districts.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. A side and rear buffer is required along the side and
rear lot lines of all lots for all building types per this subsection, Sec.
35-3907(j).
   (3)   EXCEPTIONS. The buffer width may be reduced in accordance with the
following:
      a.   Alleys. Buffers are not required abutting alleys.
      b.   Existing Landscape. Where the buffer will interfere with existing
mature, healthy landscape, the zoning administrator shall determine the extent
of the needed buffer.
      c.   Access Points. Driveways and other access points may interrupt
buffers as necessary.
   (4)   ACTIVITIES REQUIRING BUFFERS.
      a.   Side and rear buffers are required only where the following occurs
in the rear or side yards of a lot:
         1.   Motor Vehicle Areas. Any vehicular areas, abutting or adjacent to
districts designated in Table 3907-3. Vehicular areas include such areas as
parking lots or spaces, drives, drive-through uses, fuel pumps, truck parking,
and structured parking.
         2.   Loading Areas. Any loading areas abutting or adjacent to
districts designated in Table 3907-3. Loading areas include such areas as
loading bays, loading docks, service bays, garage doors, other outdoor trucking
facilities.
 
Table 3907-3. Side & Rear Buffer Required
Buffer required on lots zoned: ZONING DISTRICTS
                               SX-1, SX-2 GX-1, GX-2- RX     R      CV-1, CV-2
SX-1, SX-2                     –                    BUFFER BUFFER BUFFER
GX-1, GX-2-                    –        –         BUFFER BUFFER FENCE
RX                             –        –         –    FENCE  –
See Sec. 35-3907(j)(4) for activities triggering buffer requirement.
 
         3.   Service Areas. Any service areas abutting or adjacent to
districts designated in Table 3907-3. Service areas include such areas as
delivery doors, refuse and recycling areas, outdoor employee break areas.
         4.   Other Areas. Other outdoor activities emitting sounds, smells, or
other by-products, such as outdoor dining, as determined by the zoning
administrator.
   (5)   BUFFER LOCATION ON LOT. Side and rear buffers must be installed in one
of the following locations on the lot:
      a.   Abutting the Lot Line. Along the lot line of lot requiring the
buffer.
      b.   Abutting the Activity. The buffer may be located at the edge of the
activity being buffered, provided the area between the buffer and the lot line
is landscaped and includes at least one tree per every 2,000 square feet.
   (6)   FENCE BUFFER. See Table 3907-3 where required. See Figure 3907(j)-
A for illustration.
      a.   Buffer Depth. A minimum 2-foot wide buffer, measured from the lot
line onto the subject lot, is required.
      b.   Privacy Fence. A 6-foot opaque, privacy fence screening the activity
must be located in the buffer adjacent to the lot line.
         1.   Allowed materials include PVC, composite wood, FSC wood (cedar,
redwood, or other approved by the zoning administrator), stone, or brick.
Concrete panels and concrete masonry units are not allowed, except when faced
on all sides with brick or stone.
         2.   When located abutting an R or RX district front yard, the fence
must step down to a 3-foot height within 20 feet of the street right-of-way or
the depth of the abutting R or RX district yard, whichever is less.
      c.   Curbs or Wheel Stops. A curb or wheel stops must be provided along
the buffer edge, minimum 18" from the fence, at any vehicular area to prevent
motor vehicles from damaging the fence. Parking may not overhang into the
buffer.
      d.   Landscape. The buffer area must be landscaped.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5238.png]
Figure 3907(j)-B. Landscape Buffer
   (7)   LANDSCAPE BUFFER. See Table 3907-3 where required. See Figure 3907(j)-
B for illustration.
      a.   Buffer Depth. A minimum 5-foot wide landscape buffer, measured from
the lot line onto the subject lot, is required.
      b.   Privacy Fence. A privacy fence is required. See Sec.
35-3907(j)(6)(b) for fence requirements.
      c.   Shade Trees. Medium or large shade trees are required at a minimum
of 40 feet on center, with at least one shade tree required for each segment of
buffer.
      d.   Landscape. The buffer area must be landscaped with a continuous
shrub hedge, consisting of a staggered, double row of shrubs with a minimum
mature width of 24 inches each, spaced no more than 36 inches on center, and
height maintained between 48 and 72 inches.
   (k)   INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE. The parking lot interior is the area
dedicated to parking on a given parcel from the edge of pavement to edge of
pavement, and including any islands or medians. See Figure 3907(k)-A for
illustration of these requirements.
   (1)   INTENT. To provide shading of pavement surfaces to reduce heat island
effects and to improve the appearance of parking lots by breaking up the large
expanses of pavement with trees and landscaped islands.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. All off-street surface parking lots with more than 10
spaces and/or more than one drive aisle must meet the interior parking lot
regulations.
      a.   See Sec.
35-3907(i) for required perimeter buffer along street frontages and Sec.
35-3907(j) for required perimeter buffers at side and rear lot lines.
      b.   When the number of required off-street parking spaces on a lot
conflicts with the provision of the required landscape islands, the landscape
islands shall be supplied and the number of off-street parking spaces reduced
by the least amount possible.
   (3)   REQUIRED LANDSCAPE ISLANDS.
      a.   Terminal End Islands. Landscape islands are required at the terminal
ends of freestanding rows or bays of parking. Freestanding rows or bays of
parking are those not abutting the parking lot perimeter or building face, and
may have a single or double row of parking.
      b.   Row Islands. For rows of parking with more than 10 spaces, a
landscape island is required to result in no more than 10 continuous parking
spaces in a row without a landscape island.
      c.   Island Width. The minimum width for an island is 5 feet, measured
perpendicular to the adjacent parking space, and the depth of the island is
equal to the depth of the adjacent parking space.
         1.   Islands less than 15 feet in width must utilize a suspended
pavement system per Sec.
35-3907(b)(4) under any paved surface within a tree’s critical root zone equal
to 50% of the mature canopy diameter.
         2.   Islands less than 9 feet in width must install an aeration system
and utilize permeable paving within the mature tree canopy area.
      d.   Minimum Number of Trees. All of the following must be met for any
interior parking lot.
         1.   Island Trees. A minimum of 1 medium or large shade tree is
required within each island.
         2.   50-foot Rule. Each parking space must be located within 50 feet
of a tree.
         3.   Shading Requirement. At maturity, tree canopies must shade a
minimum of 30% of the interior of the parking lot. Refer to Table 3907-2 for
mature canopy sizes.
   (4 )    LANDSCAPE AREAS. Areas in the parking lot not specificall y designed
for use as drive aisles, parking spaces, loading, refuse, or sidewalks must be
unpaved, landscape areas. The intent is to reduce pavement area to that which
is required for a functioning parking lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5240.png]
Figure 3907(k)-A. Interior Parking Lot Landscape
   (l)   SCREENING OF REFUSE & UTILITY AREAS.
   (1)   INTENT. To reduce the visibility of open storage, refuse areas,
loading, and utility appurtenances from public areas and adjacent properties.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. All dumpsters, loading areas, refuse areas, mechanical
equipment, and utility appurtenances must be screened as follows.
   (3)   LOCATION.
      a.   Refuse and Recycling. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(7) in the building type regulations, including allowed location of
refuse and recycling areas.
      b.   Loading. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(8) in the building type regulations for the allowed location of
loading areas.
      c.   Utility Equipment. See Sec.
35-3906(f) for the allowed location of mechanical and utility equipment and
appurtenances on lots.
   (4)   LOADING AND REFUSE AREAS.
      a.   Concrete Pad. For all loading, refuse and recycling areas, a
concrete pad is required.
      b.   Opaque Screen. An opaque masonry, wood, or composite wood screen
wall is required on at least 3 sides of the loading or refuse area.
      c.   Screen Height. The height of the screen wall must be tall enough to
screen the use inside, and a minimum of 6 feet. The zoning administrator may
request additional height as needed for complete screening.
      d.   Gate. An opaque gate is required on the 4th side.
   (5)   UTILITIES.
      a.   Large Private Mechanical Equipment.
         1.   Definition. Large private mechanical equipment includes ground-
mounted equipment at least 4 feet in height.
         2.   Fence or Wall. An opaque wood fence or brickfaced masonry screen
wall is required on all sides facing street right-of-way.
         3.   Shade Trees. Medium or large shade trees are required at a
minimum of 40 feet on center, with at least one shade tree required for each
segment of buffer.
         4.   Shrubs. Planting beds consisting of a double row of mixed shrubs
with a minimum mature width of 24 inches each, spaced no more than 36 inches on
center, and height maintained between 30 and 72 inches.
      b.   Small Private Mechanical Equipment.
         1.   Definition. Small private mechanical equipment includes ground-
mounted equipment less than 4 feet in height.
         2.   Screening. Landscape screening with shrubs is required as
follows:
            i.   Shrubs must be spaced no more than 30” on center, fully
screening the equipment within 2 years.
            ii.   Shrubs must be incorporated into a larger landscape bed and
design.
   (m)   BICYCLE PARKING.
   (1)   INTENT.
      a.   Short-term Bicycle Parking. Short-term bicycle parking is generally
intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for fewer than
3-hour time periods, including customers, clients, messengers, and other short-
term visitors.
      b.   Long-term Bicycle Parking. Long-term bicycle parking is generally
intended to serve the needs of cyclists who park their bicycles for more than
2- to 3-hour periods, including employees, residents, students, and commuters.
   (2)   SPACES REQUIRED. Short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces must
be provided in accordance with the minimum bicycle parking ratios of Table
3907-4. See Sec. 35-3903(l)(1) for fractions and rounding.
Table 3907-4. Bicycle Parking Minimums
USE CATEGORY REQUIRED BICYCLE SPACES
             Minimum Short-Term Minimum Long-Term
Table 3907-4. Bicycle Parking Minimums
USE CATEGORY             REQUIRED BICYCLE SPACES
                         Minimum Short-Term         Minimum Long-Term
RESIDENTIAL
                                                    1 per dwelling unit,
Household Living, 4+     1 per 20 dwelling units,   except where a private
units                    minimum 2                  garage is provided per
                                                    unit
Group Living             1 per 4 beds               –
COMMERCIAL
Artisan Production &     1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
Sales
Consumer Service         1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
Day Care Center          1 per 6 enrollees          –
Eating & Drinking Places 1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
Entertainment Venue,     1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
Indoor
Funeral & Mortuary       –                        –
Service
Lodging                  1 per 25 sleeping rooms, 4 1 per 50 sleeping rooms
                         minimum
Office                   1 per 20,000 s.f.          1 per 30,000 s.f.
Retail Sales             1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
CIVIC & INSTITUTIONAL
Community Assembly,      1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
General & Intensive
Cultural Facility        1 per 20,000 s.f., 5       –
                         minimum
Hospital                 1 per 10 beds              1 per 30 beds
Parks & Open Space       1 per every 15,000 s.f.,   –
                         with 10 minimum
Passenger Terminal       1 per 10,000 s.f., 10      1 per 30,000 s.f.
                         minimum
Government Services      1 per 20,000 s.f., 5       1 per 30,000 s.f.
                         minimum
Schools, Colleges,       1 per every 5,000 s.f. of  1 per every 20,000 s.f. of
Universities - non-      building area              building area
commercial
Public Services and      –                        –
Utilities
OTHER
Agriculture Cultivation, 1 per 5,000 s.f.           –
Indoor
Parking Lot              1 per 5 motor vehicle      –
                         spaces
 
   (3)   LOCATION AND DESIGN.
      a.   General Design. Racks and lockers must:
         1.   Be anchored so that they cannot be easily removed;
         2.   Be of solid construction, resistant to rust, corrosion, hammers,
and saws;
         3.   Allow both the bicycle frame and at least one wheel to be locked
with the bicycle in an upright position using a standard U-lock;
         4.   Be designed and installed so as not to cause damage to the frame,
wheels, or components;
      b.   Dimensions. All required bicycle parking spaces must:
         1.   Have minimum dimensions of 2 feet in width by 6 feet in length,
with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of 7 feet.
         2.   Abut an aisle, minimum of 5 feet wide, to allow for maneuvering
and pedestrian access through.
         3.   Be separated from vehicular parking areas to protect parked
bicycles from damage. The separation may be accomplished through grade
separation, distance or physical barrier, such as curbs, wheel stops, walls,
fences, or other similar features.
      c.   Surface. The parking surface shall be designed and maintained to be
mud and dust free. The use of rock or gravel areas for bicycle parking is
permitted provided that edging materials clearly demarcate the space and the
rock material is contained.
      d.   Signage. If required bicycle parking for public use is not visible
from the street, signs must be posted indicating their location.
      e.   Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces. Short-term bicycle parking spaces
must:
         1.   Be located within 50 feet of a building entrance.
         2.   Public bicycle parking spaces may be credited toward meeting
short-term bicycle parking requirements if such bicycle parking spaces comply
with the location requirements of this paragraph.
      f.   Long-Term Bicycle Parking and Storage Spaces. Long-term bicycle
parking spaces must:
         1.   Be located with direct access by the bicycle rider, with no more
than 50% of the required spaces requiring the use of stairs or elevators;
         2.   May not be located in dwelling units or on dwelling unit
balconies;
         3.   Must protect the entire bicycle, its components and accessories
against theft and inclement weather, including wind-driven rain and snow.
         4.   Must be designed to allow bicycles to be securely locked to a
bicycle rack in a storage room or a locker with a separate access door for each
bike.
      g.   Bicycle-Share Programs. Long-term bicycle parking requirements may
be reduced or eliminated when facilities are included to accommodate a bicycle-
share program. The number of shared bicycles spaces on-site may count for any
required long-term bicycle parking spaces with approval of an administrative
adjustment.
   (4)   SHOWERS AND CHANGING FACILITIES. For new office, artisan production,
hospital, and school, college, and university uses with 30 or more full-time
employees or students, one shower and changing facility shall be provided at a
rate of 1% of the total full-time occupants. A minimum of one facility is
required. For example, a site with 30 employees must provide one shower and
changing facility; a site with 150 to 249 employees must provide 2 facilities;
a site with 250 to 349 employees must provide 3 facilities. See Sec.
35-3903(l)(1) for fractions and rounding.
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3907 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3908.   MASTER PLAN DEVELOPMENTS (MPD).
   (a)   GENERAL.
   (1)   INTENT. The Master Plan Development (MPD) regulations are intended to
implement the goals of the City's most recent comprehensive plan, most recent
downtown plan, and other planning documents. These regulations apply to
existing parcels larger than a typically walkable block and are intended to
result in a site-specific master plan that:
      a.   Addresses the surrounding existing and planned context,
relationships to other parcels, transportation continuity, and other
interactions;
      b.   Results in an interconnected system of streets and blocks, extending
the City's current grid, which provides access and mobility to all users via
multiple modes of transportation;
      c.   Incorporates a variety of smaller, usable, accessible open space for
residents and visitors to the sites within walking distance of building
entrances;
      d.   Implements goals towards providing access, visibility, and
stewardship of the riverfront.
      e.   Provides for an appropriate, finer grade mix of districts and
potential uses, creating new, walkable, complete urban areas.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. The regulations of this section apply to all lots zoned
with Moline Centre districts.
      a.   3 Acre Developments. All developments on a single parcel or
combination of parcels totaling 3 acres or more must submit a development plan
in compliance with the MPD regulations, prior to any subdivision, rezoning, or
submittal of a development plan for review, except as follows:
         1.   Parcels currently designated as CV on the zoning map are not
required to, but may elect to, submit as an MPD.
         2.   Rezoning any parcel to CV does not require submittal as an MPD.
      b.   Parcels to Include. The following must be included in the MPD:
         1.   All adjacent and abutting land under the same or similar
ownership must be included. Similar ownership means parcels that have any
common owners with legal rights.
         2.   All parcels considered to be part of the same development or
phases of a development.
         3.   All adjacent and abutting parcels under separate ownership that
are either vacant or anticipated to be redeveloped within 10 years of the
submittal must be considered for planning purposes and noted as such. Planning
purposes include such items as access to those sites, incorporation into the
blocks of the MPD, continuity of waterfront access and visibility, access to
usable open spaces, and mixing of uses and access to daily uses.
         4.   All parcels the Community and Economic Development director
requests to be included for planning purposes.
      c.   Design Adjustments. Design adjustments (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) may be approved for those regulations specifically defined
throughout this article, provided the Master Plan Development meets the intent
of the MPD requirements (see Sec.
35-3908(a)(1)) and is consistent with the most recent comprehensive plan and
other applicable planning documents. The submittal must include a clear
description of the modifications to be approved. See Sec.
35-3909(e) for design adjustments process.
   (3)   APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
      a.   Development Plan. All MPDs must be approved as a development plan
per Sec.
35-3909(c).
         1.   Project Information. A list of submittal requirements is
available from the City. The required and any additional submittals the
developer or zoning administrator deem necessary must illustrate compliance
with this section, Sec.
35-3908, and any other requirements of the City.
         2.   Project Phasing & Guarantees. Description and mapping of
anticipated project timing and phasing, including all infrastructure components
(such as utilities, streets, parking, civic spaces, landscaping, uses, building
types) must be provided. A developer agreement and other mechanisms required by
the City (such as financial guarantees) must be included to ensure completion
of all site components, such as streets and civic spaces, phased in conjunction
with buildings and site plan developments.
         3.   Master Development Plan Components. The submittal plans must
include all components defined in this section, Sec.
35-3908.
            i.   Boundary Lines. All streets, civic space, waterfront buffers,
and building sites must be located on separate lots, rights-of-way, or
easements. These lines provide the baseline for measuring locations of building
types in Sec.
35-3903.
            ii.   Zoning Districts and Building Types. The regulating plan must
locate all proposed new districts on lots and consider the regulations for
building types in Sec. 35-3903 to ensure the areas designated can accommodate
buildings meeting the regulations.
            iii.   Building plans and elevations meeting the regulations of
Sec.
35-3903 are not required for the development plan approval; however, building
and parking footprints are encouraged.
      b.   Subdivision. MPDs that consolidate lots; establish new lots, rights-
of-way, or easements; and/or dedicate any land must submit for subdivision plat
approval per Sec.
35-2108 for a minor subdivision or Sec.
35-2209 for a major subdivision. An approved development plan is required prior
to or concurrent with subdivision approval. See Figure 3909(f)-B for a diagram
of the development plan approval process, referencing subdivision approvals.
      c.   New Zoning Districts. All MPDs introducing new zoning districts per
Sec.
35-3908(e) must submit for a rezoning per Sec.
35-2203. An approved development plan and subdivision plat is required prior to
or concurrent with review and approval of the zoning map amendment. See Figure
3909(f)-B for a diagram of the development plan approval process, referencing
rezoning approvals.
   (b)   BLOCKS AND STREETS.
   (1)   BLOCK LAYOUT. An interconnected system of streets and blocks is
required for all MPD sites. See Figure 3908(e)-E for an illustration of an
example layout of these regulations; other configurations that meet the
regulations are possible.
      a.   Block Size. The smallest blocks feasible should be utilized. Block
length must be no more than 600 feet, with a maximum perimeter of 1800 feet,
except as follows:
         1.   Blocks with natural or existing site constraints, such as those
abutting rail corridors, highways, steep grades, and waterways, may be longer.
         2.   Where blocks are longer than 500 feet, pedestrian access
easements, minimum 20 feet in width with minimum 5-foot sidewalks, must be
located approximately mid-block, effectively reducing the resulting pedestrian
blocks to dimensions to no more than 300 feet or less.
      b.   Access Points. An access point is a new street connecting to an
existing street. A minimum of 2 access points must be provided for the MPD,
with a minimum of one per every 1,500 feet of boundary, except where rail
corridors, waterways, steep grades, or limited access highways prevent access.
      c.   Extend Existing Streets. Streets must connect and continue existing
streets from adjoining areas except when approved as a design adjustment (see
Sec.
35-3909(e)). Future connections must be considered and temporary dead-end
streets may be supplied for future extension with zoning administrator and
director of engineering approval.
      d.   Shape of Blocks. The shape of a block should be generally
rectangular in order to accommodate typically rectilinear buildings, but may
vary due to natural features or other existing site constraints, such as
highways and rail corridors.
      e.   Civic Space Frontage. See Sec.
35-3908(c) for civic space requirements. Open space, existing and new, should
be fronted with streets to provide more visibility and access per Sec.
35-3908(c).
      f.   Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets. Cul-de-sac and temporary dead-end
streets are not allowed, except when approved as a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) and necessitated by natural features or site constraints, including
but not limited to waterways or highways. If approved, pedestrian connections
and associated landscape plantings are required where feasible to increase
connectivity and access.
      g.   Lot Configuration. All lots must have frontage along a street per
the building type requirements, unless otherwise specified. See Sec.
35-3903 for building types and lot size requirements.
         1.   Blocks must have lots fronting on at least 2 street faces,
preferably the longest faces, with the exception of blocks containing open
space or civic space per Sec.
35-3908(c). See Sec. 35-3903 for building type regulations regarding through-
lots.
         2.   Flag lots, located on the interior of the block with street
frontage only for driveway access, are not allowed except as approved by a
design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) and for utilities and infrastructure uses only.
         3.   Regulations for anticipated building types shall be considered
when setting block depth and width to avoid the need for future variances or
adjustments.
         4.   Consider lot and block orientation for maximum energy efficiency,
depending on the building type. For example, block orientation along an east-
west longitudinal axis will encourage development of long mixed-use buildings
oriented along an east-west axis, with smaller east and west facing facades,
able to take advantage of passive solar technology.
      h.   Service Access. The configuration of the lots and blocks must
include alleys or service drives per Sec.
35-3908(b)(3) to accommodate parking and garage access, refuse and recycling
pickup, and utilities in the rear or interior of lots.
      i.   Existing Lots. Blocks may be established to include already existing
lots within them and those lots may retain their existing zoning district
designation.
      j.   Vistas. Views down streets that terminate at parcels (referred to as
"vistas" in these regulations), including where a street might angle at less
than 90 degrees, must be considered when laying out streets and blocks, and
locating open space, parking, and buildings. See Sec.
35-3908(d) for vista regulations.
   (2)   STREET CONFIGURATION. Complete streets provide for multiple modes of
travel throughout the City. All streets, whether publicly dedicated or
privately held, must meet the following requirements.
      a.   Base Street Requirements. The base street type is illustrated in
Figure 3908(e)-A. The zoning administrator and director of engineering may
require additional street right-of-way or configuration based on existing
context and circulation needs. The base street defines the minimum components
of any new street on the interior of the development and includes the
components outlined in this section,
35-3908(b)(2).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5242.png]
Figure 3908(e)-A. Typical Base Street
      b.    Design Adjustment. A design adjustment may be approved for
alternate street configurations, with the recommendation of the director of
engineering. See Sec.
35-3909(e).
      c.     Pedestrian Area. The pedestrian area includes pedestrian-orient ed
components from the back of curb to the edge of the right-of-way.
         1.    Storefront Streetscape Width. The minimum dimension required for
streetscape along ground stories with storefronts is 14 feet, with a clear
sidewalk width of at least 6 feet and a minimum 8-foot street tree buffer zone.
         2.   General Streetscape Width. Along non-storefront ground stories,
the minimum dimension required for streetscape is 12 feet with a clear sidewalk
of at least 5 feet and a minimum 7-foot street tree buffer.
         3.   Landscape. See Sec.
35-3907(f) for streetscape area regulations, including sidewalk and street tree
regulations.
      d.   Travel Lanes & Pavement Width. Pavement width must accommodate
travel lanes, on-street parking, and any on-street bicycle accommodations.
         1.   Minimum Pavement Width. Minimum pavement width is 36 feet to
accommodate travel lanes and on-street parking. Dedicated bicycle
accommodations require additional pavement width.
         2.   Maximum Pavement Width. The maximum crossing width for all
streets internal to the development is 38 feet. Pavement widths wider than 38
feet must include a median in the middle to provide pedestrian refuge and/or
bulbs/bump-outs to reduce the crossing widths to less than 38 feet.
         3.   Travel Lanes. Travel lanes must be between 10 and 11 feet in
width. Travel lanes wider than 11 feet to accommodate truck traffic may be
approved through an administrative adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)) with approval of the director of engineering.
      e.   On-Street Parking. On-street parking provides convenient parking for
businesses and for parks and open space users, decreases the need for off-
street parking, and buffers pedestrians on the sidewalk from vehicular traffic
on the street.
         1.   On-street parking must be provided on both sides of the street.
On-street parking on only one of a street may be approved as a design
adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), reducing the minimum pavement width for a two-way street to 28
feet with a minimum right-of-way width of 52 feet.
         2.   On-street parallel parking must be 8 feet wide.
         3.   Back-in or head-in angled parking may be approved through the
design adjustment process in lieu of parallel parking with additional width to
the right-of-way. Associated additional pavement and right-of-way width must be
provided.
      f.   Bicycle Accommodations. New streets within the development must
accommodate bicycle access per the City’s most recent bicycle or multimodal
transportation plan. Dedicated bicycle accommodations must be included on
through streets and higher activity streets. On non-commercial and lower
activity streets, bicycles may share vehicular lanes.
      g.   Mid-Block Pedestrian Paths. Where the maximum block size is exceeded
as allowed per Sec.
35-3908(b)(1).a or approved as a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), midblock pedestrian paths are required per the following:
         1.   The pathway must be a minimum of 6 feet in width, constructed of
a durable hardscape material.
         2.   An easement, minimum 12 feet in width, must be either paved or
landscaped with at least 1 street tree per every 50 linear feet of pathway.
         3.   Pedestrian pathways must be open-air, but overhead building
crossings may be approved as part of a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
      h.   Street Crosswalks. Crossings at all street intersections shall
include a clear pedestrian path across streets (crosswalks) with accessibility
ramps at curbs, demarcated by paint or stamped patterns per City standards.
Raised crosswalks are required for upland connections crossing streets to
waterfront access (see Sec.
35-3907(h)).
      i.   Intersection Design. In lieu of
29-3112, intersections must be designed with either bulbs/bumpouts or an
effective turning radius to shorten pedestrian crossing distances and reduce
vehicle turning speeds, increasing pedestrian safety.
         1.   Bulbs or Bumpouts. Bulbs or bumpouts must extend to the edges of
on-street parking along the intersection streets. The curb radius of the bulb/
bumpout may be designed with the actual turning radius of a typical design
vehicle as opposed to a maximum design vehicle. Bulbs/bumpouts is preferred
over using the effective turning radius.
         2.   Effective Turning Radius. Without bulbs or bumpouts,
intersections must be designed for the effective actual turning radius of a
typical design vehicle as opposed to a maximum design vehicle, using the
shortest actual curb radius possible. See Figure 3908(e)-B for illustration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5244.png]
Figure 3908(e)-B. Illustration of Effective Turning Radius vs. Curb Radius
         3.   Turning Speed. When running analyses to determine corner radius
size, the turning speed should be set to no more than 10 mph at signalized
intersection and no more than 5 mph at unsignalized intersection.
         4.   Design Vehicle: Selecting the proper design vehicle should err on
the side of selecting a smaller vehicle.
            i.   The default design vehicle for any intersection that includes
a local or minor collector street should be a SU-30. A larger vehicle may be
used if a study identifies that a particular vehicle making a specific turning
movement (such as a bus) is larger than the vehicle specified above.
            ii.   For all other intersection types or intersections featuring a
street under IDOT jurisdiction, the default design vehicle should be determined
using either the IDOT BDE Manual or BLRS Manual.
         5.   Mitigation Strategies for Larger Design Vehicles. Where larger
design vehicles are necessary, strategies should be utilized to mitigate curb
radius size:
            i.   Recess the opposing stop bar at signalized intersection.
            ii.   Assume large vehicles will turn into the centermost lane.
            iii.   Allow for vehicles to use oversteer in analyses.
            iv.   Restrict turning movements of large trucks.
         6.   Control Vehicle. The design vehicle keeps an intersection compact
for everyday use, while the control vehicle allows access by necessary and
occasional vehicles. To ensure that access for EMS, fire, moving vans, and
sanitation vehicles is not precluded, an intersection should be designed to
allow a control vehicle to utilize all traversable parts of an intersection,
including driving over curbs and across centerlines.
   (3)   ALLEYS OR SERVICE DRIVES.
      a.   Alleys or service drives (see Figure 3908(e)-C) must be provided
through all blocks to provide vehicular, refuse and recycling, and service
access to all lots, except as follows:
         1.   Parking Drives. Parking lot drives and parking structure drives
may count as service drives if the drive is continuous through the block with
at least 2 access points and serves all lots on the block.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5246.png]
Figure 3908(e)-C. Typical Alley or Service Drive
         2.   Single Access. A single point of access is allowed where a
parking structure requires only one access and the access is located off a non-
primary street.
         3.   Constraints. Where natural or existing site constraints (e.g. a
waterway, rail line, or highway) limit vehicular access points and the block
serves only one development, an alternative layout for service access may be
approved through a design adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
      b.   Alleys or service drives may be private or public with dedication to
the City, but must be located within boundary lines on the plan per Sec.
35-3908(a)(3)a. The easement, right-of-way, or designated area on the plan must
have a minimum width of 20 feet and a minimum pavement width of at least 12
feet. See Figure 3908(e)-C.
   (4)   PRIMARY STREET DESIGNATION. The orientation and location of buildings
on lots is determined by the designation of primary frontages per Sec.
35-3903(f)(4). Many building type requirements are specific to primary street
frontage; primary streets are treated as the front of the building. Designation
of certain streets as primary ensures those streets are treated consistently as
fronts; and parking access, service entrances, and sides of buildings are
intentionally located along non-primary streets. See Figure 3908(e)-E for an
illustration of an example layout, designating primary and non-primary streets.
      a.   Minimum Designation. A minimum of 45% of a combination of the new
streets in the MPD and existing streets fronting the development must be
designated as primary streets. The measurement is calculated as the percentage
of street centerline of new streets and existing streets abutting the property.
      b.   Building Frontage. Primary streets must be designated so that
building lots abut at least one primary street with no more than 20% of the
lots fronting only a non-primary street.
      c.   Civic Space Frontage. Where practicable, streets along civic space,
required per Sec.
35-3908(c), must be designated as primary streets to ensure building fronts
across the street face the civic space.
      d.   Alleys, Driveways, and Service Access.
         1.   Driveways and Service Access. Driveways and service access to
lots must not be located off a primary street, except as otherwise allowed by
building type.
         2.   Alleys. Alley access off a primary street requires approval of an
administrative adjustment (see Sec.
35-3909(e)).
         3.   No Non-Primary Street Access. When a parcel is fronted by more
than two primary streets and/or there is no non-primary street or alley access,
the zoning administrator must designate which street may have driveway and
service access. See Sec.
35-3903(f)(4) for primary streets in building types.
   (c)   CIVIC SPACE. All developments where a master plan development (MPD) is
required per Sec.
35-3908(a)(2) must provide the following civic space.
   (1)   REQUIRED AMOUNT.
      a.   Distance from Principal Entrances. One type of civic space is
required within a 500-foot distance, as measured continuously along a sidewalk,
from all front entrances of all buildings and any residential and livework
units with entrances on the street. The intent is to provide usable open space
within a short walking distance for all occupants and visitors.
      b.   Mix of Civic Space Types. A mix of types is required, with not more
than 2 of any one type utilized for each 5 acre increment of site.
      c.   Existing Civic Spaces. Existing open space may be counted towards
the civic space required, provided the existing spaces meet the regulations of
one of the types in Sec.
35-3908(c)(2) and the space is publicly accessible.
   (2)   TYPES OF CIVIC SPACE. The following types of civic space are allowed.
Refer to Figure 3908(e)-D for example images.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5248.png]
Figure 3908(e)-D. Examples of Civic Space Types
      a.   Plaza. A plaza is a generally hardscaped area (minimum 60%
coverage), minimum 5,000 square feet in size, with either street, pedestrian,
or river right-of-way, or building frontage on all sides, and at least one side
the equivalent of 25% of the perimeter fronting a primary street. A single
plaza may not fulfill the minimum civic space requirements; if a plaza is
utilized to meet the distance requirement, another civic space must be
incorporated in another location on the site.
      b.   Square. A square is a combination of hardscape and landscape
(approximately 50% and 50% respectively), minimum 1/4 acre in size, and
surrounded by street frontage on all sides.
      c.   Green. A green is a generally landscaped space (minimum 70%),
minimum 1/2 acre in size, with street right-of-way on at least 50% of the
perimeter.
      d.   Greenway. A greenway is a linear landscape space, minimum 2 acres in
total, minimum 30 feet wide and a minimum 70-foot average width, and with
street right-of-way on at least 30% of the perimeter.
      e.   Park. A park is a larger, generally landscaped space, a minimum of 2
acres in size, with at least 25% of the perimeter on a street right-of-way.
   (3)   TRAILS. Refer to any City open space and/or trail plans, and any
existing trails surrounding the site, to provide connections through and within
the site for continuous trails.
   (d)   WATERFRONT ACCESS. See Sec.
35-3907(h) for treatment along all waterfronts abutting the site. Additionally,
for any MPD abutting a waterfront, the following is required:
   (1)   GREENWAY ALONG WATERFRONT. The required waterfront buffer may be
located within a Greenway civic space. See Sec.
35-3908(b)(1).e for street frontage requirements of civic open space. Where
this Greenway is required, at least one more additional civic space type must
be located on the site.
   (2)   UPLAND CONNECTION. See Sec.
35-3907(h)(6) for upland connection regulations. A minimum of one upland
connection is required for the MPD, irrespective of the linear footage of
waterfront edge.
   (e)   LAYOUT & LOCATION OF DISTRICTS. The MPD must designate locations of
districts to meet the following requirements. Refer to Figure 3908(e)-F for an
illustration of a site layout fulfilling these regulations.
   (1)   DETERMINATION OF MPD TYPE.
      a.   Existing Zoning Designation. The type of Master Plan Development
(MPD) to be applied to the site is determined by the zoning designation(s) for
the parcel on the City's current zoning map. See Table 3908-1 for types.
      b.   Multiple Designations. Where multiple district designations exist on
the zoning map within the limits of the MPD, one of the following must be met:
         1.   One of the MPD types allowed on the site may be utilized for the
entire development.
         2.   Multiple development types allowed on the site may be utilized
for the development with a clear delineation on the MPD plan where each
applies. All zoning regulations must be met for each development type.
      c.   Design Adjustment. A different MPD type for a site, or a different
mix of new zoning districts applied to the site, may be approved through the
design adjustment process (see Sec.
35-3909(e)), provided the proposed development is consistent with the City's
most recent comprehensive plan or any City-adopted plan for the area, and the
development meets the intent of the code per Sec.
35-3908(a)(1).
 
Table 3908-1. Master Plan Development Types
            Current     MIX OF ZONING DISTRICTS                  ADDITIONAL
MPD Type to Designation                                          REGULATIONS/
be Applied  on Zoning   SX- 1 SX- 2 GX- 1 GX- 2 RX   CV -1 CV -2 REFERENCE
            Map
Core MPD    GX-1, CV-1  L     –   R     –   A    L     R     35-3908(e)(3)
Edge MPD    GX-2, RX,   –   L     –   R/A   R/ A L     R     35-3908(e)(4)
            CV-1
KEY: R = Required on site R/A means at least one of the districts designated
R/A is required and all are allowed
A = Allowed or permitted on site L = Allowed but limited on site per 3908(e)
 
   (2)   REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL MPDs. The following regulations apply to
all MPD types.
      a.   General Layout of Zoning Districts. The following general layout
guidance applies:
         1.   The same zoning district types should generally face each other
across streets, including existing buildings or zoning districts, e.g. SX
districts should be across the street from other SX districts except where SX-
2 is intended for use at a node that could occupy a single neighborhood corner.
         2.   More intense zoning districts on block faces with less intense
districts should be located on block ends. More intense districts include those
allowing taller, bigger buildings or relatively more intensive uses, e.g.
commercial uses are more intensive than residential uses or multi-unit uses are
more intensive than single-unit uses.
         3.   Changes in district types should generally occur at a rear lot
line, at an alley, or at corner parcels or corner sets of parcels (creating a
node).
      b.   Specific Layout of Zoning Districts. The following layout
requirements are applicable to these specific districts applied to a site.
         1.   SX districts should be clustered into areas or nodes at street
intersections or linearly along a primary street corridor.
         2.   GX districts may be used as transition zones, located between SX
and R or RX districts.
         3.   CV-2 must be used for all civic space required per Sec.
35-3908(c).
      c.   Building and Site Types. See Sec.
35-3903 for permitted building and site types and descriptions and regulations.
   (3)   CORE MPD. The Core MPD is required on applicable parcels per Sec.
35-3908(a)(2) where a GX-1 or CV-1 district is currently shown on the zoning
map.
      a.   Required Zoning Districts. Table 3908-1 lists districts required to
be used in this MPD type. See Sec.
35-3908(e)(2)b. for specific layout requirements for districts.
         1.   GX-1 District. At least 45% of the MPD lot area must remain or be
zoned as GX-1.
         2.   CV-2 District. Required civic space must be zoned CV-2 per Sec.
35-3908(c).
      b.   Allowed Districts. Districts allowed with no limitations, and not
required, are listed in Table 3908-1.
      c.   Limited Districts. Table 3908-1 lists districts allowed with the
following limitations in this MPD type.
         1.   SX-1 District. A maximum of 90,000 square feet of lot area of MPD
land may be zoned to SX-1. SX-1 must be located on a primary street or fronting
a waterfront.
         2.   CV-1 District. CV-1 districts are limited to no more than 20% of
the lot area. The use of the CV-1 district, by definition, is limited to civic
and institutional uses only. See Sec.
35-3904 for uses.
   (4)   EDGE MPD. The Edge MPD is required on applicable parcels per Sec.
35-3908(a)(2) where a GX-2 or RX district is currently shown on the zoning map
or where CV-1 is shown and the development abuts an R district.
      a.   Minimum Number of Building Types. In addition to the required GX-
2 district, at least 2 different building types must be used.
      b.   Required Districts. Table 3908-1 lists zoning districts required to
be used in this MPD type. See Sec.
35-3908(e)(2).b for specific layout requirements for districts.
         1.   GX-2, RX Zoning Districts. At least 45% of the MPD lot area must
remain or be zoned as GX-2 or RX.
         2.   CV-2 Districts. Required civic space must be zoned CV-2 per Sec.
35-3908(c).
      c.   Allowed Districts. Zoning districts allowed with no limitations, and
not required, are listed in Table 3908-1.
      d.   Limited Districts. Table 3908-1 lists districts allowed with the
following limitations in this MPD type.
         1.   SX-2 District. A maximum of 90,000 square feet of lot area of MPD
land may be zoned to SX-2. SX-2 must be located on a primary street or fronting
a waterfront.
         2.   CV-1 District. CV-1 districts are limited to no more than 20% of
the lot area. The use of the CV-2 district, by definition, is limited to civic
and institutional uses only. See Sec.
35-3904 for uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5250.png]
Figure 3908(e)-E. Example: Streets, Blocks, and Civic Space Layout for a Core
MPD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5252.png]
Figure 3908(e)-F. Example: Zoning District Layout for Core MPD
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3908 enacted; 04/18/23)
SEC. 35-3909.   REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (a)   COMMON PROVISIONS.
   (1)   APPLICABILITY. The common provisions of this section apply to all of
the procedures in this Sec.
35-3909, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (2)   REVIEW & DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY. Table 3909-1 provides a summary of
review and decision-making authority for projects within the Moline Centre
districts.
   (3)   APPLICATIONS AND FEES. Complete applications and required fees must be
submitted after the pre-application conference is held and prior to any formal
reviewing.
      a.   Eligible Applicants. When the procedures of this section allow an
application to be filed by an “eligible applicant,” such application must be
submitted by, or on behalf of, a person, firm, corporation or organization that
has a freehold, possessory, or contractual interest that is specifically
enforceable in the land that is subject to the application.
      b.   Form of Application. Applications must be submitted in a form as
required by the Community and Economic Development Department. Applications
must include materials and information to assist review and to illustrate
compliance with all applicable regulations, including at least the following:
         1.   A list of the names and addresses of all owners of record of the
property that is the subject of the application; and
         2.   Maps, plats, surveys, dimensioned site plans, engineering
documents, environmental reports, traffic studies, and other materials and
information, as required by this code or application checklists established by
the Community and Economic Development Department.
      c.   Application Fees. All applications filed must be accompanied by the
required application fee, as established in the City's fine and fee schedule.
      d.   Professionals. Site plans involving engineering, architecture,
landscape architecture or land surveying must be certified by an engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor authorized to practice by the
state.
Table 3909-1. Summary of Review and Decision-Making Authority for Moline
Centre Districts
REFERENCE PROCEDURE ZONING        PLANNING   CITY COUNCIL ZONING HEARING
SECTION             ADMINISTRATOR COMMISSION              OFFICER
Table 3909-1. Summary of Review and Decision-Making Authority for Moline
Centre Districts
REFERENCE PROCEDURE      ZONING        PLANNING    CITY     ZONING HEARING
SECTION                  ADMINISTRATOR COMMISSION  COUNCIL  OFFICER
–       Text and/or    SEE
          Map Amendments 35-2203
3909(b)   Site Plans     DECISION      Appeals     –      –
                                       Subdivision Rezoning
          Development                  approval    approval
3909(c)   Plans          DECISION      per         per      –
                                       35-2209,    35-2203
                                       Appeals
–       Special Use    SEE
          Permit         35-2206
3909(d)   Administrative DECISION      –         –      Appeals
          Adjustment
          Design         Review &
3909(e)   Adjustment     Recommendati  DECISION    Appeals
                         on
–       Variances      SEE
                         35-2207
          “Review & Recommendation” = reviews and makes a recommendation to
          the decision-making authority
KEY       “DECISION” = reviews and makes final decision of approval,
          approval with conditions, or disapprove
          Appeals = hears appeals to decisions made by the decision-making
          authority
 
      e.   Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency.
         1.   An application will be considered complete and ready for
processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes
all required information and is accompanied by the required application filing
and notification fees.
         2.   The official responsible for accepting the application must make
a determination of application completeness within 7 days of application
filing.
         3.   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the official
responsible for accepting the application must provide notice to the applicant
along with an explanation of the application’s deficiencies and return the
application and any application fee to the applicant.
         4.   Applications deemed complete will be placed in the first
available application processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other
review and decision-making bodies, in accordance with applicable review and
approval procedures of this code.
         5.   The official responsible for accepting the application is
authorized to request that applications or plans be revised before being placed
on an agenda for possible action if the official determines that inaccuracies
or omissions that will hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan’s/
application’s compliance with applicable regulations;
         6.   Failure to revise an application in accordance with paragraph
(5), above may result in the application or plan being recommended for denial.
   (4)   PREAPPLICATION MEETINGS.
      a.   Purpose. Preapplication meetings provide an early opportunity for
staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations
required for approval under the zoning and land development regulations.
      b.   Applicability. Preapplication meetings are required for site plans
and development plan procedures.
      c.   Scheduling. Preapplication meetings must be scheduled with the
zoning administrator prior to any application submittal.
      d.   Guidelines. The zoning administrator is authorized to establish
guidelines for preapplication meetings, including information that must be
provided and available alternatives to face-to-face meetings, such as telephone
conversations and email correspondence.
      e.   Development Review Committee. The zoning administrator may determine
at their discretion whether the Development Review Committee or members thereof
must attend any preapplication meeting; however, the applicant may request
attendance of the Development Review Committee or any of its members at the
meeting.
   (b)   SITE PLANS.
   (1)   GENERAL. Site plan review and approval is required in order to ensure
a competent evaluation of whether proposed buildings, uses, and structures, and
other site improvements comply with all applicable regulations of the zoning
and land development regulations.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY.
      a.   All of the following require site plan review in accordance with the
procedures of this section:
         1.   All new buildings and structures.
         2.   All additions to existing buildings that modify the footprint of
any story of the building.
         3.   Renovations to the exterior facade beyond maintenance or
replacement of any material with the same or similar material except as
required by Sec.
35-3909(f)(3).
         4.   Any site improvements that are regulated by the zoning and land
development regulations, including but not limited to parking, fences, walls,
and steps, and landscaping in any street yard.
      b.   Minor repairs, maintenance, and replacement of any material with the
same or similar material in the same location are exempt from the site plan
procedure.
      c.   Changes in use that do not affect any of the items outlined in
paragraph a, above, are required only to submit for a zoning certificate per
Sec.
35-2102.
   (3)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The zoning administrator is authorized to review
and approve site plans, but may refer any site plan for review and approval to
the planning commission at the zoning administrator's discretion.
   (4)   SITE PLAN REVIEW. Upon receipt of a complete application, the zoning
administrator must review the proposed site plan and distribute it to the
development review committee for a determination of whether the construction
and improvements identified on the site plan comply with all applicable
regulations.
   (5)   ACTION. Upon completion of the review by the zoning administrator and
the development review committee, the zoning administrator must act to approve
the site plan, approve the site plan with conditions, disapprove the site plan,
or, pursuant to Sec.
35- 3909(b)(3), forward the site plan and any review comments to the planning
commission for final action to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
the site plan.
   (6)   NOTICE OF DECISION. Within 10 days after the date of final action on
the site plan, the zoning administrator must provide the applicant with written
notice of the decision. If the site plan is disapproved, the notice must state
the reasons for disapproval, which may be contained in a separate document or
written on the site plan itself.
   (7)   APPROVAL WITH CONDITIONS.
      a.   Any site plan that is approved with conditions or subject to
addressing development review committee comments must be completed and all
comments addressed within 180 days of the date that the notice of decision is
provided to the applicant. If this 180-day time limit is not met, the site plan
decision expires.
      b.   If the zoning administrator determines that any aspect of the
approved site plan has been revised beyond the conditions, the site plan must
proceed back through the review and approval process again.
   (8)   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
      a.   Before the issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant must submit an
agreement in a form approved by the Community & Economic Development Director
and City Attorney. The subdivision or development agreement will, without
limitation, include or reference the following minimum information:
         1.   Proposed site development schedule for installation of guaranteed
public and private improvements, referencing the final plat or development
plan, and final engineering plans, and stipulating the improvements which must
be installed prior to issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy
for the buildings or structures to be constructed.
         2.   Description and estimated cost of public and private
improvements, in a form and amount approved by the City Engineer, providing a
detailed accounting of the various types and amounts of improvements included
in the estimate.
         3.   Type and summary of terms of performance guarantee for the
construction of public and private improvements.
         4.   Acknowledgment that the City will take no responsibilities for
any public improvements, including, without limitation, maintenance of any sort
and repairs, unless and until all of the public improvements are properly
dedicated in accordance with this code. The Corporate Authorities may, in their
sole and absolute discretion, take dedication of and assume responsibility for
individual public improvements as may be requested in writing by the developer.
         5.   A summary of the covenants, restrictions and easements necessary
for the development, including the responsibilities of a property owners'
association, if proposed.
         6.   Agreement to pay:
            i.   A fair and equitable share of all water, sanitary sewer, and
storm sewer improvements developed in the area surrounding the property that
benefit the property, as determined by the City Engineer;
            ii.   All applicable park and school donations; and
            iii.   Any other applicable costs, payments, permit fees or other
fees attributable to the subdivision or development.
         7.   An acknowledgment by the owner or developer that the City is not
and will not be, in any way, liable for any damages or injuries that may be
sustained as the result of the City’s review and approval of any plans for the
property.
         8.   All other acknowledgments, indemnifications, and hold harmless
agreements as the Corporate Authorities may require.
         9.   All other provisions deemed necessary by the Corporate
Authorities in order to fulfill the purpose and intent of this code.
      b.   The required agreement and financial guarantee must be provided for
the completion of all covered work within the time specified in the agreement.
The time period may be extended upon written application by the applicant,
signed by all parties, including the sureties, to the original agreement.
      c.   The City administrator is authorized to determine the adequacy,
conditions and acceptability of any proposed financial guarantee, but all such
financial guarantees, at a minimum, shall specify the terms and conditions
noted below.
         1.   The guarantee shall have an expiration date not less than 3
months beyond the date specified in the approved development agreement.
         2.   Not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of such guarantee,
the Corporate Authorities shall be given written notice by means of certified
or registered mail, indicating that such guarantee is to expire. No guarantee
shall expire absent such notice.
         3.   Failure of the owner or developer to install such guaranteed
improvements prior to the scheduled completion date, as specified in the
approved development schedule, shall be considered a default by the owner or
developer and the issuing institution.
         4.   The guarantee shall only be released or reduced by the issuing
institution upon written certification by the City Engineer stating:
            i.   that said guarantee may be released or reduced in accordance
with this section, and
            ii.   the amount of such discharge or reduction.
         5.   If at any time the City determines that the institution issuing
the guarantee is without adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity as
required in Sec.
35- 3909(b)(8)d.2.iii; is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for
reserves; is insolvent; is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing; or is
otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such guarantee at any time during
its term, or if the City otherwise reasonably deems itself to be insecure, then
the City shall have the right to demand that the owner or developer provide a
replacement guarantee from an institution satisfactory to the City. Such
replacement guarantee shall be deposited with the City not later than 10 days
following such demand.
         6.   If the owner or developer fails or refuses to complete the
construction of the public and private improvements covered by the guarantee or
fails or refuses to correct any defect or deficiency in such improvements upon
request by the City, or in any other manner fails or refuses to meet fully any
of its obligations under the guarantee or the applicable development agreement,
then the City may, in its sole and absolute discretion, retain all or any part
of the guarantee. The City thereafter shall have the right to exercise any
other action it deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of
such failure or refusal, and to reimburse itself from the proceeds of the
guarantee for all of its costs and expenses, including legal fees and
administrative expenses. If the funds remaining in the guarantee are
insufficient to repay fully the City for all such costs and expenses, and to
maintain a cash reserve equal to the required guarantee during the entire time
of such costs and expenses, and to maintain a cash reserve equal to the
required guarantee during the entire time such guarantee should have been
maintained, then the owner or developer shall, upon demand of the City
therefor, immediately deposit with the City such additional funds as the City
determines necessary.
      d.   Performance guarantees for the installation of public and private
improvements shall be in a form approved by the Corporate Authorities. The
following types of performance guarantee are acceptable, provided they are
consistent with the regulations below.
         1.   Cash Escrow. A cash deposit may be used as a guarantee, provided
the total amount of the guarantee required is placed with the Corporate
Authorities and administered in accordance with the provisions of the
development agreement.
         2.   Irrevocable Letter of Credit and Cash. An irrevocable letter of
credit may be used as a guarantee, provided such letter of credit is issued by
a financial institution approved by the Corporate Authorities, the
administration of such letter of credit conforms to the terms of the
development agreement, and the letter of credit is accompanied by a cash
deposit in an amount not less than 10% of the total guarantee amount. The cash
deposit shall, at all times until released, as provided herein, be maintained
at not less than 10% of the initial total guarantee amount. The financial
institution issuing the irrevocable letter of credit shall be:
            i.   Insured by the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation or
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation;
            ii.   Chartered in the State of Illinois or have a registered agent
in Illinois; and
            iii.   Have adequate capital, assets, earnings and liquidity to
ensure the financial soundness of the issuing institution, as determined by the
Corporate Authorities.
         3.   Surety Bond. A surety bond may be used as a guarantee, provided
the surety bond is issued by a surety company approved by the Corporate
Authorities, the administration of the surety bond conforms to the terms of the
development agreement and this section, Sec.
35-3909(b)(8), the surety bond is accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount
not less than 20% of the total guarantee amount.
   (9)   COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED PLAN.
      a.   Unless otherwise expressly provided in the zoning and land
development code, the construction standards for all off-site improvements and
on-site improvements required must conform to City design and construction
standards and the approved site plan.
      b.   Inspections during the installation of off-site improvements and
required on-site improvements may be made by the department or agency
responsible for such improvements, as are required to certify compliance with
the approved site plan and applicable City standards.
      c.   The applicant must notify the zoning administrator in writing at
least 3 days before beginning any street or storm sewer work shown on the
approved site plan.
      d.   The applicant must provide adequate supervision on the site during
the installation of all required improvements and have a responsible
superintendent, together with one set of approved plans, profiles and
specifications, available at the site at all times when work is being
performed.
      e.   Upon satisfactory completion of the installation of the required
improvements, the owner must be provided with a certificate of approval from
the zoning administrator. The city administrator is authorized to approve a
release or partial release of any bond or financial guarantee for such
improvements upon notice by the zoning administrator that the improvements have
been satisfactorily completed.
      f.   The installation of improvements as required does not in any way
obligate the City to accept such improvements for maintenance, repair or
operation. Acceptance of improvements is subject to existing regulations
concerning acceptance of each type of improvement.
   (10)   AMENDMENTS. The zoning administrator is authorized to approve
revisions to approved site plans or to forward proposed site plan amendment
requests to the planning commission for final review and decision. All proposed
revisions must comply with applicable regulations and City standards.
   (11)   AS-BUILT PLANS. Upon satisfactory completion of all required
improvements shown on an approved site plan, the applicant must submit the
completed as-built site plan and electronic file. Such plan must be submitted
at least one week before the anticipated occupancy of any building.
   (12)   APPEALS. An applicant for site plan approval may appeal the decision
of the zoning administrator or planning commission defined in Article II.
   (c)   DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (1)   GENERAL. Development plan review and approval is required in order to
ensure a competent evaluation of whether proposed streets, blocks, lots, open
space, and new zoning districts comply with the Master Plan Development (MPD)
regulations of Sec.
35-3908, subdivision regulations, and other applicable City regulations and
standards.
   (2)   APPLICABILITY. All Master Plan Developments (MPDs) per Sec.
35-3908 require review and approval of a development plan in accordance with
the procedures of this subsection.
   (3)   APPLICATION FILING.
      a.   Regulating Plans, Street Sections, Other Plans. See Sec.
35-3908(a)(3) for plan and drawing submittal requirements. Development plan
approval does not require building design; however, general building footprint
locations must be considered and shown.
      b.   Other Application Requirements. Phasing plans for all components of
the site, including streets, open space, utilities and infrastructure,
transportation components.
      c.   Site Narrative. A site narrative describing the intent, goals, and
objectives of the development, funding and financing, other requirements
defined by the City during the pre-application meeting.
      d.   Concurrent Filings. Complete applications for the development plan
approval must be filed with the zoning administrator concurrently with
subdivision and any rezoning applications.
   (4)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
      a.   The zoning administrator is authorized to review and approve site
plans, but may refer any site plan for review and approval to the planning
commission at the zoning administrator's discretion.
      b.   See Sec.
35-2210 for Subdivision and Sec.
35-2203 for Zoning Map Amendment procedures and approval authority.
   (5)   DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
      a.   Zoning Review. Upon receipt of a complete application, the zoning
administrator must review the proposed development plan for compliance with
regulations.
      b.   Development Review Committee. The zoning administrator must
distribute the application and their initial review to the development review
committee, including the director of engineering, for a determination of
whether the construction and improvements identified on the plan comply with
all applicable regulations.
      c.   Advisory Committee(s). The zoning administrator must update any
advisory committees in place established by the city administrator.
      d.   Adjustments. The zoning administrator may determine that
administrative and/or design adjustments may be warranted for the project. The
application may be revised and requested adjustments must be reviewed per Sec.
35-3909(d) and/or
35-3909(e). Design adjustments may be approved concurren tly with preliminary
subdivision plat.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5254.png]
Figure 3909(f)-B. Development Plan Approval Procedure
   (6)   SUBDIVISION. The zoning administrator must prepare preliminary
findings and a recommendation to the plan commission for preliminary
subdivision plat review and approval per Sec.
35-2200. Design adjustments may be approved concurrently with preliminary
subdivision plat.
   (7)   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT. For any rezoning requested by the applicant,
upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat, the zoning administrator
must prepare preliminary findings and a recommendation to the City Council for
the zoning map amendment review and approval per Sec.
35-2203. Lot and street dedications may be approved concurrently with the
zoning map amendment.
   (8)   ACTION. Upon required approvals for subdivision and rezoning, the
zoning administrator must act to approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the development plan, or, pursuant to Sec.
35-3909(c)(4), forward the site plan and any review comments to the planning
commission for final action to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
the site plan. If approved by the plan commission when no rezoning is
requested, the development plan approval may be concurrent with the subdivision
approval.
   (9)   NOTICE OF DECISION. Within 10 days after the date of final action on
the development plan, the zoning administrator must provide the applicant with
written notice of the decision. If the development plan is disapproved, the
notice must state the reasons for disapproval, which may be contained in a
separate document or written on the site plan itself.
   (10)   APPROVAL WITH CONDITIONS.
      a.   Any development plan that is approved with conditions or subject to
addressing development review committee comments must be completed and all
comments addressed within 180 days of the date that the notice of decision is
provided to the applicant. If this 180-day time limit is not met, the site plan
decision expires.
      b.   If the zoning administrator determines that any aspect of the
approved site plan has been revised beyond the conditions, the site plan must
proceed back through the review and approval process again.
   (11)   INFRASTRUCTURE.
      a.   Improvement plans per Sec.
35-2109 are required for all streets and utility improvements.
      b.   Financial guarantees and development agreements per Sec.
35-3909(b)(8) are required per the city administrator's office.
   (12)   SITE PLAN. Approval of a site plan, in accordance with the applicable
site plan procedures of this section, Sec.
35-3909, must occur before any building permits are issued for the development.
      a.   Site plan reviews and approvals per Sec.
35-3909(b) are required for each building, waterfront buffers, and civic space.
      b.   Financial guarantees per Sec.
35-3909(b)(8) may be required per the city administrator's office for assurance
of implementation of any waterfront buffer and civic space required per the
development plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5256.png]
Figure 3909(f)-A. Site Plan Review Procedure
   (13)    AME NDMENTS. The zoning administrator is authorized to approve
revisions to approved site plans or to forward proposed site plan amendment
requests to the planning commission for final review and decision. All proposed
revisions must comply with applicable regulations and City standards.
   (14)     LAPSE OF APPROVAL.
      a.   Unless a longer time period or a phasing plan is approved at the
time of approval of the development plan and any applicable development
agreement, a complete application for an improvement must be filed within 1
year of the date of development plan approval and a complete application for
site plan approval must be filed within 2 years of the date of development plan
approval. If an application for site plan approval is not filed within the
required time period, no further site plans may be approved for the project
until the subject property owner has filed the original or amended development
plan for re-review and reconsideration by the zoning administrator, planning
commission, and City Council, as required, per the development plan approval
process. Such re-review and reconsideration must follow the development plan
review procedures of this section and will result in a new timeline for the
project.
      b.   For projects to be developed in phases, phase limits must be shown
on the development plan and approved by the city administrator. The city
administrator may impose conditions upon the phasing plan as deemed necessary
to ensure orderly development, including requirements for financial guarantees
ensuring construction of all required improvements.
   (15)   AMENDMENTS.
      a.   Amendments to an approved development plan may be processed
administratively with a revised development plan application, provided the
amendments do not affect approved adjustments, subdivision approval, or zoning
approval.
      b.   Depending on the degree of change identified, the zoning
administrator may determine the amendment requires a full development
resubmittal, including fee and any notice requirements.
      c.   Amendments that affect approved adjustments, subdivision approval,
or zoning approval must be submitted as a new development plan application,
including fee, notice, and required approvals.
   (d)   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (1)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The zoning administrator has the authority to
approve administrative adjustments to the Moline Centre districts as expressly
defined in this subsection.
   (2)   ALLOWED ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS. All administrative adjustments
approved must fall within one of the following categories:
      a.   Building and Parking Siting. Within the building siting and parking
& accessory structures subsections of the building type regulations in Sec.
35-3903, any dimensional requirement may be increased or decreased by up to 10%
or 1 foot, whichever is more.
      b.   Building Height. Within the height subsections of the building type
regulations in Sec.
35-3903, floor-to-floor heights may be increased by up to 1 foot, whichever is
more, provided the overall building does not exceed the total height in feet
that is allowed.
      c.   Transparency. Up to 3% decrease in transparency or a 3% increase in
blank wall limitation for any story on a street facade, provided the overall
street facade meets the original regulation.
      d.   Other Administrative Adjustments. Other administrative adjustments
expressly stated in Division 9 as allowed in the Moline Centre districts.
   (3)   APPLICATION & REVIEW.
      a.   Administrative adjustments must be requested on the application for
a site plan and reviewed concurrently with the site plan procedure.
      b.   During the site plan review process, an applicant may revise their
application, under the direction of and with the agreement of the zoning
administrator, to include a request for an allowed adjustment that will assist
in the approval of the project.
   (4)   ACTION. The zoning administrator must act to approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the administrative adjustment concurrently with the
site plan approval. An administrative adjustment may not be approved without an
approved site plan.
   (e)   DESIGN ADJUSTMENTS.
   (1)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Plan Commission has the authority to approve
design adjustments, provided each adjustment fulfills the intent statements
defined for Moline Centre Districts in Sec.
35-3901(a), any parameters defined within these regulations, and the resulting
form is consistent or compatible with the vision for the downtown.
   (2)   ALLOWED DESIGN ADJUSTMENTS.
      a.   Design adjustments to the Moline Centre district regulations are
expressly defined through Division 9.
      b.   For an existing building renovation that requires site plan approval
per Sec.
35-3909(a)(1), a design adjustment may be approved to any building type
regulation (per Sec.
35-3903) or building design regulation (per Sec.
35-3906) in order to retain any existing building or site element, except the
parking yard location. The project must meet the intent statements in Sec.
35-3901(a).
   (3)   APPLICATION & REVIEW.
      a.   Design adjustments must be requested on the application for a site
plan or development plan and reviewed concurrently with the applicable
procedure.
      b.   During the review process, an applicant may revise their
application, under the direction of and with the agreement of the zoning
administrator, to include a request for an allowed adjustment that will assist
in the approval of the project.
   (4)   ACTION. The plan commission must act to approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the design adjustment. Approval of a design
adjustment does not constitute approval of any site plan or development plan,
subdivision, or zoning map amendment.
   (f)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES. The following regulations apply in addition
to Sec.
35-3112, Nonconforming Sites and Structures, in the Moline Centre districts.
   (1)   EXPANSION. In lieu of Sec.
35-3112(d), when renovations within any continuous 5 year period result in the
addition of more than 50% in gross building square footage, all requirements of
Division 9 Moline Centre districts must be met.
   (2)   MAINTENANCE & RESTORATION. In lieu of Sec.
35-3112(c), the following applies:
      a.   Maintenance. General repair and maintenance of existing building
elements, such as resurfacing a roof, replacement of damaged facade materials,
replacement of existing windows in the same location, does not require trigger
correction of existing conditions up to conformance.
   (3)   RENOVATION.
      a.   Building Design. In lieu of Sec.
35-3112(c), when any one of the following occurs, the project must be in
conformance with the applicable building design standards in Secs.
35-5501(3), 35-5501(5), and 35-5501(6):
         1.   Doors. Installation of additional doors or a change in location
of a door. For a storefront door and window system, installation or change in
location of 2 or more doors.
         2.   Windows. Expansion or change in location of 35% of windows on any
street façade.
         3.   Facade Materials. Replacement of 35% or more of facade materials
on any street facing facade with a different facade material.
      b.   Roof Renovations. Renovation of the shape or style of more than 50%
of the roof.
      c.   Design Adjustment. A design adjustment may be approved for exemption
from these nonconforming structure requirements, when the applicant can prove
the structure substantially meets the goals and intent of the comprehensive
plan and this code.
(Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec. 35-3909 enacted; 04/18/23; Ord. No. 3045-2025; Sec.
35-3909 amended; 10/14/25)
ARTICLE IV. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DIVISION 1. NATURAL RESOURCES PROTECTION STANDARDS
SEC. 35-4100.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Division is to set forth the requirements for the
mandatory protection of natural resources and permanently protected green space
areas within the jurisdiction of this Chapter. In part, the provisions of this
Division are designed to ensure the implementation of the adopted Moline
Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 35-4101.   HOW TO USE THIS DIVISION.
   This Division contains the standards which govern the protection,
disturbance, and mitigation of disruption of all natural resource and other
permanently protected green space areas. The provisions of this Division are
intended to supplement those of the City of Moline, Rock Island County, the
state of Illinois, and the Federal Government of the United States which
pertain to natural resource protection. This Division recognizes the important
and diverse benefits which natural resource features provide in terms of
protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Each of
the following sections is oriented to each natural resource type, and is
designed to accomplish several objectives:
   (1)   First, a definition of the natural resource is provided.
   (2)   Second, the specific purposes of the protective regulations governing
each natural resource type are provided.
   (3)   Third, the required method of identifying and determining the
boundaries of the natural resource area is given.
   (4)   Fourth, mandatory protection requirements are identified.
   (5)   Fifth, where permitted, mitigation standards are provided.
SEC. 35-4102.   NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   COMPLIANCE. All new development (including building construction,
other site improvements, and/or site preparation), additions to existing
development (including building construction, other site improvements and/or
site preparation), along with all new subdivision plats, condominiums, and site
plans, in all zoning districts, shall comply with the resource protection
standards set forth in Table 35-4102.1.
   (b)   NATURAL RESOURCES TO REMAIN UNDISTURBED. All of the natural resources
required to be protected under this Division shall remain undisturbed and in a
natural state except those natural resources where mitigation is permitted and
where that mitigation is in strict accord with those requirements set forth in
this Division.
   (c)   DESTRUCTION OF EXISTING NATURAL RESOURCES. Removal of protected
natural resources as defined in this Division from a property before any
development approvals from the City are sought shall not be allowed unless the
property owner obtains a site plan approval and meets the standards of this
Division for natural resource preservation. All clear cutting and destruction
of natural resource features shall:
   (1)   Require a site plan review and approval as per Sec.
35-2105, and shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Division.
   (2)   Be required to meet the protection levels described in this Division.
   (3)   Where such clear cutting and/or destruction violations occur, be
required to meet the mitigation standards set forth under the provisions of
this Division.
   (d)   NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION PLAN. If natural resource features defined
and described in this Article are present on a property, a “Natural Resource
Protection Plan” shall be submitted, which shall show the following:
   (1)   Proposed Name . The proposed name of the development.
   (2)   Location . The location of the proposed development.
   (3)   Name, Address and Telephone Numbers of the Owners, Subdividers, Lessee
and/or Developer . The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners,
subdividers, lessee and/or developer(s) of the property and of the designer of
the plan.
   (4)   Date . Date of the “Natural Resource Plan” submittal and all
applicable revision dates.
   (5)   Site Boundary . The boundary line of the site with dimensions and
bearings, indicated by a solid line, and the total land area encompassed by the
site.
   (6)   Lot Lines, Right-of-Way lines, and Easements . The location of all
proposed lot lines, right-of-way lines, and easements.
   (7)   Existing Streets. The location, ownership, widths, and names (if
available) of all existing and previously platted streets, rights-of-way,
parks, and other public or open spaces located within or adjacent to the
subject property.
   (8)   Easements and Neighboring Property Boundaries . The location and
dimensions of all permanent easements and the subject property boundary lines
adjacent to the site.
   (9)   Location and Extent of Existing Natural Resource Features . The
location and extent of any existing natural resource features defined and
described in this Article. Each individual resource area on the site shall be
shown graphically on the “Natural Resource Protection Plan.”
   (10)   Disturbed and Preserved Natural Resource Features . Graphic and
numerical illustration shown on the “Natural Resource Protection Plan” of those
existing natural resource features that will be disturbed and those that will
be preserved and showing on the illustration the area (in square feet or acres)
of each existing resource and those areas of resources that are to be
preserved. Numerical data may be shown in tabular form with labeled reference
to specific areas designated on the “Natural Resource Protection Plan.” Any
areas of the site where natural resources are to be mitigated and how and where
the mitigation is to take place with natural resource protection easements
shall be indicated.
   (11)   Method of Natural Resource Preservation . Graphic illustration and
notes related to how those natural resource features, which are to be
preserved, will actually be preserved (conservation easements, deed
restrictions, protective covenants, etc.).
   (12)   Scale, North Arrow, Contours . A drawing legend containing the scale
appropriate to the size of the Site Plan, the date of preparation, north arrow,
and designation of existing and proposed contours at a maximum two foot contour
interval.
Table 35-4102.1.
NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS
NATURAL  ZONING DISTRICT TYPE
RESOURCE Resource              Residential (a)       Nonresidential (b)
FEATURE  Protection Mitigation Protection Mitigation Protection Mitigation
         Standard   Permitted  Standard   Permitted  Standard   Permitted
NATURAL       ZONING DISTRICT TYPE
RESOURCE      Resource              Residential (a)       Nonresidential (b)
FEATURE       Protection Mitigation Protection Mitigation Protection Mitigation
              Standard   Permitted  Standard   Permitted  Standard   Permitted
Steep Slopes
(c):
20 to <=30%   65%        No         75%        No         70%        No
>30%          90%        No         85%        No         80%        No
Woodlands &
Forests (c):
Mature -      70%        Yes        70%        Yes        60%        (d)
Young -       50%        Yes        50%        Yes        50%        Yes
Drainageways  100%       Yes        100%       Yes        100%       Yes
Shore Buffers 100%       No         100%       No         100%       No
Isolated
Wetlands,     100% (e)   Yes        100% (e)   Yes        100% (e)   Yes
Ponds and
Lakes
Footnotes:
   a.   Including residential PUD Districts (or residential portions thereof).
   b.   Including nonresidential PUD Districts (or nonresidential portions
thereof).
   c.   Protection standards for steep slopes and woodlands shall be enforced
over the total combined occurrences of such features on lands held in common
ownership, rather than over each of any two or more individual occurrences of
steep slopes or woodlands on such lands. Lands shall be considered to share a
common boundary even if they are divided by a public road or navigable
waterway, or if they connect at only one point.
   d.   Whether mitigation is permitted shall be determined by the zoning
administrator on a case-by-case basis based on the findings of the field survey
conducted in accordance with Sec.
35-4109(c).
   e.   If not otherwise restricted by state or federal regulations, the zoning
administrator may allow the filling or alteration of up to one acre of wetland
without mitigation if such filling or alteration is essential for public safety
purposes as defined under state law.
SEC. 35-4103.   NATURAL RESOURCE MEASUREMENT.
   (a)   NATURAL RESOURCES MEASUREMENT. All land area within a proposed
development, site plan, subdivision plat, or condominium consisting of the
natural resource features defined in this Division shall be accurately measured
by the petitioner. The total square feet and acreage of each natural resource
feature shall be multiplied by its respective "Natural Resource Protection
Standard" as set forth in
Table 35-4102.1. to determine the amount of each natural resource feature to be
protected by a conservation easement. If two or more natural resource features
are present on the same area of land, only the most restrictive natural
resource protection standard shall be used.
SEC. 35-4104.   NATURAL RESOURCE FEATURES MITIGATION.
   (a)   INTENT OF MITIGATION. The City of Moline recognizes that property
owners, subdividers, or condominium developers may wish to develop in portions
of those protected natural resource feature areas shown as eligible for
mitigation in
Table 35-4102.1. Provisions in this Division set forth the conditions for
mitigation and mitigation standards for the various natural resource features
for which mitigation is allowed under the provisions of
Table 35-4102.1. The intent of these provisions is not to permit greater
destruction of natural resource features than is permitted under the
requirements of this Division for a typical property or development. This
Division sets specific standards for use when the extent of the natural
resources on a site and the use of the regulations would create a major
hardship for said natural resource feature protection. Thus, mitigation is
intended to be used instead of a variance request when severe hardships would
result from the strict enforcement of the natural resource protection standards
and requirements set forth in this Division.
   (b)   OFF-SITE MITIGATION. Off-site mitigation may be permitted if such off-
site mitigation occurs within the same watershed as the natural resource
feature, or property, being mitigated and follows the methods, requirements,
standards, and/or criteria set forth under this Division. All permitted off-
site mitigation shall occur within the corporate limits of the City of Moline.
SEC. 35-4105.   STEEP SLOPES.
   (a)   DEFINITION .   Three categories of steep slopes are defined herein for
use in this Ordinance. These categories are based upon the relative degree of
the steepness of the slope as follows:
   (1)   Slopes of 20% to 30% inclusive.
   (2)   Slopes greater than 30%.
   (3)   No land shall be considered a steep slope unless the steep slope area
has at least a 20% vertical drop and has a minimum area of 5000 square feet.
   (b)   PURPOSE . Steep slopes are particularly susceptible to damage
resulting from site disruption, primarily related to soil erosion. Such damage
is likely to spread to areas which were not originally disturbed. Such erosion
reduces the productivity of the soil, results in exacerbated erosion downhill,
and results in increased sedimentation in drainageways, wetlands, streams,
ponds and lakes. Beyond adversely affecting the environmental functions of
these resource areas, such sedimentation also increases flood hazards by
reducing the flood water storage capacity of hydrological system components,
thus elevating the flood level of the drainage system in affected areas. Beyond
these threats to the public safety, disruption of steep slopes also increases
the likelihood of slippage and slumping – unstable soil movements which may
threaten adjacent properties, buildings, and public facilities such as roads
and utilities.
   (c)   DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE .    Steep slopes are to be determined by
using the following sources and/or methods in the order indicated below. If the
first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the
zoning administrator, the succeeding source shall be used:
   (1)   A topographic survey prepared by and certified by an Illinois
registered land surveyor, at the petitioner’s expense, at a contour interval of
not less than 2 feet.
   (2)   Topographic maps on file with the City of Moline.
   (3)   U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
   The area of steep slopes (in square feet or acres) shall be measured and
graphically delineated on a topographic drawing and on the "Natural Resource
Protection Plan." Such steep slope drawing shall graphically indicate those
steep slope areas, by slope type, of the property pursuant to the "steep slope"
definition set forth in this Section.
   (d)   PROTECTION STANDARDS. Steep slope areas shall be retained to the
extent shown on
Table 35-4102.1. Protected portions of steep slopes shall remain in an
undisturbed state except for the land uses permitted per the requirements of
Sec.
35-3420.
SEC. 35-4106.   WOODLANDS AND FOREST.
   (a)   DEFINITION.
   (1)   Woodlands, young . An area or stand of trees whose total combined
canopy covers an area of one-half acre or more and at least 50% of which is
composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of at
least three inches. However, no trees grown for commercial purposes shall be
considered a young woodland.
   (2)   Woodlands, mature . An area or stand of trees whose total combined
canopy covers an area of one acre or more and at least 50% of which is composed
of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of at least 10
inches; or any grove consisting of eight or more individual trees having a DBH
of at least 12 inches whose combined canopies cover at least 50% of the area
encompassed by the grove. However, no trees grown for commercial purposes
should be considered a mature woodland.
   (3)   Woodlands include all tree species listed as large, deciduous trees
and evergreen trees as listed in
Appendix A.
   (b)   PURPOSE. Woodlands provide a wide variety of environmental functions.
These include atmospheric benefits such as removing air-borne pollutants,
carbon dioxide uptake, oxygen production, and evapotranspiration returns. Water
quality benefits include substantial nutrient uptake rates (particularly for
nitrogen and phosphorus) and surface runoff reduction in terms of both volumes
and velocities. Woodlands provide unique wildlife habitats and food sources.
Woodlands are excellent soil stabilizers, greatly reducing runoff-related soil
erosion. Woodlands also serve to reduce wind velocities which further reduces
soil erosion. Finally, under proper management techniques, woodlands serve as
regenerative fuel sources.
   (c)   DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE.
   (1)   The determination of woodland and forest boundaries shall be
determined by using the following sources and/or methods in the order indicated
below. If the first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate by the
zoning administrator the succeeding source shall be used:
      a.   A field survey of trees compiled at the petitioner’s expense by a
registered land surveyor and identified by a landscape architect, forester,
arborist, or botanist with a professional degree in one of those fields of
endeavor.
      b.   The most recent 1" = 400' (or higher resolution) aerial photographs
prepared by the City of Moline.
   (2)   Each woodland and forest area shall include the tree trunk and the
area located within the    drip line or tree canopy. The area of woodlands and
forests (mature and young), in square feet or acres, shall be measured and
graphically delineated on the “Natural Resource Protection Plan.” Such woodland
and forest area drawing shall indicate all woodland and forest areas of the
property meeting the minimum size criteria established by the definitions of
woodlands (mature and young) in this section. In cases where the drip line or
canopy areas overlap, the areas of overlap shall only be counted once. In cases
where drip line or canopy areas overlap property lines, the property line(s)
are to be used as the boundary for the woodland or forest area, with only that
portion of the drip line area located on the subject property counted toward
the woodland or forest area. The location, size, and summary of species types
of all healthy trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of 10 inches or
greater that are located in woodland and forest areas within 25 feet of any
proposed improvement and/or in woodland and forest areas to be demolished due
to the placement of improvements or grading are to be graphically shown on the
“Natural Resource Protection Plan” or submitted as a separate drawing. For the
remaining undisturbed areas of the site whether they are mature or young
woodlands is required. The “Natural Resource Protection Plan” shall include an
estimate of the percentage of all healthy trees within each woodland or forest
area that have a Diameter Breast Height (DBH) 10 inches or greater.
   (d)   PROTECTION STANDARDS. Woodland areas shall be retained to the extent
shown on
Table 35-4102.1. Protected portions of woodlands shall remain in an undisturbed
state except for the land uses permitted per the requirements of Sec.
35-3420.
   (e)   MITIGATION. Woodlands and forest areas may be mitigated under either
of the following two alternative requirements applicable to the mitigation of
woodland and forest areas, except that the zoning administrator may approve
different sizes and types of plantings in mitigation areas where site
conditions or context warrant:
   (1)   Alternative 1:
      a.   Mitigation shall include the planting of 1.25 acres of new woodland/
forest for every one acre of disturbed woodland/forest for which mitigation is
required.
      b.   Mitigation shall include the replacement of woodlands/forests
disturbed. Such mitigation shall consist of the planting of new woodland/forest
areas, as specified above, using the following numbers of plants per acre of
mitigated area:
            15 canopy trees, minimum 3.5-inch caliper*
            12 canopy trees, minimum 2-inch caliper
            250 canopy trees, minimum 4-foot high whips
            50 understory trees, minimum 5-foot high whips
            25 shrubs, minimum 12-inches high
         *Note: Each 3.5-inch caliper canopy tree may be substituted with two
1.5-inch caliper canopy trees.
      c.   All mitigation shall be in addition to landscaping required under
Division 2 of Article V of this Code.
   (2)   Alternative 2:  
      a.   Mitigation shall include the planting of 1.50 acres of new woodland/
forest for every one acre of disturbed woodland/forest for which mitigation is
required.
      b.   Mitigation shall include the replacement of woodlands/forests
disturbed. Such mitigation shall consist of the planting of new woodland/forest
areas, as specified above, using the following number of plants per acre of
mitigated area:
            12 canopy trees, minimum 3.5-inch caliper*
            10 canopy trees, minimum 2-inch caliper
            200 canopy trees, minimum 4-foot high whips
            40 understory trees, minimum 5-foot high whips
            20 shrubs, minimum 12-inches high
         *Note: Each 3.5-inch caliper canopy tree may be substituted with two
1.5-inch caliper canopy trees.
      c.   All mitigation shall be in addition to landscaping required under
Division 2 of Article V of this Code.
   (3)   The species of plants to be used in the mitigation of woodlands/
forests shall be similar to those destroyed and a minimum mix of six species
are to be planted. Acceptable species for woodland and forest mitigation are as
indicated in
Table 35-4106.1. No more than 80% of the total number of trees planted for
mitigation purposes, however, shall be of any single species.
   (4)   The land upon which the mitigation is to take place shall be protected
with a deed restriction and conservation easement as a permanent natural
resource features conservation easement.
   (5)   No tree cutting or removal, after the adoption of this Code, shall
reduce the woodland/forest natural resource features protection requirements of
this Code.
Table 35-4106.1.
TREE SPECIES FOR WOODLAND AND FOREST MITIGATION
Species     Species
Common Name Scientific Name
Species                Species
Common Name            Scientific Name
Sugar Maple            Acer saccharum
Bitternut Hickory      Carya cordiformis
Hackberry (Sugarberry) Celtis occidentalis
Butternut              Juglans cinerea
Black Walnut           Juglans nigra
Eastern Hophornbeam    Ostrya virginiana
Black Cherry           Prunus serotina
White Oak              Quercus alba
Red Oak                Quercus borealis
American Basswood      Tilia Americana
American Elm           Ulmus Americana
Slippery Elm           Ulmus rubra
 
SEC. 35-4107.   DRAINAGEWAYS.
   (a)   DEFINITION. A course of running water, either perennial or
intermittent, flowing in a channel.
   (b)   PURPOSE. Drainageways serve in the transporting of surface runoff to
downstream areas. As such, drainageways serve to carry surface waters,
supplement floodplain, wetland, and water storage functions in heavy storm or
melt events, filter water-borne pollutants and sediments, promote infiltration
and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat at the land/water
margin. Drainageway protection requirements preserve each of these functions as
well as greatly reducing the potential for soil erosion along drainageways by
protecting vegetative groundcover in areas which are susceptible to variable
runoff flows and moderate to rapid water movement.
   (c)   DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE. Drainageways are to be determined by using
the definition of "Drainageway" as set forth in Division 2 of Article I of this
ordinance and the sources in the order indicated below. If the first source is
considered inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the zoning
administrator, the succeeding source shall be used:
   (1)   A topographic survey prepared at the petitioner’s expense by and
certified by an Illinois registered land surveyor at a contour interval of not
less than 2 feet.
   (2)   Topographic maps on file with the City of Moline.
   (3)   U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
   The area of drainageways (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and
graphically delineated on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan."
   (d)   PROTECTION STANDARDS. Drainageways shall be protected as indicated on
Table 35-4102.1. Protected portions of drainageways shall remain in an
undisturbed state except for the land use permitted per the requirements of
Sec.
35-3420.
   (e)   MITIGATION. Drainageway mitigation may be permitted under the
requirements of the Illinois State Statutes, and administrative rules
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR). If such
statute or rules do not provide sufficient guidance on required mitigation, the
City shall require the preparation and submittal of a wetland mitigation plan
by a professional wetland mitigation specialist, and the petitioner shall be
responsible for all costs necessary for the City to conduct a professional
review of the mitigation plan. In addition, a permit from the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers pursuant to the requirements of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. 1344) and/or the IDNR shall be submitted to the City of Moline
certifying that the filling has been approved and permitted by the Corps and/or
IDNR. Alternatively, the applicant must obtain and provide to the City written
correspondence from said agencies that a state or federal permit is not
required, as a condition of City review.
SEC. 35-4108.   SHORE BUFFERS.
   (a)   DEFINITION. All of the land area located within 75 feet inland of the
ordinary high water mark of all ponds, streams, lakes, wetlands, and navigable
high water mark of all rivers. 
   (b)   PURPOSE. Shore buffers serve to protect land/water margins from
erosion due to site disruption. Because of regular contact with wave action,
currents, and runoff, such areas are highly susceptible to continuous, and in
some cases, rapid erosion. Shore protection also provides a natural vegetation
buffer which serves to reduce water velocities and wave energy, and filters
significant amounts of water-borne pollutants and sediments. Shore buffers also
promote infiltration and groundwater recharging, and provide a unique habitat
at the land/water margin.
   (c)   DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE. Shore buffers are to be determined as the
land within 75 feet of the ordinary high water mark of all navigable waters and
parallel to that ordinary highwater mark, where required. Navigable waters are
to be determined by using the definition of "Navigable Water" set forth in
Division 2 of Article I and the sources in the order indicated below. If the
first source is considered inaccurate or inappropriate, as determined by the
zoning administrator, the succeeding source shall be used:
   (1)   A topographic survey prepared at the petitioner’s expense by and
certified by an Illinois registered land surveyor at a contour interval of not
less than 2 feet.
   (2)   Topographic maps on file with the City of Moline.
   (3)   U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps.
   The area of shore buffers (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and
graphically delineated on the "Natural Resource Protection Plan.”
   (d)   PROTECTION STANDARDS. With the exception of the activities permitted
below, shore areas shall remain in undisturbed state, except for the land uses
permitted per the requirements of Sec.
35-3420.
   (1)   Tree Removal.
      a.   Purpose. The intent and purpose of this subsection is to preserve
the City's character as a natural wooded community, maintain property values by
improving and preserving the aesthetic appeal of the City through tree
regulations, preserve the natural resources of the City and State, reduce the
amount of erosion in the City due to tree removal, protect the quality of the
waters of the State and the City, and protect and promote the health, safety
and welfare of the people by minimizing the amount of sediment and other
pollutants carried by runoff to surface waters due to the erosion of land not
protected by a naturally wooded environment.
      b.   Clear-Cutting Prohibition.
         1.   Waterfront Shoreland Areas. In a strip of land 35 feet wide
inland from the bulkhead line, no more than 30 feet in any 100 feet shall be
clear-cut.    Where the lot is less than 100 feet, no more than 30% of this
strip shall be clear-cut. Natural shrubbery shall be preserved as far as
practicable and, where removed, it shall be replaced with other vegetation that
is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion and preserving
natural beauty.
         2.   Tree Preservation Area. Except for circumstances identified under
paragraph c., below, it is prohibited to remove any tree or cause any trees to
be removed from the tree preservation area of each lot. During construction, no
equipment movement, construction or placement of equipment or material storage
shall be permitted in the tree preservation    area.
      c.   Cutting Exceptions.
         1.   Trees may be removed from the building activities area. This area
shall be as small as possible, including the entire area affected by building,
grading, and temporary material storage areas. In no case shall the amount of
trees with a 6- inch tree diameter removed within the building activities area
exceed the following:
            (a)   80% of the total of such trees on lots of 1/4 acre or less.
            (b)   60% of the total of such trees on lots of ¼ acre to one acre,
except in the C-2 District.
            (c)   40% of the total of such trees on lots of one acre to 2.5
acres, except in the C-2 District.
            (d)   20% of the total of such trees on lots of 2.5 acres or more,
except in the C-2 District.
            (e)   10% of the total of such trees on all lots in the C-
2 District.
         2.   Trees removed in excess of the above will require a tree removal
permit.    Conditions under which a permit may be issued include, but will not
be limited to, the following:
            (a)   The tree is dead, dying or diseased.
            (b)   The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is
likely to die or become diseased.
            (c)   The removal of the tree will enhance the tree preservation
area and the health of the remaining trees.
            (d)   The removal of the tree will avoid or alleviate an economic
hardship or hardship of another nature to the property or residences.
            (e)   The removal of the tree is consistent with good arboriculture
practices.
   (2)   Replacement Trees . When in keeping with good arboriculture practices,
replacement trees shall be planted for all removed trees. They may be planted
in the tree preservation area or in the building activities area after the
initial construction activities are completed. All replacement trees shall be
planted within 30 days of final grading or as soon as practicable thereafter as
determined by the zoning administrator. The determination of good arboriculture
shall be based on tree density and spacing of
Table 35-4108.1.
   (3)   Penalties . Any person violating any provision of this section shall
be subject to a penalty per tree illegally cut or removed, which shall be
determined by the assessed value of the trees removed. The assessed value shall
be determined in accordance with the “Manual for Plant Appraisers,” published
by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, most recent edition. In
addition, a replacement tree shall be planted, of equivalent caliper, to
replace each tree cut illegally.
Table 35-4108.1.
Shore Buffer Replacement Trees
Small Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height of 20’ to 30’ and 15’ to 25’
spread. They should be planted 15’ to 20’ on center or roughly at a density of
115 trees per acre.
Apricot              Hawthorne (sp)       Plum, Purpleleaf     Soapberry
Crabapple, Flowering Lilac, Japanese Tree Redbud               Pear, Bradford
(sp)
                     Peach, Flowering     Golden Chain Tree    Serviceberry
Medium Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height of 30’ to 50’ and 30’ to 40’
spread. They should be planted 25’ to 30’ on center or roughly at a density of
30 trees per acre.
Ash, Green           Linden or Basswood   Oak, Red             Osageorange
                     (sp)                                      (Thornless)
Hackberry            Mulberry, Red        Pagodatree, Japanese Persimmon
                     (fruitless, male)
Honeylocust          Oak, English         Pecan                Poplar
(Thornless)
                                          Birch                Sassafras
Large Trees: Trees which have an ultimate height greater than 50’ and over 40’
spread. They should be planted 40’ on center or roughly at a density of 25
trees per acre.
American Elm         Kentucky Coffeetree  Sugar Maple          Sycamore
Walnut               Silver Maple         Oaks                 Cottonwood
 
SEC. 35-4109.   ISOLATED WETLANDS, LAKES AND PONDS.
   (a)   DEFINITION. Isolated wetlands are those areas where water is at, near,
or above the land surface long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic
vegetation and which have soils indicative of wet conditions that are no longer
under regulation by the Federal Clean Water Act administered by the U. S. Army
Corps of Engineers (Corps). For "jurisdictional wetlands" under Corps
regulation, please refer to the Rock Island Corps website: http://
www.mvr.usace.army.mil/.
   (b)   PURPOSE. These provisions are intended to maintain safe and healthful
conditions; prevent water pollution; protect wildlife habitat; manage flooding;
protect personal property and real estate; and control building and development
in wetlands no longer under regulation by the federal Clean Water Act
administered by the Corps. When development is permitted in isolated wetland
areas, the development should occur in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts
upon the wetland.
   (c)   DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE. Wetland areas shall be determined at the
petitioner’s expense by a field survey and mapping of plant material by a
botanist with a professional degree in either botany or biology. The area of
wetlands (in square feet and acres) shall be measured and graphically
delineated on the “Natural Resource Protection Plan.”
   (d)   PROTECTION STANDARDS. Wetlands shall be protected as indicated in
Table 35-4102.1. Protected portions of wetlands shall remain in an undisturbed
state except for the land use permitted per the requirements of Sec.
35-3420.
   (e)   MITIGATION. Wetlands mitigation may be permitted under the
requirements of the Illinois State Statutes, and administrative rules
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) under that
Section. If such statute or rules do not provide sufficient guidance on
required mitigation, the City shall require the preparation and submittal of a
wetland mitigation plan by a professional wetland mitigation specialist, and
the petitioner shall be responsible for all costs necessary for the City to
conduct a professional review of the mitigation plan. In addition, a permit
from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the requirements of Section
404 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1344) and/or the IDNR shall be submitted
to the City of Moline certifying that filling has been approved and permitted
by the Corps and/or IDNR. Alternatively, the petitioner must obtain and provide
to the City written correspondence from said agencies that a state or federal
permit is not required, as a condition of City review.
DIVISION 2.   INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SEC. 35-4200.   PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The infrastructure and public improvement standards of this division
establish requirements for designing and installing infrastructure and
improvements in all developments. These standards are intended to:
   (1)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   (2)   Promote the orderly growth and development of the City; and
   (3)   Ensure the timely and coordinated provision of required transportation
improvements, utilities and other public facilities and services to new
subdivisions and developments.
SEC. 35-4201.   APPLICABILITY.
   The infrastructure and public improvement standards of this division apply
to any activity that requires one or more of the following permits or
approvals:
   (1)   Minor Subdivision (see Sec.
35-2108);
   (2)   Major Subdivision (see Sec.
35-2209);
   (3)   Site Plan Review (see Sec.
35-2105);
   (4)   Planned Unit Development (see Sec.
35-2205);
   (5)   Special Use Permit (see Sec.
35-2206); or
   (6)   Building Permit (see Sec.
35-2103) for a principal structure or principal use.
SEC. 35-4202.   REGULATIONS AND POLICIES.
   All developments must be designed and laid out in accordance with:
   (1)   The Comprehensive Plan;
   (2)   All applicable City ordinances, including this Zoning and Land
Development Code; and
   (3)   All applicable laws and regulations of the federal government and the
State of Illinois.
SEC. 35-4203.   SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   Development approval may be withheld for land on which there is evidence of
harmful or hazardous conditions until a plan sufficient to alleviate the
identified hazard has been submitted by the applicant and approved by the City.
Harmful or hazardous conditions may be due to flooding, poor drainage, steep
slopes, adverse soil conditions, or other features that will be harmful or
hazardous to the health safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
development or surrounding areas.
SEC. 35-4204.   REQUIRED INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Developers are responsible for the construction and installation of
infrastructure and public improvements, in accordance with the standards of
this Code. Such infrastructure and improvements include but are not limited to
the following:
   (1)   Survey monuments;
   (2)   Streets within the development and improvements to existing streets
that border the development;
   (3)   Sidewalks;
   (4)   Water distribution and wastewater collection systems;
   (5)   Grading, surface drainage and erosion control measures;
   (6)   Stormwater management improvements;
   (7)   Utilities; and
   (8)   Any other on- or off-site infrastructure or improvements required by
this Code or required at the time of subdivision plat, site plan, PUD, special
use permit or other development approval.
   (b)   If a developer files a final plat or site plan for only a portion of
development for which a preliminary plat or overall development plan was
approved, the infrastructure and improvements required to be constructed,
installed, and maintained are those improvements that the City engineer
determines to be necessary to serve the lots shown on the final plat or site
plan.
   (c)   All improvements must be designed and installed so as to provide for a
logical inter-connected system of infrastructure and to create continuity of
improvements for the development of adjacent properties.
   (d)   Upon installation and construction of all required infrastructure and
improvements, the developer may seek acceptance of improvements to be dedicated
to the public by submitting to the City engineer the required number of as-
built (record) plans. In addition, the developer must provide a statement
signed by an Illinois licensed registered professional engineer indicating that
all required improvements have been installed and constructed in accordance
with the submitted as-built plans.
   (e)   The developer is responsible for maintenance of all required
infrastructure and improvements, including rights-of-way, to the standards of
this Code until such time as the City, another unit of government, a property
owners association, lot owner, or other legal entity assumes formal, legal
responsibility for maintenance of the infrastructure and improvements. Final
plats must include the developer’s signed and notarized acknowledgement of this
responsibility.
   (f)   It is the subdivider’s responsibility to notify the appropriate public
utilities. Proof of notification shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
to the City for City approval.
SEC. 35-4205.   OFFICIAL MAP.
   The documents that make up the City’s official map must be adopted by the
City Council and filed in the office of the City clerk. The official map is
made part of this Code by reference. The Comprehensive Plan and other adopted
plans and studies serve as the City’s Official Map.
SEC. 35-4206.   DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS.
   (a)   Dedications. Land must be dedicated for public street rights-of-way
within the development and for public street rights-of-way that abut the
development.
   (b)   Reservations. Besides requiring that developers dedicate land for
public street rights-of-way, developers may also be required to reserve lands
identified on the Official Map for possible acquisition by the City or other
public agency. Land may not be required to be reserved for more than 12 months.
SEC. 35-4207.   EASEMENTS.
   Easements must be provided by the developer when the City engineer
determines that such easements are necessary to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities (surface or subsurface), best management practices, pedestrian
access, emergency vehicle access or other required improvements. The City
engineer is authorized to establish the location and size of easements.
SEC. 35-4208.   ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All infrastructure and public improvements must be constructed in accordance
with the most recent edition of the following:
   (1)   City of Moline Supplemental Specifications, which govern in the case
of conflict with any of the specifications contained in the manuals referred to
in Sec.
35-4208(1) through Sec.
35-4208(9). These Supplemental Specifications are available for public
inspection in the office of the City engineer or online;
   (2)   IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
including the Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
   (3)   IEPA’s Recommended Standards for Sewage Works and Design Criteria for
Pressure Sewer Systems;
   (4)   The Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices;
   (5)   American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials’ A
Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (“Green Book”);
   (6)   The American Society for Testing and Materials’ Manual of Test
Procedures of Materials;
   (7)   The Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts’
Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in
Illinois (“Green Book”);
   (8)   IEPA’S Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control (“Yellow Book”); and
   (9)   The Illinois Society of Professional engineers’ Standard
Specifications for Water & Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
SEC. 35-4209.   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES AND SECURITY.
   (a)   PURPOSE. Performance guarantee and security requirements are
established for the purpose of ensuring that developers properly install
infrastructure and improvements required by this Code in a timely manner, in
accordance with approved plans.
   (b)   TERM OF AGREEMENT. The term of a performance guarantee may not exceed
2 years. If the developer has not completed the required infrastructure and
public improvements within the 2-year period, the City engineer is authorized
to approve one extension of up to 6 months in duration. Any additional
extensions or extensions of a longer duration require approval of the plan
commission. Decision-making bodies are authorized to require updated
improvement cost estimates and additional security as a condition of any
extension granted.
   (c)   FORM AND AMOUNT OF SECURITY.
   (1)   Security must be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash
or other instrument readily convertible to cash, which includes, but is not
limited to, a performance bond, as approved by the City attorney. The
performance guarantee and security must be conditioned upon the performance of
all work necessary to complete the required infrastructure and improvements.
Said Security must be posted with the City clerk. Suggested language for such
security may be found in the written administrative policies and supplemental
procedures pertaining to the processing of subdivision applications maintained
by the zoning administrator.
   (2)   The estimated total cost of required infrastructure and improvements
must be itemized by improvement type and certified by the developer’s Illinois
licensed registered professional engineer. Cost estimates must be based on
industry norms within Moline.
   (3)   The amount of the performance guarantee must equal at least 110% of
the estimated total cost of the required infrastructure and improvements, plus
all required inspection fees.
   (4)   No personal shall be eligible to act as surety unless such person has
been approved by the State of Illinois to act as a surety on public works
improvements.
   (d)   DEFAULT AND USE OF SECURITY. If the developer fails to properly
install required infrastructure and improvements within the term of the
guarantee and any approved extension, the guarantee will be deemed in default.
In the case of default, the City is authorized to foreclose upon the security
funds to fund completion of the required infrastructure and improvements or to
contract for installation of the required infrastructure and improvements. If
the cost of completing the required infrastructure and improvements exceeds the
security amount, the developer is liable for payment of all excess costs. Any
foreclosed security funds will be subject to an administrative fee that
reflects the City’s actual costs associated with preparing bid documents and
preparing and administering a contract for the work to be completed.
   (e)   RELEASE OF SECURITY. The security must be released once all of the
following occur:
   (1)   The conditions of the performance guarantee have been completed to the
satisfaction of all agencies with jurisdiction over the improvements.
   (2)   Any required maintenance guarantee has been provided in accordance
with Sec.
35-4210;
   (3)   A final inspection has been conducted by the City engineer or other
qualified professional selected by the City engineer and retained by the
developer;
   (4)   Written evidence has been submitted that all owners of the
infrastructure and improvements have accepted ownership of the improvements and
have assumed responsibility for maintenance;
   (5)   The developer has provided as-built plans showing monuments, streets,
curbs, sidewalks and all other infrastructure and public improvements as they
were installed; and
   (6)   All required certifications of completion have been provided.
SEC. 35-4210.   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES AND SECURITY.
   (a)   PURPOSE. Maintenance guarantees and security are required for the
purpose of ensuring that infrastructure and public improvements are properly
constructed and remain in sound condition for a reasonable period of time after
construction or installation.
   (b)   TIMING. A maintenance guarantee and required security must be in place
before any required performance security is released.
   (c)   TERM OF AGREEMENT. The maintenance guarantee agreement must run and be
in force for a term of at least one year from the date of release of the
performance security.
   (d)   AGREEMENT. Required maintenance guarantees must stipulate that the
developer guarantees the satisfactory condition of required infrastructure and
improvements for the term of the maintenance guarantee and agrees to correct
any defects that may arise during the term of the maintenance agreement.
   (e)   AMOUNT OF SECURITY. The amount of the maintenance security must be at
least 20% of the total cost of all required infrastructure and improvements.
The estimated cost of the required improvements must be itemized and certified
by the developer’s Illinois licensed registered professional engineer. Cost
estimates must be based on industry norms within Moline.
   (f)   USE OF SECURITY. If required infrastructure and improvements are found
to be defective, the City may perform the replacement or repairs utilizing the
maintenance security to fund the work. Prior to performing required repairs or
replacement, the City engineer must notify the developer by certified mail of
the intent to utilize the maintenance guarantee security. If the developer has
not performed the maintenance within 90 days of the date that notice is mailed,
the City is authorized to take the steps necessary to perform the work and
utilize the maintenance guarantee security to fund the work. If the cost of
repairs/replacement exceeds the security amount, the developer is liable for
payment of all excess costs.
   (g)   RELEASE OF SECURITY. All remaining security funds must be released at
the end of the guarantee period.
SEC. 35-4211.   MAINTENANCE OF COMMON AREAS AND PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Establishment of Legal Entity. The perpetual maintenance of any common
areas and private improvements (e.g., streets, stormwater facilities, open
space, recreational facilities, or other infrastructure or improvements) within
a development must be provided for by a legal entity that is established by the
developer and approved by the decision-making body.
   (b)   Property Owners Association. If multiple property owners will be
responsible for perpetual maintenance and control of common areas and private
improvements within a development, a property owners association must be
established.
   (c)   Deed Restriction. If the entire development is to remain under single
ownership or if a trust or other legal entity is established for ownership and
maintenance, the developer must file a deed restriction with the county
recorder of deeds providing for the legal entity to be responsible for
ownership and perpetual maintenance of common areas and private improvements.
   (d)   Declarations and Covenants. Decision-making bodies are authorized to
require the establishment of declarations and covenants within property owner’s
association documents guaranteeing ongoing maintenance of common areas and
private improvements. Among the declarations and covenants that may be required
are provisions authorizing the City to correct maintenance deficiencies and to
recover actual costs and any legal fees from the subject property owners in the
event that maintenance duties are not carried out. The City may also require
City approval before any amendments are made to the declarations and covenants.
   (e)   Documentation.
   (1)   Documents providing for the establishment of the legal entity and any
required declarations and covenants must be submitted to the City attorney
before approval and recordation of any required final plat. If a plat is not
required, required documents must be submitted to the City attorney before
approval of required building permits.
   (2)   The City’s review is limited to ensuring that the legal entity has
clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the common areas
and facilities, including the power to compel contributions from property
owners to cover their proportionate share of the costs associated with the
maintenance of the common areas and facilities.
SEC. 35-4212.   LOTS.
   (a)   General.
   (1)   The size, shape and orientation of lots must comply with applicable
zoning district regulations, be appropriate for the location, topography and
physical features present and be of sufficient size to accommodate an adequate
buildable area and area for required setbacks, off-street parking, and service
facilities required by the type of use and development proposed.
   (2)   Minimum lot area, lot dimensions, and building setbacks must conform
to applicable zoning district requirements.
   (3)   Side lot lines must be at or approximately at right angles (within 80
to 100 degrees) to street right-of-way lines or radial to curved street right-
of-way lines.
   (b)   Flag Lots.
   (1)   The creation of flag lots is prohibited, except that flag lots may be
approved when the authorized decision-making body determines that a flag lot is
necessary to address one or more of the following circumstances:
      a.   To avoid direct access onto a major street;
      b.   When a property owner demonstrates that, because of the irregular
shape of a tract or its difficult topography or for some other substantial
reason, the creation of a flag lot is reasonably necessary to avoid extreme
hardship to the property owner and can be accomplished without creating
substantial adverse effects on neighboring properties or the public health or
safety;
      c.   When a flag lot would provide greater protection of natural
resources areas; or
      d.   To help hide or conceal utility buildings/substations, or radio,
television or telecommunication towers.
   (2)   A flag lot may not be created if the effect is to increase the number
of access points onto a major street.
   (3)   A flag lot may be used only for a single-family detached dwelling
(including any uninhabited accessory structures); a utility; or a radio,
television, or telecommunication tower (when permitted by zoning).
   (4)   The flagpole section of the flag lot may not exceed 200 feet in
length.
   (5)   The flagpole section of the lot must have a minimum width of at least
20 feet for its entire length.
   (6)   Use of a single driveway to serve abutting flag lots or to serve a
flag lot and an abutting conventional lot is permitted and encouraged. In the
latter case, the preferred location for the driveway is on the flagpole portion
of the flag lot, with the conventional lot granted an access easement over the
flagpole portion of the lot.
   (c)   Lot Access. Land must be subdivided in such a way that each lot abuts
a street that complies with the standards of this Code.
   (d)   Access to Arterial Streets. If a property with frontage along an
arterial street is proposed to be subdivided or developed, decision-making
bodies are authorized to restrict access to the arterial street and require one
or more of the following:
   (1)   The subdivision of through lots that they back onto the arterial
street and front onto and take access from a parallel street, coupled with the
installation of a fence, wall or vegetative screening along the arterial street
frontage;
   (2)   Provision of and access to a frontage road separated from the arterial
street; or
   (3)   A cross-access easement provided by the owner of subject property to
adjoining properties that front on the same arterial street.
   (e)   Unbuildable Lots. This code recognizes that it may occasionally be in
the public interest to create lots that will not be built upon. Such lots may
be used as common areas for stormwater detention, common recreation, private
rights-of-way or other similar purposes, subject to the common area maintenance
provisions of Sec.
35-4211. If declared unbuildable by means of restrictive covenants or other
recorded legal document approved by the City attorney, unbuildable lots are
exempt from the lot regulations of this section (Sec.
35-4212).
SEC. 35-4213.   BLOCKS.
   (a)   Blocks must have a width that accommodates two rows of lots, except
when reverse frontage along major streets is provided or where prevented by
topographic conditions, property size or location next to railroad or water
body.
   (b)   Blocks must be laid out in a pattern that ensures the connectivity of
streets, provides for efficient provision of public and safety services and
establishes efficient and logical routes between residences, nonresidential
destinations and public gathering places.
   (c)   To provide multiple motorized and nonmotorized travel routes within
and between neighborhoods, blocks along local and collector streets in
residential subdivisions may not exceed 660 feet in length. Decision-making
bodies are authorized to allow longer block lengths in nonresidential and low-
density residential subdivisions or when topography, natural resources or other
physical constraints make short block lengths undesirable or impractical.
Decision-making bodies are authorized to condition the allowance of longer
block lengths on the provision of emergency vehicle access routes, mid-block
pedestrian connections (easements), crosswalks and other access features that
provide safe and convenient motorized and non-motorized access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation routes and other community
facilities. Block lengths are measured from street centerline to street
centerline.
   (d)   Block lengths along arterial streets must be at least 660 feet in
length. Streets that intersect with arterial streets must be spaced in a manner
that provides adequate connectivity between neighborhoods, but also maintains
the capacity of the street for the safe and efficient movement of traffic.
Longer block lengths may be required along high capacity or higher speed
arterial streets where the interests in moving traffic outweigh the
connectivity between areas of development. Decision-making bodies are
authorized to approve shorter block lengths in areas with high pedestrian
counts.
SEC. 35-4214.   STREETS AND NONMOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES.
   (a)   General Principles. Developments must be designed to create an
integrated system of streets and nonmotorized transportation facilities that
provide for safe and efficient access to lots and movement of people within and
to and from the proposed development.
   (b)   General Design Criteria. The general design criteria for streets are
stated in
Table 35-4214-1. The precise minimum right-of-way and overall pavement width
will be established at the time of development approval, based on the City of
Moline Supplemental Specifications; topography; drainage and utility
improvements; and other transportation design criteria, including the need for
medians, turn lanes, and bicycle/nonmotorized transportation facilities.
Table 35-4214-1: Street Design Standards
     Minimum          Min. Travel  Min. Gutter  Min. Parking      Maximum
Type ROW Width (feet) Lane Width   Width (feet) Lane Width (feet) Grade (%)
                      (feet)
                Minimum    Min. Travel  Min. Gutter  Min. Parking Maximum
Type            ROW Width  Lane Width   Width (feet) Lane Width   Grade (%)
                (feet)     (feet)                    (feet)
Arterial, Major 100        12           2            NA           6
Arterial, Minor 80         12           2            NA           6
Collector
No on-street    60         12           2            NA           10
Parking
On street       60         12           2            9            10
parking-1 side
On-street       60         12           2            9            10
parking-2 sides
Local
No on-street    50         11           1.5          NA           10
parking
On street       50         11           1.5          8            10
parking-1 side
On-street       50         11           1.5          8            10
parking-2 sides
Alley           20         18           NA           NA           10
 
   (c)   Private Streets.
   (1)   Private streets are prohibited unless expressly approved as part of a
planned unit development (PUD).
   (2)   A private street is not and may not be dedicated for public use, but
may be allowed to provide access to lots within a PUD when ownership and
maintenance of the street is guaranteed in accordance with Sec.
35-4211.
   (3)   Private streets must be designed and constructed in accordance with
the same standards that apply to public streets unless a waiver or modification
of this requirement is approved at the time of PUD approval.
   (d)   Pavement. All streets must be paved in accordance with IDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the City of Moline’s
Supplemental Specifications.
   (e)   Half Streets. Half streets are prohibited. If an existing half street
abuts the tract to be developed, the other half of the street must be dedicated
and constructed as part of the subject development.
   (f)   Reserve Strips. Reserve strips that work to prohibit or control access
to streets are prohibited.
   (g)   Curb and Gutter. Concrete curb and gutter must be provided along the
outside edge of all street pavements. Rollover curbs are prohibited. See the
City of Moline’s Supplemental Specifications.
   (h)   Traffic Calming Features.
   (1)   Local streets, block length, and lot layouts must be designed to
discourage speeding traffic and unsafe driving behavior.
   (2)   In order to minimize the potential for speeding traffic and create a
safer environment for nonmotorized modes of transportation, the City engineer
and plan commission is authorized to require traffic calming features to be
designed into developments. These features may include, but are not limited, to
discontinuous streets, curb extensions, raised crosswalks, medians, traffic
circles, signage and other traffic control devices.
   (i)   Intersections.
   (1)   Number of Streets. No more than two streets may intersect at any
single point.
   (2)   Angle. Streets must be laid out to intersect at an angle of no less
than 80 degrees and no more than 100 degrees. All oblique angle streets must be
curved approaching an intersection and must be approximately at right angles
with the intersection for a distance of at least 100 feet from the
intersection.
   (3)   Alignment. Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street must align with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such
street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are
prohibited except when the intersected street has divided lanes without median
breaks at either intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial
streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. Figure 35-4214-1:
Minimum Street Jog Illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
   (4)   Curb Radii. The minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local
streets is 15 feet. The minimum curb radius at all other intersections is 30
feet.
   (5)   Grade. Intersections must have minimum grade of 0.5% and a maximum
grade of 2% for a distance of at least 60 feet from the nearest right-of-way
line of intersecting streets.
   (6)   Pedestrian Access Routes. All pedestrian access routes at
intersections must comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code.
   (7)   Cross-Slope. The cross slopes of all streets, including intersections,
may not exceed 3%.
   (8)   Vision Clearance. Street intersections must be designed to comply with
the visibility triangle requirements of Sec.
35-5210 and applicable IDOT and City of Moline vision clearance requirements.
   (j)   Horizontal Curves. Horizontal curves must comply with the minimum
radii of
Table 35-4214-2, as measured along street centerlines:
Table 35-4214-2: Horizontal Curve Radii
 
Street Type Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius
Arterial    500
Collector   300
Local       125
Alley       100
 
   (k)   Reverse Curves.  A tangent of at least 50 feet in length must be
introduced between reverse curves on local streets. A tangent of at least 100
feet in length must be introduced between reverse curves along all other (non-
local) streets.
   (l)   Vertical Curves. Vertical curve lengths must comply with IDOT
standards.
   (m)   Connectivity of Streets and Nonmotorized Transportation Improvements.
   (1)   Each development must contribute to the larger interconnected street
pattern of the City to ensure street connectivity between neighborhoods,
multiple travel routes resulting in the diffusion and distribution of traffic,
efficient routes for public and emergency services, and to provide direct and
continuous vehicular and pedestrian travel routes to neighborhood destinations.
To that end, streets and nonmotorized transportation improvements must connect
to other similar improvements within the development and be extended to the
outer perimeter of the development.
   (2)   Cul-de-sacs will be considered where it can be clearly demonstrated
that environmental constraints, existing development, access limitations along
arterial streets, or other unusual features prevent the extension of the street
to the property line or to interconnect with other streets within or abutting
the subdivision.
   (n)   Dead-End Streets.
   (1)   Temporary Dead-End (“Stub”) Streets. Temporary turnarounds may be
required at the end of stub streets that are intended for extension when a
subsequent phase of development is completed or when the abutting property is
developed.
      a.   At the time that the street is extended or a connection is made, the
temporary turnaround must be removed in accordance with the terms of the
performance guarantee.
      b.   Stub streets must be clearly marked on plats and labeled “Future
Street Extension.” In addition, a sign must be posted on the stub street right-
of-way indicating that it is intended as a “Future Street Extension.”
      c.   The following notation must be incorporated into any plat showing a
stub street: THIS RIGHT-OF-WAY IS PLATTED WITH THE INTENT OF BEING EXTENDED AND
CONTINUED IN ORDER TO PROVIDE INGRESS AND EGRESS TO AND FROM ADJOINING
PROPERTIES.
   (2)   Permanent Dead-End Streets.
      a.   Permanent dead-end streets may be approved only when decision-making
bodies determine that a through street is not necessary or desirable because of
the absence of abutting developable land, topography, the presence of sensitive
natural resources, or potential land use conflicts. All approved permanent
dead-end streets must be designed as cul-de-sacs, loop streets or other
alternative approved by the City engineer.
      b.   The minimum required radius of the pavement of a cul-de-sac bulbs or
loop streets is 40 feet.
      c.   Medians with a minimum width of 30 feet are required for loop
streets. Medians must be landscaped in accordance with the general yard
landscaping requirements of Sec.
35-5206. Such areas are subject to the common area maintenance provisions of
Sec.
35-4211.
      d.   Cul-de-sacs may not exceed 660 feet in length, measured from the
center point of the turnaround, to the nearest edge of the right-of-way of the
nearest intersecting street.
      e.   Decision-making bodies are authorized to condition the allowance of
permanent dead-end streets on the provision of supplemental emergency vehicle
access routes and a pedestrian access easement from the terminus of the cul-de-
sac or other dead-end street.
SEC. 35-4215.   DEVELOPMENT ON SUBSTANDARD STREETS.
   (a)   When development is proposed to access existing streets that do not
meet City standards for right-of-way, surfacing or other street improvements,
the granting of development approval may be conditioned on the developer
dedicating the needed right-of-way and (1) making the necessary improvements to
bring the street segment that abuts the property up to City standards or (2)
contributing toward the construction costs of bringing the street segment that
abuts the property up to City standards. Developers may be required to make
dedications and improvements only to the extent that the City determines that
the need for such dedications and improvements are specifically and uniquely
attributable to the proposed development. If needed right-of-way is determined
to not be specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed development,
the City may require that the land be reserved in accordance with Sec.
35-4206(2).
   (b)   The following provisions govern in interpreting the phrase
“specifically and uniquely attributable”:
   (1)   Local streets are streets that provide access to abutting properties
and carry insignificant amounts of through traffic. Therefore, up to 100% of
the entire cost of upgrading a local street to City standards for that segment
of the street that abuts the subject property may be determined to be
specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed development.
   (2)   Collector streets are streets that collect traffic from a neighborhood
and direct it to and from arterial streets. The function of a collector street
is 50% access to abutting property and 50% through traffic. Therefore, no more
than 50% of the entire cost of upgrading a collector street to City standards
for that segment of the street that abuts the subject property may be
determined to be specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed
development.
   (3)   Arterial streets have the primary function of carrying traffic through
and between neighborhoods and throughout the City and region. The function of
an arterial street is 25% access to property and 75% through traffic.
Therefore, no more than 25% of the entire cost of upgrading an arterial street
to City standards for that segment of the street that abuts the subject
property may be determined to be specifically and uniquely attributable to the
proposed development.
SEC. 35-4216.   STREET LIGHTS.
   The City engineer is authorized to require the installation of street lights
along public and private streets at the time of development. The location and
type will be determined during the development review process based on
guidelines established in the American National Standard Practice for Roadway
Lighting (ANSI/IESNA RP-8-00).
SEC. 35-4217.   STREET SIGNS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The City engineer is authorized to require traffic and warrant studies, and
based on such studies, require the installation of street signs and traffic
control devices at the time of development. All street signs, traffic control
devices and related apparatus must comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
SEC. 35-4218.   SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   NEW DEVELOPMENT.
   (1)   Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all public and private
streets, except in cases where sidewalks are not allowed by IDOT. Decision-
making bodies are authorized to require the installation of sidewalks in other
locations, such as at the end of permanent dead-end streets through private
property when they determine that such sidewalks will create a logical and well
connected pedestrian circulation system.
   (2)   Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet or minimum width
required by the Illinois Accessibility Code, whichever is greater.
   (3)   For property being subdivided, sidewalks must be installed before
approval of the final subdivision plat, the cost of installation must be
included in the performance guarantee approved in accordance with Sec.
35-4209. For all other development, sidewalks must be installed prior to
issuance of the occupancy permit.
   (4)   Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot inside the right-of-way line
whenever practicable or in an alternative location approved by the City
engineer.
   (5)   All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the City of
Moline Supplemental Specifications.
   (6)   All sidewalks and ramps at intersections shall comply with the
Illinois Accessibility Code.
   (b)   INFILL LOCATIONS.
   (1)   Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all public and private
streets, except in cases where sidewalks are not allowed by IDOT. In cases
where right-of-way limits do not provide sufficient space for sidewalks, where
existing topography makes the installation impracticable, or where the
installation cost exceeds the anticipated public benefit, the City Council may
direct that sidewalks be installed on only one (1) side of the street or not
installed at all and shall state the reasons for the Council’s decision by
resolution.
   (2)   Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet or the width of
the sidewalk to which they will connect, whichever is greater, but not greater
than five (5) feet. Where sidewalks are less than five (5) feet in width, an
American’s with Disabilities Act compliant passing area shall be installed at
the required intervals.
   (3)   Sidewalks shall be located one (1) foot inside the right-of-way line
whenever practicable or in an alternative location approved by the City
engineer.
   (4)   All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the City of
Moline Supplemental Specifications.
(Ord. No. 3025-2018; Sec.
35-4218, “SIDEWALKS,” repealed in its entirety; new Sec.
35-4218, “SIDEWALKS,” enacted; 07/20/18)
SEC. 35-4219.   TRAILS.
   Where a trail extension, as identified in the comprehensive plan or an
adopted trails plan, is located on the subject property, the City may require
that an easement be provided for the trail.
SEC. 35-4220.   WATER.
   (a)   Developers are responsible for providing a complete water supply and
distribution system for the entire development, including hydrants, valves and
all other appurtenances.
   (b)   The water supply distribution system must be extended into and through
the entire development to the boundary lines of the subject property in order
to provide for extension by adjoining properties. Whenever a water main is
extended, it must be extended across the entire frontage of the property being
developed and it must be connected to any other mains that front on or abut the
subject development to provide for looping of the water system.
   (c)   Project specific tap-on assessment fees may apply as set forth in
Chapter 34 of the Code of Ordinances.
   (d)   The developer’s engineer must calculate expected fire flow
requirements for the proposed development based in accordance with the Uniform
Fire Code. Anticipated demand for water by “downstream” properties must also be
taken into consideration when determining the size of pipe to be installed.
   (e)   Individual water service connections within single-family residential
subdivisions must be extended from the water main to within one foot of the lot
line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and clearly marked
with a fence post or similar material to identify their location.
   (f)   Upon written request to the water superintendent, the City will
perform fire flow tests on existing water mains to be extended and provide the
data to the developer’s engineer.
   (g)   Fire hydrants must be installed by the developer in accordance with
standard engineering practice at intervals of not more than 400 feet for
residential development, and not more than the maximum interval specified by
the Uniform Fire Code for nonresidential use.
SEC. 35-4221.   DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   Drainage and stormwater management improvements must be coordinated with
existing and planned improvements in order to form an integrated area wide
system. The drainage and stormwater management system must be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system and comply with the standards of
Chapter 34 of the Code of Ordinances. Required drainage and stormwater
management improvements may include adequate drains, swales, bioretention
areas, culverts, storm sewers, intakes, manholes, and detention facilities. An
erosion and sedimentation control plan, in accordance with
Chapter 34, must be submitted to and approved by the City engineer before any
earth-disturbing activity occurs.
SEC. 35-4222.   SANITARY SEWER.
   (a)   Whenever a lot or tract proposed for development is within 300 feet of
an existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection system, the developer
is responsible for establishing a connection to such public sewer and for
providing a complete sanitary sewer system, including stubs, for the entire
development.
   (b)   The sanitary sewer system must be extended to the development
boundaries, as necessary to provide for the extension of the sanitary sewer to
adjacent property, as determined by the City. Whenever a sanitary sewer main is
extended, it shall be extended across the entire frontage or frontages of the
property to be improved by the extension unless the City has determined,
because of land contours or the presence of other mains, that no other property
can be technically or needs to be served by such an extension.
   (c)   Project specific tap-on assessment fees may apply as set forth in
Chapter 34 of the Code of Ordinances.
   (d)   The use of individual sewage disposal systems requires approval of a
waiver or modification in accordance with Sec.
35-2211.
SEC. 35-4223.   UTILITIES.
   (a)   Developers shall make all necessary arrangements with the respective
utility providers for the installation of utilities, including gas, electrical,
and communications service.
   (b)   All new utility installations must be placed underground within a
dedicated easement or public right-of-way, except that the requirements for
underground utilities do not apply in the following instances:
   (1)   Temporary overhead utility lines used in connection with construction,
but only during periods of construction;
   (2)   Service connections, meters, and similar equipment that are
customarily attached to the outside wall of the premises they serve;
   (3)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting;
   (4)   Electric distribution transformers, switch gear, meter pedestals, and
telephone pedestals that are customarily installed above-ground, provided that
landscaping is provided around ground-mounted equipment; and
   (5)   Utilities located on land in an I-2 (General Industrial) zoning
district are not required to be installed underground.
   (c)   No underground water, electric, gas, communication service or other
similar utility may be placed within a storm or sanitary sewer easement, except
for crossings, unless expressly approved by the City engineer.
SEC. 35-4224.   SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   Permanent survey monuments must be placed in all subdivisions by a licensed
surveyor, as follows:
   (1)   Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms at least 4 inches in diameter
or square at least 42 inches in length must be set at the extreme corners of
subdivisions.
   (2)   Steel pins at least 0.5 inches in diameter and at least 30 inches in
length must be set at locations in accordance with the Plat Act. Pins must have
a survey marker cap showing the land surveyor's registration number.
   (3)   Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading must be reset.
(Ord. No. 3009-2015; Article IV repealed; new Article IV enacted; 03/24/15)
DIVISION 3. PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENTS FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 35-4300.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the establishment of guidelines,
procedures and standards for the integration of Public Art into new private
development projects within the Cultural Corridors. Public Art helps create a
more livable and visually stimulating City. The presence of and access to
Public Art enlivens the public areas of buildings and their grounds and makes
them more welcoming. It creates a deeper interaction with the places where we
live, work and visit. A city rich in art encourages cultural tourism which
brings in visitor revenues.
   The visual and aesthetic quality of development projects has a significant
impact on property values, the local economy and vitality of the city. Public
Art illuminates the diversity and history of a community, and points to its
aspirations for the future. A wealth of art and culture in the public realm
will foster the economic development of the community.
   To achieve these goals, Public Art should be integrated into development
projects within the Cultural Corridors. For best results, consideration of
public art should be integrated into project planning at the earliest possible
stage, and the selected artist should become a member of the project’s design
team early in the design process.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 35-4300 enacted; 8/31/21)
SEC. 35-4310.   DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Division 3, the following words and phrases will have the
meanings set forth below, and such other capitalized words and phrases will be
as defined in Chapter 2, Article 1, Section
2-1111, and Chapter 2, Article IV, Division 9.:
   Addition means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
   Alteration means any construction or renovation to an existing structure
other than repair or addition.
   Cultural Corridors are designated for the following subareas within the
Downtown Moline Public Art Program Area:
      1.   19th Street from 7th Avenue to the Riverfront;
      2.   River Drive from 12th Street to 34th Avenue;
      3.   5th/6th Avenue from 6th Street to 23rd Street; and
      4.   12th Street from 6th Avenue to River Drive.
   Each of which as specifically designated in Ordinance No. 3022-2021.
   Construction Cost means the total physical development cost of any
development project covered by this chapter. Calculations shall be based on
construction and site improvement costs as declared on all building permit
applications. For purposes of calculating the public art fee, construction
costs shall include, but not be limited to, all grading, site improvement,
building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical permit applications for the
project.
   Developer means the person or entity that is financially and legally
responsible for the planning, development and construction of any development
project covered by this chapter, who may, or may not, be the owner of the
subject property.
   Development Project means a project in the a Cultural Corridor involving the
construction of any new commercial building (including office and retail uses),
any mixed use building, residential development project with more than 10-
units, or the construction of new tenant improvements in any shell building, an
addition to an existing building, or the rehabilitation, renovation, remodeling
or improvement of an existing building resulting in the modification,
renovation, expansion, reconstruction, or improvement of more than 50% of the
gross floor area of the building. To the extent that all or some portion of the
new construction include one or more of the following five items, those
portions of the project are excluded and not subject to the requirements of
this Division 3:
      1.   Repair or reconstruction of structures which have been damaged by
fire, flood, wind, or other calamity;
      2.   Historic preservation or restoration;
      3.   Fire sprinkler and other life safety installation work items; and
      4.   Any modification, renovation, expansion, reconstruction, or
improvement of that is less than 50% of the gross floor area of the building.
   Director means the Director of Community and Economic Development, or his or
her designee.
   Installation Date means the actual date on which the public art is installed
on site.
   Public Art Contribution means the dollar amount equal to 80% of one percent
of the Construction Cost of a Development Project. In the case of a mixed-use
Development Project, the Public Art Contribution will be calculated only on the
Construction Cost for the non-residential component of that Development
Project. [Example: ($100,000Construction Cost x .01 = $1,000) x 0.8 = $800
Public Art Contribution]
   Public Art means a work of art that is visible and accessible to the public
for a minimum of 40 hours per week. Public Art may include sculpture, painting,
installations, photography, video, works of light or sound, or any other work
or project determined by the Public Art Commission to satisfy the intent of
this Chapter, provided, however, that none of the following shall be considered
Public Art:
      1.   Objects that are mass produced of standard design, such as banners,
signs, playground equipment, benches, statuary, street or sidewalk barriers, or
fountains;
      2.   Reproduction, by mechanical or other means, of original works of
art, except as incorporated into film, video, photography, printmaking or other
derivative works as approved by the Public Art Commission;
      3.   Decorative, architectural, or functional elements that are designed
by the building architect or landscape architect as opposed to an artist
commissioned for this purpose; or
      4.   Landscape architecture or gardening, except where these elements are
designed by an artist and are an integral part of a work of art.
   Public Place means any exterior area on private property which is clearly
visible to the general public. The area must be clearly visible from adjacent
public property such as a street or other public thoroughfare, sidewalk, or
path.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 35-4310 enacted; 8/31/21)
SEC. 35-4315.   PUBLIC ART REQUIREMENT; PUBLIC ART INSTALLATION PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The Developer of a Development Project will install Public Art on the
Development Project site in a Public Place as recommended by the Public Art
Commission and as approved by the Corporate Authorities. The cost of the Public
Art must be equal at least to one percent of the construction cost, but in no
event more than $100,000.00. The creator of Public Art shall be an artist.
Public Art shall be displayed in a manner that will enhance its enjoyment by
the general public. As an alternative to on-site installation of Public Art,
the developer may:
      (1)   Request that the Public Art Commission consider and recommend
approval to the Corporate Authorities of placement of Developer-funded Artwork
in a Public Place identified in the Public Art Master Plan; or
      (2)   Pay a Public Art Contribution to be deposited into the Public Art
Acquisition and Maintenance Fund. The Public Art Contribution must be paid as
follows:
         50% at the time of building permit issuance; and
         50% at the time certificate of occupancy issuance.
      (3)   Subject to the recommendation of approval by the Public Art
Commission and approval by the Corporate Authorities, install Public Art on the
Development Project site that has a value lower than the Public Art
Contribution amount and make an in-lieu Public Art Contribution for the
difference between the value of the Public Art and the required Public Art
Contribution value.
   (b)   Prior to obtaining a building permit for construction of the
Development Project, the developer must demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this Division 3 in one of the following ways:
      (1)   Payment of the full amount of the Public Art Contribution; or
      (2)   Written proof to the Director of a contract to commission or
purchase and install Public Art previously recommended for approval by the
Public Art Commission and approved by the Corporate Authorities. The Developer
will be required to deposit performance security, in an amount determined by
the Director, to be adequate to secure faithful performance of the Public Art
Commission and installation in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. The
performance security must be accompanied by a written acknowledgment by the
Artist and Developer, in a form approved by the Director, that the Public Art
complies with the following:
         i.   Will be designed by an Artist.
         ii.   Require a low level of maintenance and the proposed maintenance
provisions will be adequate for the long-term integrity and enjoyment of the
Artwork, and in all events consistent with the Policy and Procedure for
Maintenance approved pursuant to Ordinance No. 3022-2021 on August 31, 2021.
The property owner will enter into a maintenance agreement with the City to be
recorded against the property to ensure proper maintenance is performed as
determined by the Director and in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
         iii.   Will be permanently affixed to the property except in the case
of a “contributing" building in the Moline National Register Historic
Commercial District, which may require specialized installation to the
satisfaction of the Director.
         iv.   Will be maintained by the owner or his or her successor in
interest in a manner acceptable to the City.
         v.   Will meet all applicable building code requirements.
   (c)   The Developer will provide the Director with proof of installation of
the approved Public Art at an approved Public Place on the Development Project
site prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (d)   Title to Public Art installed pursuant to this Division 3 on private
property will be vested in the property owner and pass to the successive owners
of the property. Each successive owner will be responsible for the custody,
protection and maintenance of the Public Art.
   (e)   If, for any reason, the current property owner or successor in
interest chooses to replace any Public Art installed pursuant to this Division
3, the following requirements must be met before the Public Art is replaced:
      (1)   The replacement Public Art must be reviewed and recommended for
approval by the Public Art Commission and approved by the Corporate
Authorities.
      (2)   The cost of the replacement Public Art will be equal to, or greater
than, the inflation adjusted cost of the existing Public Art to be removed.
      (3)   The replacement Public Art must be located at the same Public Place
or another Public Place on the property.
      (4)   The replacement Public Art must be installed within 21-days of the
removal of the existing Public Art piece, unless the period is extended by the
Director.
(Ord. No. 3022-2021; Sec. 35-4315 enacted; 8/31/21)
ARTICLE V. SITE IMPROVEMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
DIVISION 1. PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
SEC. 35-5100.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND TRAFFIC CIRCULATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent
congestion of public rights-of-ways so as to promote safety and general welfare
of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of off-
street parking and circulation in accordance with the utilization of various
sites.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY. The provisions of this section shall apply to all new
development and redevelopment projects as follows:
   (1)   New principle structures  – shall comply with all provisions of this
section.
   (2)   Additions to principle structures – shall comply with all provisions
of this section as they apply only to the area of addition.
   (3)   New accessory structures – accessory structures that contain uses that
have parking    requirements separate from those of the principle structure and
use as per subsection (h)(3), below, shall comply with all provisions of this
section as they apply only to the accessory structure.
   (4)   Additions to accessory structures – accessory structures that contain
uses that have parking requirements separate from those of the principle
structure and use as per subsection (h)(3), below, shall comply with all
provisions of this section as they apply only to the addition to the accessory
structure.
   (5)   Changes in use of existing structure – shall be exempt provided the
change in use does not include any new structures or additions to existing
structures.
   (6)   New parking and circulation areas that are not required – shall comply
with all provisions of this section except for the number of spaces required as
per subsection (h), below.
   (c)   LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS .   All parking and traffic circulation
areas shall be shown on the site plan required for development of the property.
   (1)   Distance from building being served . Off-street automobile parking
facilities shall be located as specified below. Where a distance is specified,
such distance shall be walking distance measured from the nearest point of the
parking area to the nearest entrance of the building that the parking area
serves.
      a.   One and two-family dwellings – on the same lot with the same
building they serve.
      b.   Three-family to six-family dwellings – on the same lot or parcel of
land as the building they serve. For the purpose of this requirement, a group
of such uses constructed and maintained under common ownership or management
shall be assumed to be on a single lot or parcel of land.
      c.   Multifamily buildings containing seven or more dwelling units - on
the same lot or parcel of land as the building they serve, or on a separate lot
or parcel of land (under common ownership) not more than 300 feet from the
nearest entrance to the main building being served.
      d.   Boarding houses and group/institutional residential uses - on the
same lot or parcel of land as the main building or buildings being served, or
upon properties that are contiguous and under common ownership.
      e.   Uses other than those specified above - on the same lot or parcel of
land as the main building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land,
(under common ownership or long-term lease) not over 1,000 feet of any entrance
of the main building.
   (2)   Off-site Parking . All off-site parking areas shall comply with the
provisions of Sec.
35-3417(g).
   (d)   USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING. The use of all required off-street parking
areas shall be limited to the parking of operable vehicles not for lease, rent,
or sale. Within residential districts, required parking spaces shall be used
only by operable cars and trucks. Semi/tractor trailers shall be prohibited in
all parking areas, except loading areas that comply with Sec.
35-5101.
   (e)   TRAFFIC CIRCULATION AND TRAFFIC CONTROL. Site circulation shall be
designed to provide for the safe and efficient movement of all traffic
entering, exiting, and on the site. Circulation shall be provided to meet the
individual needs of the site with specific mixing of access and through
movements. Circulation patterns shall conform with the general rules of the
road and all traffic control measures shall meet the requirements of the Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (f)   INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND TRAFFIC
CIRCULATION AREAS. All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas shall
be completed prior to building occupancy and shall be maintained in a dust-free
condition at all times. In no instance shall any off-street parking or traffic
circulation area be used as a storage area, except as provided for by Division
4 of Article III.
   (g)   OFF-STREET PARKING AND TRAFFIC CIRCULATION DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (1)   Surface and Marking . All open off-street parking areas shall be
improved with a compacted aggregate base, not less than 4 inches thick,
surfaced with not less than 1.5 inches of asphalt, thick-concrete or some other
comparable all-weather dustless material, extending at full width along a path
of access from the parking area to an alley, street, or paved driveway; except
as follows:
      a.   In parking areas accessory to single family dwellings, gravel or
paving units may be used in lieu of the above base and surfacing requirements.
      b.   In parking areas of less than 2,000 square feet, bituminous oil seal
coating, as per specifications supplied by the City engineer, may be
substituted for 1.5 inches of asphalt concrete surfacing.
      c.   In industrial zoning districts where parking areas are not adjacent
to residential zoning districts, the surface requirements of this subsection
shall not apply. All parking areas shall be treated for reasonable control of
dust. (Ord. No. 3033-2008; Sec.
35-5100(g)(1) repealed; new Sec.
35-5100(g)(1) enacted; 05/13/08)
   (2)   Curbing . All off-street parking areas designed to have head-in
parking adjacent to a landscaped area shall provide a tire bumper or curb of
adequate height and which is properly located to ensure that no part of any
vehicle will project into the landscape by more than 1.5 feet.
   (3)   Lighting . All off-street parking and traffic circulation areas
serving 6 or more cars shall be lit so as to ensure the safe and efficient use
of said areas during the hours of use. An illumination level of between 0.4 and
1.0 footcandles is recommended, however, the illumination level shall not
exceed the standards of Division 3 of this Article.
   (4)   Access . Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway that is wide enough and designed to provide a safe
and efficient means of vehicular access to    the parking space without
directly backing or maneuvering a vehicle into a public right-of-way exceeding
50 feet in width. All off-street parking and traffic circulation facilities
shall be designed with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or
alley in a manner which least interferes with traffic movements. No driveway
across public property, or requiring a curb cut, shall exceed a width of 25
feet. Off-street parking spaces for residential uses may be stacked or in front
of one-another for the same dwelling unit. Parking spaces located behind an
enclosed garage and located directly off a through aisle shall be a minimum of
20 feet deep.
   (5)   Signage . All signage located within, or related to, required off-
street parking or traffic circulation shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 3 of the Moline Code of    Ordinances (Advertising and Signs).
   (6)   Handicapped Parking Spaces . Parking for the handicapped shall be
provided at a size, number, location, and with signage as specified by City,
State and Federal regulations.
   (7)   Parking Space Design Standards . Other than parking required to serve
the handicapped, all off-street parking spaces shall comply with the minimum
requirements of
Table 35-5100.1. The minimum required length of parking spaces shall be 17
feet, plus an additional 1.5 foot vehicle overhang area at the end of the
stall. All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least 7
feet.
   (8)   Minimum Permitted Throat Length .
Table 35-5100.2. provides the minimum permitted throat length of access drives
serving parking lots, as measured from the right-of-way line along the
centerline of the access drive.
   (9)   Snow Storage . Required off-street parking and traffic circulation
areas shall not be used for snow storage.
   (10)   Parking Lot Design Standards . Horizontal widths for parking rows,
aisles, and modules shall be provided at widths no less than listed in
Table 35-5100.1. Additional design standards apply to “group developments” (see
Article III, Sec.
35-3419).
   (11)   Pedestrian Ways . Parking lots and access ways that separate building
entrances from any fronting street by more than 100 feet shall provide a
sidewalk and/or a delineated pedestrian way from the street or street sidewalk
to the building entrance. Sidewalks shall be designed according to the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and
constructed to meet the Supplemental Specifications and Construction Standards
as adopted by the City.
   (12)   Transit Design Standards . Any development larger than 2 acres which
does not include a required pedestrian way from the street to the building
entrance, or which includes one or more building entrances separated from the
street by more than 500 feet, shall be designed to accommodate internal bus
transit stops and movements. Roadways that curve or terminate shall provide a
minimum turning path as shown in the accompanying diagram. The City may review
transit design in consultation with the Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass
Transit District.
Diagram for Sec.
35-5100(g)(12):
Minimum Turning Path for Single-Unit Design Transit Vehicle
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-33.png]
   (13)   Landscaping . Parking lot landscaping shall comply with the
requirements of the paved area landscaping requirements in Division 2 of this
Article.
   (14)   Locational Prohibitions for Off-Street Parking Areas .
      a.    No portion of any parking space shall be located within a required
front yard, excepting, however, that two required parking spaces for a dwelling
unit may be located within the required front yard when sole access to the unit
is from a public street and provided said parking space is located on the
driveway affording access to a garage or carport to the unit. Any wall, fence
or hedge developed around any parking area shall be subject to the front yard
setback requirements of this ordinance in the same manner as the principal
structure.
      b.   Off-street parking shall not be located between the principal
structure on a residential lot and a street right-of-way, except within
residential driveways and parking lots designated on the approved site plan.
      c.   No private parking shall occur on street terraces, driveways, or any
other areas located within a public right-of-way not explicitly designated by
the City Council in
Chapter 20 of the Moline Code of Ordinances (Motor Vehicles and Traffic).
Table 35-5100.1.
Parking Layout Dimensions
Minimum Permitted Dimensions Parking Angle in Degrees (°)
                             0° (parallel)45°60°75°90°
                                               Parking Angle in Degrees (°)
Minimum Permitted Dimensions                   0°        45°    60°    75°    90°
                                               (parallel)
Stall Width at Parking Angle (SW)              9.0’     9.0’  9.0’  9.0’  9.0’
Stall Width Parallel to Aisle (WP)             17.90’   12.7’ 10.4’ 9.3’  9.0’
Stall Depth to Wall (D)                        9.0’ (a) 17.5’ 19.0’ 19.5’ 18.5’
                                                          (a)     (a)     (a)     (a)
Stall Depth to Interlock (DI)                  -          15.3’ 17.5’ 18.8’ -
Stall Length (including 1.5’ curb overhang)  18.5’    18.5’ 18.5’ 18.5’ 18.5’
(SL)
Aisle Width (AW)                               12.0’(b) 12.0’ 16.0’ 18.0’ 24.0’
                                                          (b)     (b)     (b)     (b)
Throat Length (right-of-way to parking angle)  Refer to requirements in
(T)                                            Table 35-5100.2.
Parking Module Width (PMW)
   Wall to Wall (Single-Loaded) (W1)        21.0’    29.5’ 35.0’ 37.5’ 42.5’
   Wall to Wall (Double-Loaded) (W2)        30.0’    47.0’ 54.0’ 57.0’ 61.0’
   Wall to Interlock (Double-Loaded) (W3)   -          44.8’ 52.5’ 56.3’ -
   Interlock to Interlock (Double-Loaded) (W-)         42.6’ 51.0’ 55.6’ -
Turning Path for Transit Vehicles (TP)         Refer to requirements and diagram at Sec.
                                               35-5100(g)(12)
 
   (a)   Parking spaces located behind an enclosed garage and located directly
off a thorough aisle shall be at least 30 feet deep.
   (b)   This dimension represents (AW) for one-way traffic. For two-way
traffic, add 8.0 feet to a maximum (AW) of 24.0 feet.
Diagram for Table 35-5100.1.: Typical Parking Layout Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-35.png]
(Ord. No. 3010-2009; Table 35-5100.1 repealed; new Table 35-5100.1 enacted; and
Diagram for Table 35-5100.1 repealed; new Diagram for Table 35-5100.1 enacted;
04/14/09; Ord. No. 3014-2009; Sec.
35-5100(g) repealed; new
35-5100(g) enacted; 06/09/09; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec.
35-5100 amended; 02/4/2025)
Table 35-5100.2.
Minimum Permitted Throat Length1
Land Use Type Scale of Development Type of Access Street
                                   Collector Arterial
Land Use       Type                 Scale of Development  Type of Access Street
                                                          Collector Arterial
                                    0-100 dwelling units  25 feet   -
Residential    Any Residential      101-200 dwelling      50 feet   75 feet
                                    units
                                    201+ dwelling units   75 feet   125 feet
                                    0-50,000 gross sq.    25 feet   50 feet
                                    ft.
                                    50,000-100,000 gross  25 feet   75 feet
               Office               sq. ft.
                                    100,000-200,000 gross 50 feet   100 feet
                                    sq. ft.
                                    200,001+ gross sq.    100 feet  150 feet
                                    ft.
               Sales & Service In-  0-2,000 gross sq. ft. 25 feet   75 feet
               Vehicle              2,001+ gross sq. ft.  50 feet   100 feet
               Entertainment,       0-15,000 gross sq.    25 feet   50 feet
Commercial     Indoor               ft.
                                    15,000+ gross sq. ft. 25 feet   75 feet
               Lodging              0-150 rooms           25 feet   75 feet
                                    151+ rooms            25 feet   100 feet
                                    0-25,000 gross sq.    25 feet   50 feet
                                    ft.
                                    25,001-100,000 gross  25 feet   75 feet
               All Other Commercial sq. ft.
               Uses                 100,000-500,000 gross 50 feet   100 feet
                                    sq. ft.
                                    500,001+ gross sq.    75 feet   200 feet
                                    ft.
                                    0-100,000 gross sq.   25 feet   50 feet
                                    ft.
Industrial     All Industrial Uses  100,001-500,000 gross 50 feet   100 feet
                                    sq. ft.
                                    500,000+ gross sq.    50 feet   200 feet
                                    ft.
All Other Uses 6+ parking spaces                          25 feet   50 feet
 
1 If the required throat length is more than one third of the lot depth, the
minimum throat length will be 25 feet for a collector and 50 feet for an
arterial.
   (h)   CALCULATION OF MINIMUM REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
   (1)   General Guidelines for Calculating Required Parking Spaces . The
requirements of subsection (3), below, shall be used to determine the minimum
required number of off-street parking spaces which must be provided for the
proposed use. Requirements are generally tied to the capacity of the use; the
gross floor area of the use; or the number of employees which work at the
subject property during the largest work shift. The term "capacity" as used
herein means the maximum number of persons that may be accommodated by the use
as determined by its design or by Moline Building Code regulations, whichever
number is greater. References herein to "employees on the largest work shift"
means the maximum number of employees working at the facility at any one time
during a single given day, regardless of the time period during which this
occurs, and regardless of whether any such person is a full-time employee. The
largest work shift may occur on any particular day of the week or during a
lunch or dinner period in the case of a restaurant. In all cases, one reserved
parking space shall be provided for each vehicle used by the operation during
business hours. Said spaces shall be in addition to those required by paragraph
(3), below. Where said parking needs of any land use exceed the minimum
requirements of this Division, additional parking spaces sufficient to meet the
average maximum weekly peak-hour parking space demand shall be provided by said
land use.
   (2)   Joint Parking Facilities .
      a.   Parking facilities which have been approved by the zoning
administrator to provide required parking for one or more uses shall provide a
total number of parking spaces which shall not be less than the sum total of
the separate parking needs for each use during any peak hour parking period
when said joint parking facility is utilized at the same time by said uses.
      b.   Each parking space designed to serve as joint parking shall be
located as specified in subsection (c), below, except as permitted by a special
use permit.
      c.   The applicant(s) for approval of a joint parking facility shall
demonstrate to the zoning administrator’s satisfaction that there is no
substantial conflict in the demand for parking during the principal operating
hours of the two of more uses for which the joint parking facility is proposed
to serve.
      d.   A legally binding instrument, approved by the City attorney, shall
be executed by any and all parties to be served by said joint parking facility.
This instrument shall be recorded with the Rock Island County Recorder’s
Office, and filed with the City clerk.
   (3)   Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements for Land Uses .
      a.   The off-street parking requirements for each principal land use are
listed on
Table 35-5100.3. Requirements for accessory uses shall be as indicated in
Division 4 of Article III.
      b.   Properties in the Moline Center Districts (SX-1, SX-2, GX-1, GX-2,
RX and CV), B-2 and NC zoning districts shall be exempt from the requirements
of
Table 35-5100.3. However, parking and circulation areas that are constructed in
the Moline Centre Districts B-2 and NC zoning districts shall comply with all
other provisions of this section and parking areas constructed within the B-
2 zoning district that are in excess of 2,000 square feet shall be considered a
group development and shall require the approval of a special use permit per
Section
35-3419.
(Ord. No. 3002-2019; Sec.
35-5100(h)(3)(b) repealed; new Sec.
35-5100(h)(3)(b) enacted; 03/05/19; Ord. No. 3014-2023; Sec.
35-5100(h)(3)b. amended; 04/18/23; Ord. No. 3007-2025;
Table 35-5100.2 amended; 02/4/25)
Table 35-5100.3 – Minimum Required Parking Spaces
LAND USE REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING STALLS
LAND USE                                                REQUIRED NUMBER OF
                                                        PARKING STALLS
                     One-Family Detached Dwelling       2 per unit
                     One-Family Detached Dwelling       1 per unit
                     (<6,000 sq/ft lot)
                     Zero Lot Line Development          2 per unit
                     Twin House                         2 per unit
                     Duplex                             2 per unit
                     Two-Flat                           2 per unit
                                                        2.5 per 3-bedroom
                     Town House                         unit; 2 per 2-bedroom
                                                        unit; 1 per 1-bedroom
                                                        unit
RESIDENTIAL                                             2.5 per 3-bedroom
                     Multiplex                          unit; 2 per 2-bedroom
                                                        unit; 1 per 1-bedroom
                                                        unit or efficiency
                                                        2.5 per 3-bedroom
                     Multiple-Family Dwelling           unit; 2 per 2-bedroom
                                                        unit; 1 per 1-bedroom
                                                        unit or efficiency
                     Manufactured Home                  2 per unit on a lot; 2
                                                        per unit within a park
                     Mobile Home/Mobile Home Park       2 per unit on a lot; 2
                                                        per unit within a park
                     Group/Institutional Residential
                     Small                              1 per every 3
                                                        residents
                                                        1 per every 3
                     Large                              residents, except as
                                                        listed below
                                                        1 per every 6
                                                        residents, plus 1 per
RESIDENTIAL                                             employee on the
                     (monastery or convent)             largest work shift,
                                                        plus 1 per every 5
                                                        chapel seats if public
                                                        may attend
                                                        1 per every 6 beds,
                                                        plus 1 per employee on
                     (nursing home)                     the largest work
                                                        shift, plus 1 per
                                                        every visiting doctor
                     Cultivation                        1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Agricultural Services              1 per employee on the
AGRICULTURAL                                            largest work shift
                                                        1 per every 200 sq.
                     On-Site Agricultural Retail        ft. of product display
                                                        area
                     Recreation, Outdoor – Passive,   1 per 4 patrons at
                     Public                             maximum capacity
                     Recreation, Outdoor – Active,    1 per 4 patrons at
                     Public                             maximum capacity
                     Recreation, Outdoor – Private    1.5 per campsite
                     Camping
                                                        1 per 3 patrons at
                     Institutional, Outdoor             maximum capacity,
                                                        except as listed below
                                                        1 per employee, plus 1
                                                        per 3 patrons at
                     (cemetery)                         maximum capacity of
                                                        all indoor assembly
                                                        areas
                                                        36 spaces per 9 holes,
                                                        plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work
                                                        shift, plus 50% of
                     (golf courses)                     spaces otherwise
                                                        required for any
                                                        accessory uses (e.g.
                                                        bars, restaurant,
                                                        etc.)
                     (swimming pool)                    1 per 75 sq. ft. of
                                                        gross water area
                     (tennis courts)                    3 per court
                     Institutional, Indoor – Day Care 1 per 5 students ,
                     Center                             plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work shift
                                                        1 per 3 patrons at
                     Institutional, Indoor – General  maximum capacity,
                                                        except as listed below
                     (church)                           1 per 5 seats at
                                                        maximum capacity
                                                        1 per 250 sq. ft. of
RECREATIONAL &                                          gross floor area, or 1
INSTITUTIONAL                                           per 4 patrons at
                     (community or recreation center)   maximum capacity,
                                                        whichever is greater,
                                                        plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work shift
                                                        1 per 3 patron seats
                     (funeral home)                     at maximum capacity,
                                                        plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work shift
                                                        2 per 3 patient beds,
                                                        plus 1 per shift
                     (hospital)                         doctor and each other
                                                        employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                                                        1 per 250 sq. ft. of
                                                        gross floor area, or 1
                                                        per 4 seats at maximum
                     (library or museum)                capacity, whichever is
                                                        greater, plus 1 per
                                                        employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                                                        1 per teacher and per
                     (elementary or junior high school) other shift member,
                                                        plus 1 per 2
                                                        classrooms
                                                        1 per teacher and
                     (senior high school)               other shift member, 1
                                                        per 5 non-bused
                                                        students
                                                        1 per shift member on
                                                        largest work shift,
                     (college or trade school)          plus 1 per 2 students
                                                        of the largest class
                                                        attendance period
                     Institutional, Indoor – Intensive1 per 3 patrons at
                                                        maximum capacity
                     Office
                     Personal and Professional Services
                     Sales and Service, General
                     Sales and Service, Intensive
                     Sales and Service, In-Vehicle
                     Sales and Service, Outdoor Display
                     Restaurant
                                                        1 per bedroom, plus 1
                     Lodging                            per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                                                        1 per 3 patron seats
                                                        or lockers, whichever
COMMERCIAL           Entertainment, Indoor              is greater; or 1 per 3
                                                        patrons at maximum
                                                        capacity
                     Entertainment, Outdoor             1 per 3 patrons at
                                                        maximum capacity
                                                        1 per 3 patrons at
                     Entertainment, Adult               maximum capacity, plus
                                                        1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Vehicle Repair and Maintenance,
                     Minor
                     Vehicle Repair and Maintenance,
                     Major
                     Animal Boarding Services
                                                        1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift,
                     Airport/Heliport                   plus 1 per 5
                                                        passengers based on
                                                        average daily
                                                        ridership
                     Terminal, Freight                  1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                                                        As per most recent
TRANSPORTATION &     Terminal, Passenger                edition of the ITE
UTILITIES                                               Parking Generation
                                                        Manual
                                                        1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift,
                                                        plus 1 per company
                     Public Services & Utilities,       vehicle normally
                     Distribution and Transmission      stored or parked on
                                                        premises, plus 1 per
                                                        500 sq. ft. of office
                                                        area.
                     Storage, Personal                  1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Storage and Wholesaling, Indoor    1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of
                                                        gross floor area
                                                        1 per 10,000 sq. ft.
                     Storage and Wholesaling, Outdoor   of gross floor area,
                                                        plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work shift
                     Contractor Shops                   1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                                                        1 per 20,000 sq. ft.
STORAGE, WHOLESALING Junkyard or Salvage Yard           of gross storage area,
& INDUSTRIAL                                            plus 1 per employee on
                                                        the largest work shift
                     Waste Disposal Facility            1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Industrial, Light                  1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Industrial, General                1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Industrial, Intensive              1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
                     Extraction Use                     1 per employee on the
                                                        largest work shift
 
   (4)   Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Infrastructure.
      a.   Residential Buildings. Residential buildings containing five or more
dwelling units where on-site parking is required must install electric vehicle
supply equipment or electric vehicle supply equipment infrastructure so that at
least 20 percent of the parking spaces are either EV-Ready or EV-Installed.
      b.   Nonresidential Buildings. Non-residential buildings where 30 or more
parking spaces are provided must install electric vehicle supply equipment or
electric vehicle supply equipment infrastructure so that at least 20 percent of
the parking spaces are either EV-Ready or EV-Installed.
      c.   Accessible EV-Ready or EV-Installed Spaces.
         1.   Installation of EV-Ready or EV-Installed parking spaces does not
increase or reduce the size, number, location, or signage for accessible
parking spaces for persons with disabilities required by City, State and
Federal regulations. An accessible parking space is not required by this
section if no accessible parking spaces are required by Code Sec.
35-5100(g)(6).
         2.   If the applicable regulations require accessible parking spaces
for persons with disabilities and this section requires the installation of EV-
Ready or EV-Installed parking spaces, then the number of accessible parking
spaces required that must also be EV-Ready or EV-Installed parking spaces is as
follows:
 
Total EV-Ready or EV-Installed Parking Minimum Number of Accessible EV-Ready or
Spaces                                 EV-Installed Parking Spaces
1 to 50                                1
51 to 75                               2
76 to 100                              3
More than 100                          3, plus 1 for every 60 additional EV-
                                       Ready or EV-Installed parking spaces
 
         3.   For the first required accessible EV-Ready or EV-Installed
parking space, the electric vehicle supply equipment infrastructure may be
located so that the electric vehicle supply equipment will be located on an
accessible route and may be shared by an accessible parking space and a parking
space not required to be accessible. Otherwise, both an accessible parking
space and a parking space not required to be accessible must be EV-Ready or EV-
Installed.
         4.   Any accessible EV-Ready or EV-Installed parking space must also
be available for use by an automobile that is not an electric vehicle provided
such automobile bears an appropriate handicapped parking decal or device.
(Ord. No. 3012-2023; Sec. 35-5100 (h)(4) enacted; 04/11/23; Ord. No. 3037-2023;
Table 35-5100.3 amended; 9/26/23; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Table 35-5100.3 amended;
02/4/25; Ord. No. 3039-2025; Table 35-5100.3 amended; 9/9/25)
SEC. 35-5101.   OFF-STREET LOADING STANDARDS.
   (a)   PURPOSE .   The purpose of this section is to prevent congestion of
public rights-of-way and private lots so as to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for the provision of
loading facilities on various sites.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY . Any use which has a gross floor area of 6,000 square
feet or more, and which requires deliveries or makes shipments, shall provide
off-street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations of this
section.
   (c)   LOCATION. No permitted or required loading space shall be closer than
50 feet to any property in a residential district unless completely enclosed by
building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination
thereof not less than 6 feet in height. No permitted or required loading space
shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two
streets. Loading spaces open to the sky may be located in any required yards. A
loading dock or separate loading door is not required.
   (d)   SIZE OF LOADING AREA . The first required loading space shall be
designed in accordance with
Table 35-5101.1. All remaining required loading spaces shall be a minimum of 25
feet in length. All required loading berths shall have a minimum vertical
clearance of 14 feet.
Table 35-5101.1.
Loading Standards
Design  Length in Bay Angle  Clearance in Berth Width Apron Space Total Offset
Vehicle Feet (L)  (a)        Feet (D)     in Feet (W) in Feet (A) in Feet (T)
Design  Length in Bay Angle  Clearance in Berth Width Apron Space Total Offset
Vehicle Feet (L)  (a)        Feet (D)     in Feet (W) in Feet (A) in Feet (T)
                                          10          63          113
                  90°       50           12          56          106
                                          14          52          102
                                          10          46          90
WB-40   50        60°       44           12          40          84
                                          14          35          79
                                          10          37          73
                  45°       36           12          32          68
                                          14          29          65
                                          10          77          132
                  90°       55           12          72          127
                                          14          67          122
                                          10          55          103
WB-50   55        60°       48           12          51          99
                                          14          46          94
                                          10          45          84
                  45°       39           12          40          79
                                          14          37          76
 
Sawtooth Bays
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-37.png]
   (e)   ACCESS TO LOADING AREA. Each loading space shall be located so as to
facilitate access to a public street or alley, and shall not interfere with
other vehicular or pedestrian traffic and shall not interfere with the function
of parking areas. In no instance shall loading areas rely on backing movements
into public rights-of-way.
   (f)   SURFACING AND MARKING . All open off-street loading spaces shall be
improved with a compacted aggregate base, not less than 7 inches thick,
surfaced with not less than 2 inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable
all-weather dustless material.
   (g)   USE OF REQUIRED LOADING AREAS . The use of all required loading areas
shall be limited to the loading and unloading of vehicles. Said area shall not
be used to provide minimum required parking spaces.
   (h)   LIGHTING . All loading areas shall be lit so as to not exceed the
standards of Division 3 of this Article.
   (i)   SIGNAGE. All signage located within, or related to, loading areas
shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 3, Advertising and Signs, of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
   (j)   DEPICTION ON REQUIRED SITE PLAN . All required loading areas shall be
depicted on the site plan required for the development of the property.
   (k)   CALCULATION OF REQUIRED LOADING SPACES .
   (1)   Residential Group/Institutional and Indoor Institutional Land Uses .
One loading space shall be required for each building having a gross floor area
of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square feet. For such uses located in buildings
having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater, two loading spaces
shall be required.
   (2)   Commercial (except Offices), Transportation and Utility, and Storage,
Wholesaling and Industrial Land Uses . One loading berth shall be required for
each building having a gross floor area of 6,000 square feet to 29,999 square
feet. For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 30,000
square feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any
portion of each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the
original 29,999 square feet.
   (3)   Office Land Uses . One loading berth shall be required for each
building having a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet to 99,999 square feet.
For such uses located in buildings having a gross floor area of 100,000 square
feet or greater, an additional loading berth shall be required for any portion
of each 100,000 square feet of gross floor area in addition to the original
99,999 square feet.
DIVISION 2. LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD STANDARDS
SEC. 35-5200.   PURPOSE.
   The intent of this Division is to provide minimum landscaping, screening and
buffering standards to protect and improve community appearance, mitigate the
environmental and aesthetic impacts of new development, prevent the creation of
nuisances and health hazards, encourage the use of stormwater best management
practices, and improve quality of life in the City of Moline.
SEC. 35-5201.   HOW TO USE THIS DIVISION.
   (a)   This division contains the standards which govern the amount, size,
type, installation and maintenance of required landscaping. This Division
recognizes the important and diverse benefits which landscaping provides in
terms of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community,
and implementing the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
   (b)   Each section of this Division is oriented to a specific category of
required landscaping. The landscaping requirements described in this Division
are cumulative in nature and are required for all development, except one and
two-family dwelling units and agricultural uses, in the following locations:
around building foundations, in developed lots, along street frontages, in or
around paved areas, and in bufferyards.
   (c)   In each instance, a "landscaping point" concept is used to provide a
maximum amount of flexibility in terms of the selection of plant materials.
Appendix A of this Chapter provides a listing of plant species fitting into the
“large deciduous tree,” “small deciduous tree,” “evergreen tree,” and “shrub”
categories used by this Division.
SEC. 35-5202.   LANDSCAPING POINTS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Most landscaping requirements are stated in terms of the number of
landscaping points required. The required number of landscaping points is
dependent upon the type, location, and size of the development. A different
number of points is awarded for each plant, depending upon its typical growth
rate, its mature height, and whether it is a deciduous or evergreen species. A
minimum installation size is required for each of these plant categories. These
requirements are as follows:
   (1)   LANDSCAPING POINT CREDITS . Credit for landscape plantings will be
granted based on the following schedule:
      a.   Large Deciduous Tree (mature height 25+ feet) : 150 points
      b.   Small Deciduous Tree (mature height <25 feet) : 60 points
      c.   Evergreen Tree : 100 points
      d.   Shrub (deciduous or evergreen): 20 points
      e.   Annual/Perennial Bed : 20 points per 20 square feet of bed
   (2)   MINIMUM LANDSCAPING SIZE : Required plants must be the following size:
      a.   Large Deciduous Trees . Two inches diameter, six inches above ground
level, and ten (10) feet in height when planted.
      b.   Small Deciduous Trees . One inch diameter, six inches above ground
level, and 6 feet in height when planted.
      c.   Evergreen Trees . Two inch diameter, six inches above ground level,
and 6 feet in height when planted.
      d.   Shrubs . 24 inches in height when planted; when used in a
bufferyard, 40% or more must reach a mature height of 6 feet or more.
SEC. 35-5203.   STREET FRONTAGE LANDSCAPING.
   One large deciduous tree shall be planted for each 50 feet of property line
along a public street right-of-way. Said trees shall be planted in the public
terrace equidistant from the curb and the normal sidewalk line or on the
private site within 10 feet of the property line adjoining the public right-of-
way, at the discretion of the zoning administrator in consultation with the
City Forestry Division.
Sec.
35-5203 Illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-39.png]
 
SEC. 35-5204.   PAVED AREA LANDSCAPING.
   One large deciduous tree and 60 points of additional landscaping shall be
planted for each 3,000 square feet of paving. Paving is defined as all hard
surfaced areas within the ground plane including but not limited to parking
stalls, driveways, trash enclosure pads, loading docks, sidewalks, plazas and
patios. Plants required in this section shall be installed within landscaped
islands within the paved area or within 15 feet of the edges of the paved area.
Sites containing 50 or more parking stalls or 20,000 square feet or more of
paved area shall incorporate a minimum one-half of the required trees and
points in curbed islands within the interior of the parking lot or paved area.
Tree islands and/or planting strips should be designed and placed throughout
the site so as to divide parking lots into sections, or “pods”, to minimize the
expansiveness of paving.
Sec.
35-5204 Illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-41.png]
 
SEC. 35-5205.   BUILDING PERIMETER LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping points equaling 150 shall be planted for each 100 lineal feet of
exterior building wall. Plants required by this section must be installed
within 30 feet of the building foundation, and should generally not include
large deciduous shade trees.
Sec.
35-5205 Illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-43.png]
SEC. 35-5206.   GENERAL YARD AREA LANDSCAPING.
   Landscaping points equaling 200 shall be planted for each 5,000 square feet
of total lot, site or parcel area. Landscaping required by this standard should
be placed where appropriate on the site, but generally in those areas not
covered by other provisions of this division. At least 50% of the general yard
landscaping should be located in street yards. General yard landscaping
requirements shall apply only if the street frontage, paved area, building
foundation and bufferyard landscaping area requirements of this division
combined, fail to achieve the minimum landscape surface area ratio requirements
of the applicable zoning district (Tables 35-3201.1 and 35-3301.1).
Sec.
35-5206 Illustration:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4386c6707b94e056a9de5fbad1b74837802d6a1b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-45.png]
SEC. 35-5207.   BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   PURPOSE .   The provisions of this section are intended to provide
specific landscape screening and bufferyard requirements to reduce the
incompatibility between zoning districts of different intensity and type. These
bufferyards will lessen the adverse impact of more intense land uses upon
residential areas and/or other areas of less intense use by reducing noise,
visual and other environmental impacts.
   (b)   REQUIREMENTS . In addition to landscaping and screening requirements
for street frontage areas, paved areas, building foundations and general yard
areas, these bufferyard standards will also apply to all developments, other
than one- and two-family dwellings. The bufferyard requirement is determined by
the difference between the zoning district of the subject property and the
zoning district of adjacent properties. The specific requirements are
identified in the following sections and in
Table 35-5207.1 “Schedule of Bufferyard Requirements." Bufferyards are required
only along interior property lines that abut another property and not along
streets or right-of-ways.
   (c)   DESCRIPTION OF BUFFERYARD TYPES A THROUGH D .
   (1)   Type A Buffer . The standard buffer within Type A is 8 feet wide and
contains the following number of required plants per 100 feet:
      a.   one large deciduous tree;
      b.   one small deciduous tree;
      c.   one evergreen tree; and
      d.   six shrubs.
   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several
alternative buffer widths to provide a Type A buffer, each with a different
amount of required plantings reflected as a multiplier of the required plant
units per 100 feet. The alternatives include the following:
      a.   20 foot wide buffer with 50% of the required plant units per 100
feet;
      b.   16 foot wide buffer with 60% of the required plant units per 100
feet;
      c.   12 foot wide buffer with 80% of the required plan units per 100
feet;
      d.   4 foot wide buffer with 90% of the required plant units and a
continuous hedge set back three feet from the property line or fence.
   (2)   Type B Buffer . The standard buffer with Type B is 10 feet wide and
contains the following number of required plant per 100 feet:
      a.   two large deciduous trees;
      b.   two small deciduous trees;
      c.   two evergreen trees; and
      d.   six shrubs.
   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several
alternative buffer widths to provide a Type B buffer, each with a proportionate
amount of required plantings. Type B buffer alternatives range from a 25 foot
wide buffer with 50% of the required plantings to a 5 foot wide buffer with 90%
of the required plantings and a continuous hedge or fence.
   (3)   Type C Buffer . The standard buffer within Type C is 15 feet wide and
contains the following number of required plantings per 100 feet:
      a.   three large deciduous trees;
      b.   two small deciduous trees;
      c.   three evergreen trees; and
      d.   nine shrubs.
   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several
alternative buffer widths to provide a Type C buffer, each with a proportionate
amount of required plantings. Type C buffer alternatives range from a 25 foot
wide buffer with 60% of the required    plantings to a six foot wide buffer
with 90% of the required plantings and a continuous fence.
   (4)   Type D Buffer. The standard buffer within Type D is 15 feet wide and
contains the following number of required plants per 100 feet:
      a.   three large deciduous trees;
      b.   two small deciduous trees;
      c.   five evergreen trees; and
      d.   fifteen shrubs.
   Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several
alternative buffer widths to provide a Type D buffer, each with a proportionate
amount of required plantings. Type D buffer alternatives range from a 25 foot
wide buffer with 60% of the required    plantings to an 8 foot wide buffer with
90% of the required plantings and a continuous fence.
Table 35-5207.1.
Schedule of Bufferyard Requirements
                 ZONING OF ADJACENT PROPERTY
                     R-2 R-4 R-6 C-2 O-1 ORT B-1 NC B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2
                 R-2 N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 R-4 A   N   N   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 R-6 A   N   N   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 C-2 A   N   N   N   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 O-1 A   A   A   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
SUBJECT PROPERTY ORT D   D   D   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 B-1 B   A   A   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 NC  B   A   A   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 B-2 C   B   B   B   N   N   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 B-3 C   B   B   B   C   C   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 B-4 C   C   C   B   C   C   N   N  N   N   N   N   N
                 I-1 C   C   C   C   D   C   B   B  A   N   N   N   N
                 I-2 D   D   D   D   D   C   B   B  A   A   A   N   N
         ZONING OF ADJACENT PROPERTY
             R-2 R-4 R-6 C-2 O-1 ORT B-1 NC     B-2 B-3 B-4 I-1 I-2
         R-2 N   N   N   N   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         R-4 A   N   N   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         R-6 A   N   N   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         C-2 A   N   N   N   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
SUBJECT  O-1 A   A   A   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
PROPERTY ORT D   D   D   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         B-1 B   A   A   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         NC  B   A   A   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         B-2 C   B   B   B   N   N   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         B-3 C   B   B   B   C   C   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         B-4 C   C   C   B   C   C   N   N      N   N   N   N   N
         I-1 C   C   C   C   D   C   B   B      A   N   N   N   N
         I-2 D   D   D   D   D   C   B   B      A   A   A   N   N
A – Type A Bufferyard  B – Type B BufferyardC – Type C Bufferyard
D – Type D Bufferyard  N – No Buffer Required
 
SEC. 35-5208.   GENERAL LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   REQUIRED LANDSCAPE PLAN . All development required to provide
landscape or bufferyard areas under the provisions of this Code shall provide a
detailed landscape plan showing the location and types of all proposed
landscaping and buffering materials. In addition, the plan should include
calculations for the landscaping plant types and points as required by this
Division and calculations for those proposed.
   (b)   CUMULATIVE REQUIREMENTS . All of the landscaping and bufferyard
requirements of this Division shall be counted toward meeting the minimum
landscape surface area ratios of each zoning district. However, all landscape
areas specified for street frontages, paved areas, building foundations and
bufferyards shall be provided as required herein even if such requirements
exceed the minimum landscape surface area ratio of the applicable zoning
district. The landscaping requirements for general yards (Sec.
35-5206.) shall apply only if all other landscape area and bufferyard
requirements, combined, are less that the minimum landscape surface area ratio
of the applicable zoning district.
   (c)   CALCULATING LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS. In calculating
the number of required landscaping points under the provisions of this
Division, all areas and distances on which required calculations are based
shall be rounded to the nearest whole number of square feet or linear feet. Any
partial plant derived from the required calculations of this Division (for
example 23.3 shrubs) shall be rounded to the nearest whole plant (23 shrubs).
   (d)   MOST SIGNIFICANT PROVISIONS APPLY . In the event that the provisions
of this Division specify two or more types of landscaping requirements for the
same area of a property (e.g. paved area requirement and bufferyard
requirement) the requirement specifying the greater number of plant materials
and points shall apply.
   (e)   INSTALLATION.
   (1)   Any and all landscaping and bufferyard material required by the
provisions of this Code shall be installed on the subject property, in
accordance with the approved plan within 180 days of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for any building on the subject property.
   (2)   Surety.
      a.   If the subject property is to be occupied prior to the installation
of all required landscaping and bufferyard material, the property owner shall
sign an agreement stating the intent to install the landscaping within the 180
day period. This agreement shall also contain a statement indicating that there
are fines associated with not complying with this agreement.
      b.   If a phase of development is approved per the requirements of this
Code, required landscaping may be split into amounts which are applicable to
each phase.
      c.   Governmental units to which these bond and guarantee provisions
apply may, in lieu of said contract or instrument of guarantee, file a
resolution or letter from officers authorized to act in its behalf, agreeing to
comply with the provisions of this Division.
   (3)   Existing, healthy plant material which meets the requirements of this
Division and which will be preserved on the subject property following the
completion of development may be counted as contributing to the landscaping
requirements. Furthermore, existing trees having a diameter of at least 5 times
the minimum required shall be counted as double landscaping credit if they are
preserved. This credit shall be in the form of double points or double
quantities, as applicable.
   (4)   All required landscaping and bufferyard areas shall be covered with a
minimum of 75% of living plant material. In addition to the tree and shrub
requirements, all areas shall be covered with lawn or native ground cover.
   (5)   The exact placement of required plants and structures as depicted on
the required detailed landscape plan, shall be the decision of each property
owner within the requirements of this Division, except that the following
requirements shall be met:
      a.   Evergreen shrubs shall be planted in clusters in order to maximize
their chance for survival.
      b.   Where a combination of plant materials, and/or berming and/or
fencing is used in a bufferyard, the fence and/or berm shall be located toward
the interior of the subject property and the plant material shall be located
toward the exterior of the subject property.
      c.   A property owner may establish through a written agreement, recorded
with the Rock Island County Recorder’s Office, that an adjacent property owner
shall agree to provide a partial or full portion of the required bufferyard on
an immediately adjacent portion of their land, thereby exempting the developer
from providing all or a portion of the bufferyard on his property.
      d.   In no manner shall landscaping or bufferyard materials be selected
and/or located in a manner that results in the creation of a safety or
visibility hazard.
      e.   The restrictions on types of plants listed in this Division shall
apply.
      f.   The minimum area for planting all types of trees shall be no less
than 160 square feet. Deciduous trees may not be planted in any area with a
width less than 5 feet. Evergreen trees may not be planted in any area with a
width less than 10 feet. Shrubs may not be planted in any area with a width
less than 2 feet.
      g.   The minimum spacing for planting large deciduous trees and evergreen
trees shall be no less than 15 feet. The minimum spacing for planting small
deciduous trees shall be no less than 12 feet. These spacing requirements may
be reduced within bufferyards.
   (f)   MAINTENANCE. The continued and continual maintenance of all required
landscaping and bufferyard materials shall be a requirement of this Code and
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property on which said
materials are required. This requirement shall run with the property and is
binding upon all future property owners. Development of any and all property
following the effective date of this Code shall constitute an agreement by the
property owner to comply with the provisions of this Division. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this Code, and
shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement procedures and
penalties.
   (g)   USE OF REQUIRED BUFFERYARD AND LANDSCAPED AREAS. Any and all required
bufferyards or landscaped areas may be used for passive recreation activities.
Said areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails provided that: no
required material is eliminated; the total width of the required bufferyard, or
the total area of required landscaping, is maintained; and all other
regulations of this Code are met. In no event, however, shall swimming pools,
tennis courts, sports fields, golf courses, or other such active recreation use
be permitted in such areas. Furthermore, in no instance shall any parking be
permitted in such areas, nor shall any outdoor display of storage of materials
be permitted in such areas. Paving in such areas shall be limited to that
required for necessary access to, through, or across the subject property, or
for stormwater management purposes where the requirements of this Code are
otherwise met.
   (h)   LOCATION IN UTILITY EASEMENTS . Planting in utility easements is at
the risk of the property owner. Any plants that must be removed because of
utility work within such easements shall be replaced by the property owner at
his or her cost.
   (i)   ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE. In lieu of complying with the points and
specifications stated herein for determining the nature and extent of
landscaping and buffering required on any property, a landscape plan may be
submitted where practical difficulties or a particular hardship exists that
renders strict compliance impossible or impractical. Such hardship exists only
where the zoning administrator finds one (1) or more of the following
conditions to exist and that reduced requirements may be warranted. Economic
hardship, standing alone, will not be considered a practical difficulty or a
particular hardship.
   (1)   The view of the landscaping will be blocked by a change in grade,
natural vegetation, or man-made features.
   (2)   In the case of building perimeter landscaping, a building setback is
not required or an existing building or public sidewalk occupies the area where
the landscaping would otherwise be required.
   (3)   In the case of bufferyards, the adjacent property has previously been
developed with an active land use that is permitted in the subject property’s
zoning district, and the zoning administrator determines that a reduction in
the nature and extent of the landscaping and screening will not have a negative
impact on the adjacent property.
   (4)   A clear conflict exists with underground or overhead utilities or
infrastructure.
SEC. 35-5209.   FENCE AND WALL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all fences and walls erected after
the adoption of this Code, whether or not the fence or wall is required to be
installed as per the provisions of this Division or elsewhere in this Code:
   (1)   All walls and fences shall be durable, weather resistant, rust proof,
and easily maintained. Acceptable materials include: wrought iron, plastic,
wood, brick, stone, stucco, wire and other materials with a similar look.
Unacceptable materials include glass, tires, unfinished concrete blocks,
recovered salvaged materials, or similar materials. Except for fences in
Resource and Industrial Districts, wire fences are prohibited in front of the
principal structure and in side and rear yards that are adjacent to public or
private street right-of-way, not including alleys, except those securing the
property of the City of Moline or the property of the Moline-Coal Valley
Community Unit School District 41. Wire fences are no longer permitted in front
of the principal structure of utility uses and all existing wire fences in
front of the principal structure of utility uses are, upon the effective date
of this Ordinance, declared legal-nonconforming. No such legal-nonconforming
fence may be replaced except with permitted materials and all such legal-
nonconforming fences must be replaced with permitted materials no later than
December 31, 2030.
   (2)   All walls and fences shall be kept in good condition, plumb, and true,
and without damage. All walls and fences shall be designed and constructed to
withstand winds during typical Illinois storm events.
   (3)   All fences with two sides of different quality and/or with posts on
one side shall be erected such that the higher quality and/or side without
posts faces the adjoining property.
   (4)   Fence and wall setbacks and height requirements for each zoning
district shall be as indicated on Tables 35-3201.3 and 35-3301.2.
   (5)   Fence height is measured vertically from the finished grade at the
base of the fence to the highest point of the fence, inclusive of any materials
attached to the fence, such as lattice, horizontal board or post projections.
(Ord. No. 3019-2020; Sec. 35-5209(1) repealed; new Sec. 35-5209(1) enacted; 7-
14-20: Ord. No. 3036-2020; Sec. 35-5209(1) repealed; new Sec. 35-5209(1)
enacted; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-5209 amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-5210.   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Within a triangle formed by two intersecting public street right-of-way
lines and a third line joining a point along each right-of-way line 15 feet
from their intersection:
   (1)   No wall, fence or earth mound shall be permitted which materially
impedes vision above the height of 2.5 feet;
   (2)   No vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision
between the height of 2.5 feet and 8 feet.
(Ord. No. 3005-2008; Art. V, Div. 2 repealed; new Art. V, Div.2 enacted; 02/12/
08)
DIVISION 3. ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
SEC. 35-5300.   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Division is to establish lighting requirements for
personal safety and crime prevention while regulating any spill-over of light
and glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses near a
light source to promote personal and traffic safety and to prevent the creation
of public nuisances.
SEC. 35-5301.   LIGHTING PLAN.
   Except for single family and two family dwellings, plans for required
parking lot and security lighting shall be approved by the zoning administrator
prior to approval and issuance of permits. Plans, at appropriate scale, shall
be based on accurate, approved final site plans and shall depict all exterior
lighting as to its location, orientation and configuration. This must include,
but not be limited to:
   (1)   Luminaire height;
   (2)   Luminaire and standard technical specifications;
   (3)   Intensity of illumination shall be measured at the least point of
illumination and the greatest point of illumination when measured from ground
level;
   (4)   Type of light source (Metal Halide, High Pressure Sodium, etc.);
   (5)   Hours of illumination; and
   (6)   A photometric plan superimposed on the site plan for each
classification of lighting with points no greater than 30 feet apart.
SEC. 35-5302.   ILLUMINATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (1)   Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian
walkways, entrance areas, and yard areas within 30 feet of the building. Neon,
LED, incandescent or gas infused lighting to outline doors, windows (installed
indoors or outdoors), signs, architectural features, and building facades is
prohibited. This is not regulating string lights that are holiday decorations.
No wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate areas for motor vehicle
parking or access unless the zoning administrator finds the following:
      a.   That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated
purpose in this section;
      b.   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
      c.   The proposed luminaire has a cutoff angle of less than or equal to
66 degrees.
   (2)   Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or access shall
be illuminated with free-standing luminaries. Free-standing luminaries are
permitted to be a maximum of 30 feet in height with a 3 foot support, for a
maximum height from the ground of 33 feet. When a luminaire is located within
500 feet of a residential zoning district, the maximum permitted luminaire
height shall be 25 feet. All measurements shall be taken from the average
elevation of the finished grade within 10 feet of the structure or fixture to
the highest point of the luminaire. All luminaries must have a total cutoff
angle equal to or less than 90 degrees. The use of exterior lighting with a
cutoff angle greater than 90 degrees shall be permitted only when the zoning
administrator finds the following:
      a.   That the lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this
section;
      b.   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
      c.   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision
creating a hazard for    vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (3)   In no instance shall Low Pressure Sodium fixtures be used to meet the
requirements of this Division unless the zoning administrator finds the
following:
      a.   That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated
purpose in this section;
      b.   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
      c.   The color distortion effect of Low Pressure Sodium lighting will not
create a hindrance to crime prevention and investigation.
   (b)      INTENSITY OF LIGHTING .
   (1)   The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting from a
property shall not exceed one foot-candle when measured at any boundary line
with an adjoining property. This provision may be waived by the zoning
administrator when:
      a.   The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose of
this Division;
      b.   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public
health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
      c.   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision
creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (2)   All parking lot and parking structure lighting located within 300 feet
of a residential zoning district may be illuminated not more than one hour
before the start of business and shall be extinguished within one hour after
the end of business except as approved by the zoning administrator after
finding the following:
      a.   The property has been identified as an area where the incidence or
potential for crime warrant additional lighting;
      b.   Additional lighting is required to increase visibility of a property
which is not readily accessible for police during routine patrol; and
      c.   The use of timers, sensors, or other devices that produce a reduced
lighting level that does not conflict with the stated purpose in this section.
   (c)   GLARE/ILLUMINATION . In all zoning districts, any lighting shall be
arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining property. A person shall not
conduct a use that has a source of illumination that produces glare clearly
visible beyond a property line or creates a sensation of brightness within a
visual field so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of vision. The
use of lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers, or prismatic control devices shall
be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting to facilitate compliance
with this requirement.
   (d)   PARKING STRUCTURES . Luminaries used for illumination of designated
pedestrian walkways in parking structures (parking areas serving more than two
residential dwellings or any non-residential land use within a structure with
one or more levels) shall be of a significantly different color value than
luminaries used for illuminating vehicle parking and drive aisles.
(Ord. No. 3006-2023; Sec. 35-5303 amended; 03/07/23)
SEC. 35-5303.   COMPLIANCE.
   Any new lighting installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall
be in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Any lighting in
existence before the effective date of this ordinance that does not comply with
these requirements shall be considered legally nonconforming and may remain,
subject to the following provisions:
   (1)   ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING LIGHTING.
      a.   When poles and support structures are removed and replaced for
reasons other than acts of God or accidents, they must be replaced with
luminaries, poles and supports that comply with this Division; and
      b.   When luminaries are replaced, they must be replaced with luminaries
that comply with all provisions of this Division.
      c.   When twenty-five percent (25%) or more of exterior lighting fixtures
are replaced, all exterior lighting on the site must be replaced with exterior
lighting fixtures that comply with all provisions of this Division. This is
calculated as installation of new lighting posts and/or non-post mounted
lighting fixtures based on the total lighting installed by the type of
mounting. For example, if over twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall-mounted
fixtures are to be replaced, all wall-mounted fixtures must be brought into
conformance while nonconforming freestanding fixtures may remain.
   (2)   REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF PARKING LOT SURFACE.  A parking lot or
portion thereof shall be considered “removed and replaced” when any portion of
the existing parking surface material is removed and a new surface is
installed. When less than 50% of the gross area of the parking lot surface on a
particular site is removed and replaced, only the parking area replaced must be
provided with lighting in compliance with this Division. If greater than 50% of
the parking area on a particular site is removed and replaced at one time, the
entire parking lot on the site where the construction activity occurs must be
in full compliance with this Division.
   (3)   NEW PARKING LOTS OR PARKING LOT ADDITIONS. When a new parking lot or
addition to an existing parking lot is constructed, the new lot or lot addition
must be provided with lighting in compliance with this Division.
   (4)   RENOVATIONS. When the cost of renovation of the principal structure
reaches the thresholds detailed in Sec.
35-3112(c)(3), all existing lighting shall be brought into compliance to the
extent required in said section.
   (5)   NEW STRUCTURES, ADDITIONS, OR REPLACEMENTS. When a site is improved
with new structures, additions to, or replacements of existing structures, the
lighting for the new structure, addition or replacement on the site must be
upgraded with complying lighting. Existing noncompliant parking lot lighting
must be upgraded with complying lighting over a portion of the parking area
that is equivalent to the amount of parking that would be required for the new
structure, addition or replacement. In the event that the new structure,
addition or replacement is accompanied by a new or replaced parking area, the
amount of upgraded lighting area shall be that required under this Division.
Where a conflict with Section
35-3112(d) of this Code exists, the stricter provision requiring the
installation of more compliant lighting shall govern.
   (6)   DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. When a development application is made for a
site for a non-administrative permit, the plan commission or city council, may
as a condition of approval, require compliance with any or all of the standards
of this Division and the extent of compliance required in such cases may be
greater than that otherwise required in this Division, if deemed reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and to achieve the
proposes of this Division.
(Ord. No. 3006-2023; Sec. 35-5303 amended; 03/07/23)
SEC. 35-5304.   POINT OF MEASUREMENTS.
   Any light intensity measurement taken at the property line shall be measured
at the greatest point of illumination of said property line. Any measurements
to determine the minimum and maximum lighting levels internal to a site will be
measured by positioning the light meter horizontally at ground level at the
greatest and least points of artificial illumination.
SEC. 35-5305.   PUD MODIFICATIONS.
   Modifications to the requirements of this Division may be approved as part
of a final development plan for a planned development, as per Sec.
35-2205, pursuant to the provisions provided:
   (1)   That any deviations from lighting standards established by this
Division are clearly delineated in the plan submission reviewed by the plan
commission;
   (2)   That any deviations are consistent with the purposes of this Division;
   (3)   That the minimum light level proposed provides a minimum of 75% of the
illumination required in this Division;
   (4)   That the height of support poles above grade does not exceed the
maximum permitted by this Division by more than 25 percent, except that no
development shall be allowed for increased support pole height within 500 feet
of a residential zoning district; and
   (5)   That no increase in glare occurs as a result of deviation from the
adopted standards.
DIVISION 4. GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SEC. 35-5400.   COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Any use established after the effective date hereof shall comply with
the minimum performance standards contained in this Division.
   (b)   Existing uses which are not in compliance with the performance
standards contained in this Division are exempt, except where a use did not
comply with performance standards in effect prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance.
   (c)   Uses which do not comply shall not be increased in scope or magnitude.
Such uses shall be permitted to be enlarged or altered, provided the addition
or change conforms with the applicable performance standards.
SEC. 35-5401.   CERTIFICATION MAY BE REQUIRED.
   When necessary, the zoning administrator may require the applicant to
provide, at his expense, certification by a registered professional engineer or
other qualified person that the performance standards for a proposed use can be
met.
SEC. 35-5402.   SMOKE EMISSIONS.
   The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not exceed a
density or equivalent opacity permitted by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency (IEPA).
SEC. 35-5403.   PARTICULATE MATTER.
   (a)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any process which
emits particulate air contaminants exceeding the air quality standards of the
IEPA or its successor.
   (b)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an applicant must
submit to the zoning administrator documentation of the IEPA approval of the
applicant’s application and permit to install or alter equipment or control
equipment if such a permit is required under the applicable IEPA standards.
   (c)   In the event the IEPA lowers its air quality standards, the IEPA
standards in effect on the adoption date of this ordinance shall remain
applicable. Under these circumstances, prior to the issuance of a building
permit, an applicant must submit to the zoning administrator documentation from
a licensed engineer demonstrating that the use complies with the IEPA standards
in effect at the time this Ordinance was adopted.
   (d )    In the event the IEPA raises its air quality standards, the new IEPA
standards shall apply, and the applicant must comply with the requirements of
subsection (b), above.
SEC. 35-5404.    AIRBORNE HAZARDOUS MATTER.
   The release of airborne hazardous matter from any operation or activity
shall not exceed the fractional quantities of the threshold limit values
adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a
hazardous substance is not listed, verification that the proposed level of
hazardous matter will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or
injurious to plant and animal life will be required. The measurement of
hazardous matter shall be on the average of any 24 hour sampling period.
   (1)   In all zones other than Industrial, the release beyond lot lines of
airborne hazardous matter shall not exceed one-eighth of the threshold limit
values.
   (2)   In all industrial zones the release of airborne hazardous matter shall
not exceed one-eighth of the threshold limit values beyond zone boundary lines.
SEC. 35-5405.    VIBRATION.
   Earth borne vibrations from any operation or activity shall not exceed the
displacement values shown in Table 35-5505.1. Vibration displacements shall be
measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three
mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less
than the vibration displacement permitted. The maximum displacements shall be
determined by the following formula:
   D =  K       where D = displacement in inches
      f      where   K = a constant given in Table 35-5505.1.
               f = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the
ground in cycles per second
Table 35-5405.1.
Vibration Performance Standards
 
                                  Impulsive
Zone and Place of                 (at least 1 second    Less Than 8 Pulses Per
Measurement            Continuous rest between pulses   24 Hour Period
                                  which do not exceed 1
                                  second duration)
B Zones and I Zones:   0.003      0.006                 0.015
At Lot Line
I-1 Zone and I-2 Zone:
1. At Zone Boundary    0.030      0.060                 0.150
Line
2. At R Zone,
Recreational Area or   0.003      0.006                 0.015
School Boundary Line
 
SEC. 35-5406.   GLARE AND HEAT.
   (a)   The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to glare created during
the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental
traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations.
   (b)   No directed sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from
temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, shall be
visible at the lot line of the subject property. (See also, Division 3 of this
Article.) Furthermore, there shall be no transmission of heat or heated air so
as to be discernible (by a healthy observer such as the zoning administrator or
a designee) at the lot line. Solar systems regulated by the State shall be
entitled to the protection of its provisions.
SEC. 35-5407.   SEWAGE WASTE.
   Sewers and sewage discharge shall meet all applicable City and IEPA
requirements.
SEC. 35-5408.   STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLES.
   (a)   All combustible material shall be stored in such a way as to include,
where necessary, access drives to permit free access of firefighting equipment.
   (b)   The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals, when stored in
above-ground tanks, shall be no closer to the lot line or any principal
building than the distance indicated below:
Capacity Per Container (Gallons) Minimum Separation Distance
Capacity Per Container (Gallons) Minimum Separation Distance
Less than 125                    None
125 to 250                       10 Feet
251 to 500                       10 Feet
501 to 2,000                     25 Feet
2,001 to 30,000                  50 Feet
30,001 to 70,000                 75 Feet
70,001 to 90,000                 100 Feet
 
   (c)   The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be located in
accordance with the Moline Fire Code regarding tank storage underground, except
the minimum distance between such underground tanks and any residential zone
boundary shall be at least 10 feet.
SEC. 35-5409.   NOISE.
   (a)   No person or entity shall emit beyond the boundaries of his or her
property any noise that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or
with any lawful business or activity within the limits of the City of Moline so
as to violate the City of Moline’s Noise Performance Standards or any other
federal or state laws or regulations, as amended.
   (b)   Noise Performance Standards . The standards for noise emissions in
Title 35, Subtitle H, Chapter 1, Part 901, except Section 901.107(a) and (d),
of the Illinois Administrative Code, as amended, adopted by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board, are hereby adopted by reference as the “noise
performance standards” for the City of Moline. Except as stated herein and
unless a different meaning of a term is clear from its context, the definitions
of terms used in the Sections stated above are the same as those set forth in
900.101.
   (c)   Under the City of Moline’s Noise Performance Standards, daytime hours
shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., local time, and nighttime hours shall be
from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., local time.
   (d)   Noise measurements shall be taken in accordance with the procedures
specified as follows:
   (1)   Insofar as practicable, sound measurements shall be made while the
source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as
necessary, at other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum,
and fluctuating rates.
   (2)   All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following
procedures:
      a.   Enforcement personnel shall, to the extent practicable, identify all
sources contributing to the noise at the point of measurement;
      b.   Measurements shall be taken at or within the property line of the
affected person;
      c.   No outdoor measurements shall be taken during periods when wind
speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour;
      d.   Measurements shall be taken in keeping with the instructions of the
manufacturer of the measuring equipment.
   (3)   The report for each measurement session shall include, but not be
limited to:
      a.   The date and times at which measurements are taken;
      a.   The results of the calibration check;
      a.   The weather conditions;
      a.   The identification of all monitoring equipment;
      a.   A description of the source(s) and its operating cycle;
      a.   The total sound level (level with the sources in question
operating); and
      a.   The background sound level (level without the sources in question
operating).
   (4)   When measuring sound, the sound level meter shall be set for A-
weighting, linear averaging, and the proper range (i.e., where the sound level
registers in the upper measurement range without exceeding its limits). The
sample duration shall be at least ten (10) seconds.
   (5)   The measuring instrument shall be placed at a minimum height of three
(3) feet above the ground and from any reflective surface. The microphone shall
be held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by
the measuring instrument's manufacturer.
   (6)   If temporary sound sources unrelated to the measurements are plainly
audible, such as aircraft flyovers, barking dogs, or moving motorcycles, the
measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have negligible
effect on the sound levels of interest.
   (e)   Objectionable sounds which are not easily measured shall be controlled
so as to not become a nuisance to adjacent properties or uses, as set forth in
Section
21-1100(7).
   (f)   Noise measurements under this section are not required to establish a
violation of Section
21-1100(7) (nuisance noise).
   (g)   Exemptions . In addition to the exceptions provided in the City of
Moline Noise Performance Standards, as amended, the following occurrences shall
be exempt from the noise performance standards:
   (1)   Emergency repairs or necessary maintenance to public works, utilities,
or infrastructure.
   (2)   Construction and heavy equipment which are in compliance with
Chapter 21 of the Moline Code of Ordinances, “NUISANCES IN GENERAL.”
   (3)   Maintenance of private property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:
00 p.m.
   (4)   Safety signals, warning devices, pressure relief valves, and similar
equipment.
   (5)   Transportation vehicles in lawful use or transit on designated
streets, routes, or ways.
   (6)   Portable or permanent residential backup generators and equipment used
during a temporary utility outage.
   (7)   Clock towers, bells or carillons.
(Ord. No. 3009-2014; Sec.
35-5409 repealed in its entirety; new Sec.
35-5409 enacted; 05/06/14)
SEC. 35-5410.   ODOR STANDARDS.
   (a)   The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities, except that these standards shall not apply to odors created during
the construction of the principal use on the subject property, or by incidental
traffic, parking, loading, or maintenance operations. Public landfills and
public sanitary sewage treatment plants shall be exempted from the requirements
of this section as essential public services.
   (b)   Except for food preparation and cooking odors emanating from
residential land uses, and odors associated with property development and
maintenance (such as construction, lawn care, permissible open burning, and the
painting and roofing of structures), and permitted agricultural operations, no
odor shall be created for periods exceeding a total of 15 minutes per any day
(which are detectable by a healthy observer such as the zoning administrator or
a designee who is unaffected by background odors such as tobacco or food) at
the boundary of the subject property, where said lot abuts property within any
residential, office, or commercial zoning district.
SEC. 35-5411.   ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any planned or
intentional source of electromagnetic radiation for such purposes as
communication, experimentation, entertainment, broadcasting, heating,
navigation, therapy, vehicle velocity measurement, weather survey, aircraft
detection, topographical survey, personal pleasure, or any other use directly
or indirectly associated with these purposes which does not comply with the
then current regulations of the Federal Communication Commission regarding such
sources of electromagnetic radiation. Further, said operation in compliance
with the Federal Communications Commission shall be unlawful if such radiation
causes an abnormal degradation in performance of other electromagnetic
radiators or electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of
proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious radiation, harmonic content,
modulation or energy conducted by power or telephone lines. The determination
of “abnormal degradation in performance” and “of quality and proper design”
shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the
latest principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical
Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries
Association. In case of any conflict between the latest standards and
principles of the above groups, the following precedents in the interpretation
of the standards and principles shall apply: (1) American Institute of
Electrical Engineers, (2) Institute of Radio Engineers, and (3) Electronic
Industries Association.
SEC. 35-5412.   HAZARDOUS OR NOXIOUS MATERIAL STANDARDS.
   (a)   The requirements of this section apply to all land uses and
activities.
   (b)   No use shall discharge across the boundaries of the subject property,
or through percolation into the subsoil, hazardous or noxious material in such
concentration as to be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare, cause injury or damage to the property or business.
   (c)   No use shall discharge at any point into any public or private
sewerage disposal system or stream, or into the ground, any liquid or solid
materials except in accordance with the regulations of the IEPA.
   (d)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit, inhibit or diminish the
City’s ability to enforce its Spiller Pays Ordinance located at
Chapter 11, Article III, of the Moline Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 3060-2006; new Sec.
35-5412(d) enacted; 12/12/06)
DIVISION 5. QUALITY BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN AND MATERIALS STANDARDS
SEC. 35-5500.   APPLICABILITY.
   The standards of this division shall apply to the uses within those zoning
districts as provided for in Divisions 2 and 3 of Article III.
SEC. 35-5501.   BUILDING DESIGN.
   For development permitted by–right, a site plan review and approval shall be
required that incorporates these design standards in addition to the review
criteria contained in Sec.
35-2105. For development permitted as a special use, these design standards
shall be in addition to the special use permit review criteria contained in
Sec.
35-2206. Accordingly, applicants shall submit drawings, material samples and
other information in sufficient detail as necessary for the appropriate review
authority to determine compliance with these requirements.
   (1)   DESIGN FOCUS . The front façade of the building and main entrance
shall be designed as focal points to the building. The main entrance shall
incorporate devices such as canopies, overhangs,    arcades, raised parapets
over the door, larger door openings, display windows, accent colors and/or
other architectural details such as moldings. The remaining portions of the
building shall be designed in a way that complements and is consistent with the
building’s street façade.
   (2)   VISUAL INTEREST . At a minimum, façades facing public or private
streets shall incorporate at     least one of the following features along each
applicable façade:
      a.   Recesses and projections along at least 20% of the length of the
building façade.
      b.   Windows, awnings, arcades or other significant architectural
features used along at least 60% of the front building façade length or 30% of
the side or rear building façade length.
      c.   Brick, natural or fabricated all-weather stone covering at least 50%
of the area when applied to the front building façade or 25% of the area when
applied to a side or rear building façade.
   (3)   MATERIALS. All materials exposed to view on the front façade and at
the main building entrance shall be high quality durable materials that are
visually pleasing. The remaining building façades shall utilize materials that
are compatible with the materials used on the buildings front façade and at the
main building entrance.
   a.   The following materials are permitted:
   1.   Concrete, (cast-in-place or precast panels). The following finishes for
concrete surfaces exposed to view are permitted:
       Exposed aggregate
       Hammered
       Sandblasted
       Cement-based acrylic cement
   2.   Masonry. The following masonry materials are permitted:
       Face Brick
       Concrete masonry units as follows:
          Splyt face fluted block with exposed aggregate face
          Corduroy fluted block with exposed aggregate face
          Break off fluted block with exposed aggregate face
          Rock face (non scored) block with exposed aggregate face
       Stone (ashlar veneer or panels), natural or manufactured
       Glass Block
       Glazed or Porcelain Tile
   3.   Exterior Insulation & Finish System (EIFS)
   4.   Portland Cement Stucco
   5.   Structural Steel or Aluminum
   6.   Glass
   7.   Architectural metal wall panels on up to 35% of the front facade.
   8.   Metal on canopies, soffits and as an accent material for trim, fascias
and fascia bands located at the top of a wall.
   9.   Siding. The following siding materials are permitted on all façades:
   .   Cedar Siding (painted transparent or opaque finish)
   .   Redwood Siding (painted transparent or opaque finish)
.      Cedar Shingles (painted transparent or opaque finish)
.      Fiber cement siding (painted, transparent or opaque finish)
.      Engineered Wood
.      Finished Corrugated Metal
         b.   The following materials are prohibited on any façade:
            1.   Unfinished corrugated metal wall panels/siding
            2.   Plywood wall panels/siding
            3.   Vinyl, aluminum, or steel siding
   (4)   BUILDING COLOR .
      a.   In general building colors shall be complimentary with other
buildings on the block.
      b.   Primary Colors:
         ∙      Primary colors are prohibited for use as a wall color for all
building façades in R-2, R-4, R-6, R-7, O-1 and ORT Districts.
         ∙      Primary colors in off-white pastel shades are permitted as a
wall color for all building façades except the front façade and at the main
building entrance in B-1, NC, and B-2 Districts.
         ∙      Primary colors used as an accent color are permitted for trim
and door and window frames; and permitted for logos and signage attached to
building walls.
         ∙      Primary colors are prohibited for metal roofing of any type in
R-2, R-4, R-6, R-7, O-1 and ORT Districts.
   (5)   ROOFING MATERIALS. The following roofing materials are permitted for
all roof surfaces exposed to view:
         a.   Asphalt Shingles ( includes fiberglass reinforced asphalt
shingles)
         b.   Cedar Shingles/Shakes
         c.   Slate Roofing
         d.   Concrete roofing and metal roofing that replicates slate, cedar
shingles/shakes and/or clay tile roofing
         e.   Copper Roofing
         f.   Prefinished Metal Roofing Panels
         g.   Clay Tile Roofing
   (6)   OTHER MATERIALS. Other materials, not listed above, may be considered
for approval upon application for an exception to the requirements of this
Division. The application shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for
consideration after completion of concept design, but before preparation of
construction/bidding documents, and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
         a.   Material samples including color chips.
         b.   The material manufacturer’s product literature and technical
specifications.
         c.   Elevation views of all principal building façades. All materials
intended for each façade    shall be clearly shown and identified in each view.
         d.   The applicant shall respond to the following criteria and his or
her request shall be evaluated in relation to the following criteria:
            1.   Compatibility of proposed material(s) with those of nearby
buildings.
            2.    Compatibility of proposed material(s) with other materials to
be used on the exterior of the structure.
            3.    Compatibility of proposed material(s) with other material
elements of the subject     property’s yard or landscape features.
            4.   Similarity of texture, color, and internal and external
material quality to those materials permitted under this Division.
         e.   Appeal of zoning administrator’s Action. Any interested party,
aggrieved by or claimed accordance with
Table 35-2100.1 and this section. Appeals of denials made by the Zoning
Administrator on items for which they make a recommendation and are not the
final decision maker, shall be heard by the Plan Commission in accordance with
these provisions.
            Approval Criteria. Findings. In granting an appeal to action on a
non-administrative development permit, the Plan Commission shall find:
            1.   The zoning administrator has acted in a manner inconsistent
with the provisions of the Code or other applicable local, state or federal
law; or
            2.   The zoning administrator has made erroneous findings of fact
based on the evidence and testimony on the record; or
            3.   The zoning administrator has failed to fully consider
mitigating measures or revisions offered by the applicant that would have
brought the proposed project into compliance; or
            4.   The zoning administrator has acted arbitrarily, capriciously
and/or abused its discretion, in which case such arbitrariness, caprice and
abuse shall be detailed in written findings along with other relevant
information; or
            5.   In addition to one or more of the above findings, the Plan
Commission shall find the appellant was present in person or by lawful
representative at the hearing during which the original decision was made or
was otherwise on the official record concerning the development application.
(Ord. No. 3007-2009; Sec.
35-5501(3)(f) repealed; new Sec.
35-5501(3)(f) enacted; 03/17/09; Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec.
35-5501(3) amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-5502.   MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   Ground and roof mounted equipment, including ventilators and satellite
dishes greater than 30 inches, not including solar energy systems, shall be
screened from view (100% opacity) or isolated so as not to be visible from any
adjacent street or residential district, up to 300 feet away. The appearance of
roof screens shall be coordinated with and be integral to the building design
to maintain a unified appearance. It is not the intent of this requirement to
increase the height of the screening significantly above that of the equipment
in order to screen it from view from tall buildings or from higher ground.
(Ord. No. 3007-2025; Sec. 35-5502 amended; 02/4/25)
SEC. 35-5503.   UTILITIES.
   All telephone and cable television lines, electrical services and
distribution lines shall be placed underground, except that this provision
shall not include meters, electric and telephone service pedestals,
transformers, three-phase feeder lines, sub-transmission and transmission
lines, electrical substations and such other facilities as the utility may deem
necessary to install utilizing overhead-type construction. These aboveground
utilities shall be located as close as possible to the building as permitted by
the adopted Moline Electrical Code and screened from view of public streets to
the extent possible through the use of landscaping or screening walls that are
integrated into the overall site design.
APPENDIX A
Detailed Classification of Plant Species
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Large Deciduous Trees (Climax
Species)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Large Deciduous Trees (Climax Species)
Botanical Name    Common Name   Growth Form       Adaption and Remarks
                                Rate
Acer saccharum                                    Rich soil; salt-sensitive; oval when young; yellow, orange or scarlet fall
                  Sugar Maple   S      Round      color.
“Green Mountain”                              Scorch-resistant; leathery leaves.
Carya ovata       Shagbark                        Native and very adaptable, salt-sensitive, fruit-nut, lawn tree.
                  Hickory
Ginkgo bilboa     Ginkgo               Pyramidal  Very urban, dioecious, females produce smelly fruits, golden yellow fall
                                S                 color.
“Fastigiata”  Sentry Ginkgo        Columnar   Seedless.
                  Walnut                          Best in public open spaces or lawns; not to be used as a street tree;
Juglans nigra     Eastern       F                 poisonous to other plants within the drip zone; susceptible to caterpillars
                  Walnut                          and leaf-spot disease.
                  Black Walnut
                                                  Extremely sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; dry
Quercus alba      White Oak     S      Round      soil; subject to iron chlorosis; red fall color; very difficult to
                                                  transplant; excellent lawn or shade tree.
Quercus bicolor   Swamp White   S      Round      Very tolerant of urban conditions; moist to wet, intolerant of alkaline
                  Oak                             soil; tolerates poor drainage; difficult to transplant; yellow fall color.
Quercus           Bur Oak       S      Round      Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; dry to wet
macrocarpa        Mossycup Oak                    soil; no fall color; very difficult to transplant.
                                                  Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; moist, acid
Quercus palustris Pin Oak       M      Pyramidal  soil; pendulous lower branches; red fall color; iron chlorosis on alkaline
                                                  soil; lawn tree; cultivar “Sovereign” best for streets.
Quercus rubra     Northern Red                    Sensitive to soil compaction; tolerant of urban conditions; pyramidal when
(also known as    Oak           M      Round      young; red fall color; well-drained soil; fast-growing for oaks; excellent
Quercus Borealis) Red Oak                         lawn, shade, and street tree.
Acer nigrum       Black Maple   M      Oval       Does well in poor, dry soils; red to bright gold fall color; excellent for
                                                  lawn, shade, or street.
Acer platanoides  Norway Maple  M      Round      Shallow root system; not to be used along streets.
“Cleveland”                 F      Oval-      Uniform, dense foliage.
                                       upright
“Columnare”                        Columnar   Indistinct central leader.
“Crimson King”                                Keeps deep purple leaf color throughout summer; susceptible to sun scald,
                                                  bark-splitting and transplant shock.
“Drummondii”  Harlequin     S      Round      Variegated, cream-edged leaves.
                  Norway Maple
“Emerald Queen”             F      Oval       Vigorous; crisp foliage.
“Globosum”    Globe Norway  S      Globe      Useful on a standard under utility wires; 20’ height.
                  Maple
“Greenlace”                        Round      Deeply divided, fine-textured leaves.
“Royal Red”                 S      Round      Best for purple summer foliage.
“Shwedleri”                        Round      New foliage reddish; bronze by summer.
“Summershade”               F                 Rapidly growing cultivar; deep green, large, leathery leaves.
Acer rubrum                            Round      Moist, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; smooth gray bark; yellow,
                                                  orange, or red fall color; salt-sensitive.
“Armstrong”   Red Maple            Fastigiate No fall color; light gray bark.
“Autumn Flame”Scarlet Maple F                 Early scarlet fall color.
“Bowhall”     Swamp Maple          Oval       Orange fall color.
“Red Sunset”                                  Late, scarlet fall color.
“Schlesingeri”                                Red-orange fall color.
                  Silver Maple                    Heart and fast-growing; most soil; tolerates poor drainage; fine-textured;
Acer saccharinum  Soft Maple    F      Vase       weak-wooded (develops heart rots after fifty years, limbs may fall);
                  White Maple                     yellowish or no fall color.
                  River Maple
                  Silver Maple                    Heart and fast-growing; most soil; tolerates poor drainage; fine-textured;
Acer saccharinum  Soft Maple    F      Vase       weak-wooded (develops heart rots after fifty years, limbs may fall);
                  White Maple                     yellowish or no fall color.
                  River Maple
“Blair”                     Very              Strong branch structure; storm-resistant.
                                Fast
“Pyramidale”  Upright              Pyramidal  Improved branch structure.
                  Silver Maple
“Silver Queen”Seedless             Round      Seedless.
                  Sugar Maple
“Wieri”       Cutleaf Sugar                   Shredded leaves; pendulous branches.
                  Maple
Aesculus hippocas Horsechestnut M      Round      Urban; course; showy, white May flowers; litter problem; no fall color;
tanum                                             difficult to transplant; pest or disease problems may limit use.
                  European
Alnus glutinosa   Alder         F      Oval       Rich or wet soils; produces catkins; possible winterkill.
                  Black Alder
Betula lutea      Yellow Birch  M      Round      Drooping branches; moist well-drained soils; yellow-orange bark; rusty
                                                  yellow fall color.
Catalpa speciosa  Northern      F      Oval       Poor, dry soil; showy, white June flowers; coarse; litter problem; no fall
                  Catalpa                         color.
Celtis            Common        M      Vase       Tolerates alkaline soils; “pebbled” bark; yellowish fall color; pest or
occidentalis      Hackberry                       disease problem may limit use.
Fagus grandifolia American      S      Oval       Moist, rich soil; smooth, gray bark; yellow-bronze fall color; difficult to
                  Beech                           transplant; salt-sensitive; sensitive to soil compaction.
Fagus sylvatica   European      S      Round      Moist, rich soil; less difficult to transplant than American Beech; several
                  Beech                           cultivars available; excellent lawn tree.
Fraxinus                               Round      Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; dioecious; orange to purple fall
americana         White Ash     M                 color; tolerates urban conditions.
“Autumn Purple”                    Round      Seedless; superior fall color.
“Rosehill”                         Oval       Seedless; superior fall color.
Fraxinus          European Ash  F      Round      Jet-black buds; no fall color.
excelsior
“Aurea”       Golden        M      Round      Golden, young foliage, twigs and fall color; green summer foliage.
                  European Ash
“Hesseri”     Hesse                Round      Simple leaves.
                  European Ash
Fraxinus nigra    Black Ash     M      Irregular  Deep, rich, moist soils; tolerates wet soils; yellow fall color; scaly
                                                  bark.
Fraxinus                               Oval;      Dry to wet soils; tolerates poor drainage; salt-tolerant; twiggy and weak-
pennsylvanica =                        irregular  wooded; yellow fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use; tolerates
                  Green Ash     F                 urban conditions.
“Marshall’s   Red Ash              Oval       Seedless; glossy, dark green foliage; improved habit of growth.
Seedless”
“Summit”                           Upright    Finer textured foliage.
Gleditsia                                         Tolerates poor drainage; thornless, as are all of the following; pest or
triancanthos                           Vase       disease problem may limit use; salt-tolerant; yellow fall color.
inermius
“Imperial”    Thornless            Round      Podless; low-growing; flat-topped; pest or disease problem may limit use.
“Shademaster” Honeylocust   F      Irregular  Podless; vase shape in age; pest or disease problem may limit use.
“Skyline”                          Upright    Podless; tends to form central leader; good golden fall color; pest or
                                                  disease problem may limit use.
“Sunburst”                         Irregular  Podless; yellow new foliage; poor branch structure; pest or disease problem
                                                  may limit use.
Gymnocladus       Kentucky      M      Upright    Moist, rich soil; coarse and rugged; dioecious; yellowish fall color.
dioica            Coffeetree
Juglans cinerea   Butternut     S                 Needs good soil and consistent moisture; fairly good shade tree;
                                                  susceptible to butternut decline.
Larix decidua     European             Pyramidal  Full sun; graceful, fine-textured; transplant in spring before buds open;
                  Larch         F                 yellow fall color.
“Pendula”                                     nteresting weeping branches.
Larixkaempferi    Japanese      M      Wide-      Similar to European Larch, more picturesque.
                  Larch                Pyramidal
                  American             Narrow-
Larix laricina    Larch         M      Pyramidal  Hardy; drought tolerant; used in shelterbelts.
                  Tamarack
Liriodendron      Tuliptree     F      Upright    Rich, moist soil; unique leaves and interesting June flowers; yellow fall
tulipifera                                        color; purchase from northern source.
Platanus          Sycamore                        Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; mottled bark; coarse, maple-like
occidentalis      American      F      Pryamidal  leaves; no fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use.
                  Planetree
Populus alba      White Poplar  F      Fastigate  Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; mottled bark; coarse, maple-like
“Pyramidalis”                                 leaves; no fall color; pest or disease problem may limit use.
Populus deltoides                      Fastigiate Hardy, fast growing; golden yellow fall color; tolerates drought; brittle;
                  Eastern       Very              may produce "cotton"; too large for homes.
“Robusta”     Poplar        fast   Upright    Seedless.
“Siouxland”                                   Larger greener leaves; seedless; uniform in shape; hardy.
“Cottonless”                                  Seedless; many similar species available.
Populus           Bigtooth      F      Narrow     Moist, sandy, gravelly soils; not shade tolerant; yellow fall color.
grandidentata     Aspen
Prunus serotina   Black Cherry  M      Oval       Dry soil; white flowers and black fruits in drooping racemes; orange fall
                                                  color; pest or disease problem may limit use.
Taxodium          Baldcypress   F      Pyramidal  Moist, intolerant of alkaline soil; tolerates poor drainage; sun; bronze
distichum                                         fall color; fine texture; purchase from northern source.
                  American
                  Linden
Tilia americana   Basswood      M      Round      Sensitive to soil compaction; salt-sensitive; coarse; rich soils.
                  Linden Tree
                  Linn Tree
Tilia cordata     Littleleaf    S      Pyramidal  Urban; moist soil; fragrant flowers; poor branch structure, needs training
                  Linden                          while young; yellow fall color.
“Chancellor”                                  Uniform, upright habit.
“Greenspire”                                  Improved branching habit.
Tilia x euchlora  Redmond       M      Pyramidal  Urban; dark green foliage.
“Redmond”     Linden
KEY:   S=Slow      M=Medium   F=Fast
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Small Deciduous Trees
Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Small Deciduous Trees
Botanical Name     Common Name   Growth Form       Adaption and Remarks
                                 Rate
Aesculus x carnea  Ruby          S      Round      Rich, most soil; red flowers.
“Briotii”      Horsechestnut
Aesculus glabra    Ohio Buckeye  S      Round      Rich, moist soil; yellow-green flowers; orange fall color.
Alnus glutinosa    European      F      Oval       Wet; tolerates poor drainage; catkins; cone fruits; no fall
                   Alder                           color.
Betula nigra       River Birch   M      Vase       Wet to dry, intolerant of alkaline soils; tolerates poor
                                                   drainage; pinkish, peeling bark.
Betula papyifera   Paper Birch   M      Oval       Cool, moist soil; white, peeling bark; golden yellow fall
                                                   color; pest or disease problem.
Betula pendula     Cutleaf                         Cool, moist soil; dissected leaves; yellow fall color; pests &
“Gracilis”     European      M      Weeping    disease.
                   Birch
Betula platyphylla Japanese      M      Pyramidal  White bark; some resistance to bronze birch borer.
japonica           White Birch
Cercidiphyllum     Katsuratree   M      Columnar   Moist soil; dioecious; form controlled by pruning, wide
japonicum                                          spreading if multi-trunked; yellow to red fall color.
Cladrastis lutea   American      S      Round      Moist, rich soil; smooth, light gray bark; fragrant, white
                   Yellowwood                      June flowers in large clusters; yellow fall color.
Magnolia acuminata Cucumbertree  F      Pyramidal  Inconspicuous, greenish flowers; pink to red fruits; coarse
                                                   foliage; no fall color.
Nyssa sylvatica    Black Gum     S      Pyramidal  Moist soil; tolerates poor drainage; dense habit; dioecious;
                                                   orange to scarlet fall color; difficult to transplant.
Phellodendron      Amur Corktree M      Round      Urban; dry soil; dioecious; compound leaves; corky bark;
amurense                                           yellow fall color.
Prunus maackii     Amur          M      Round      Amber exfoliating bark; does well in containers.
                   Chokecherry
Prunus padus       Harbinger
commutata          European Bird S      Round      Sun; early to leaf out in spring; pest or disease problem.
                   Cherry
Prunus             Pin Cherry    M      Upright    Poor, dry soil; sun; graceful; shortlived; suckering; red
pennsylvanica                                      fruits; orange to red fall color.
Prunus sargentii   Sargent       M      Upright    Sun, well-drained soil; early, pink flowers; red fall color.
                   Cherry
                   Golden                          Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; bright yellow twigs; fine-
Salix alba tristis Weeping       F      Weeping    textured; litter problem.
                   Willow
Ulmus parvifolia   Chinese Elm   M      Vase       Disease resistant; exfoliating bark.
Acer ginnala       Amur Maple    M      Round      Sun, shade; red fruit; red fall color.
Alnus rugosa       Speckled      F      Round      Wet soil; tolerates poor soil; lenticeled bark.
                   Alder
Amelanchier        Downy         S      Upright    Dry soil; shade; gray bark; white flowers; yellow to red fall
arborea            Serviceberry                    color; edible fruits.
Amelanchier x      Apple         S      Spreading  Semi-shade; large, white flowers, edible fruits.
grandiflora        Serviceberry
Amelanchier laevis Allegany      S      Upright    Moist soil; shade; white flowers; orange to red fall color,
                   Serviceberry                    edible fruits.
Carpinus           American      S      Spreading  Moist soil; shade; smooth, gray muscle-like trunks; orange
caroliniana        Hornbeam                        fall color.
Cercis canadensis  Eastern       M      Spreading  Sun or shade; purplish-pink flowers; yellow fall color;
                   Redbud                          purchase form northern source.
Cornus             Pagoda        M      Spreading  Cool, moist soil; shade; blue-black berries on red stalks;
alternifolia       Dogwood                         early, maroon fall color.
Crataegus crus-    Thornless                       Urban; sun; persistent, brick red fruits; orange to red fall
galli              Cockspur             Spreading  color; no thorns.
“Inermis”      Hawthorn
Crataegus          Paul's                          Heavy soil; sun; double, scarlet flowers in late May; no fall
laevigata          Scarlet                         color; pest or disease problem.
“Paulii”       Hawthorn      S      Upright
“Superba”      Crimson Cloud                   Single, scarlet flowers; resistant to leaf spot.
                   Hawthorn
Crataegus x        Lavalle       S      Upright    Urban; sun; glossy foliage; bronzy-red fall color.
lavallei           Hawthorn
Crataegus mollis   Downy         S      Upright    Sun; large, red, early-ripening fruit; yellow fall color; pest
                   Hawthorn                        or disease problem.
Crataegus          Washington    M      Upright    Urban; sun; latest blooming; small, persistent, orange-red
phaenopyrum        Hawthorn                        fruits in clusters; orange fall color.
Crataegus punctata Dotted        S      Spreading  Moist, heavy soil; sun; picturesque; pest or disease problem
                   Hawthorn                        may limit use.
Crataegus x “TobaToba Hawthorn S                 Sun; double, pink, fragrant flowers; glossy leaves; red
                                                   fruits; dwarf-15.
Elaeagnus                                          Dry, alkaline soil; sun; fragrant, inconspicuous flowers;
angustifolia       Russianolive  F      Round      silver-gray foliage; no fall color; pest or disease problem
                                                   may limit use.
Magnolia x         Dr. Merrill                     Rich soil; sun; white, many-petaled flowers; difficult to
loebneri           Magnolia      M      Pyramidal  transplant.
“Merrill”
Magnolia x         Saucer        S      Round      Rich soil; sun; large pink flowers; difficult to transplant.
soulangiana        Magnolia
Malus species &    Flowering                       All require sun and well drained soil. They all possess a high
cultivars          Crabapples                      degree of resistance to the apple scab disease.
                   Adams                           Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rose-red flowers; 5/8"
Malus “Adams”  Flowering     M      Spreading  diam., persistent, deep red fruits.
                   Crabtree
Malus baccata      Jack                 Upright    Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white flowers; tiny 1/3-
jackii             Flowering     M      spreading  1/2"diam., dark red fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Bob White                       Moderately susceptible to fire blight; white flowers; 5/8"
Malus “Bob White�Flowering     M      Rounded    diam., persistent, yellow fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Weeping
Malus “Candied   Candied Apple        Weeping    Slightly susceptible to scab; pink flowers; 5/8" diam.,
Apple”           Flowering                       persistent cherry-red fruits; foliage tinged with red.
                   Crabtree
                   Centurian            Narrow-    Disease resistant; rose-red flowers; 5/8" diam., persistent,
Malus “Centurian�Flowering            Upright    cherry-red fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   David                           Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; white glowers;
Malus “David”  Flowering     M      Rounded    1/4-1 1/2" diam., reddish fruits for in alternate years.
                   Crabapple
                   Dolgo                Upright-   Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; white flowers; 1
Malus “Dolgo”  Flowering     M      Spreading  1/4-1 1/2" diam., persistent red fruits.
                   Crabtree
Malus “Donald    Donald Wyman                    Disease-resistant; white flowers; 3/8” diam.; persistent red
Wyman”           Flowering     M      Rounded    fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Dorothea                        Moderately susceptible to scab; clear pink semi-double
Malus “Dorothea�Flowering     S      Horizontal flowers; 1/2" diam., yellow fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Gibb's Golden
Malus “Gibb's    Gage                 Rounded    Disease resistant; white flowers; 1" diam., persistent, yellow
Golden Gage”     Flowering                       fruits.
                   Crabtree
Malus “Indian    Indian Summer                   Disease resistant; rose-red flowers; 5/8-3/4" diam., red
Summer”          Flowering            Rounded    fruits.
                   Crabtree
Malus “Mary      Mary Potter                     Moderately susceptible to fire blight and scab; white flowers;
Potter”          Flowering     S      Horizontal 1/2" diam., red fruits; 10' height.
                   Crabtree
Malus “Ormiston  Ormiston Roy                    Slightly susceptible to fire blight; white flowers, 3/8"
Roy”             Flowering     M      Rounded    diam., persistent, yellow fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Profusion            Rounded-   Slightly susceptible to fire blight; rose-red flowers; 1/2"
Malus “Profusion�Flowering     M      Spreading  diam., deep red fruits; bronze-green foliage.
                   Crabtree
                   Red Jewel                       Moderately susceptible to scab; white flowers; 1/2" diam.,
Malus “Red Jewel�Flowering            Horizontal persistent, bright red fruits.
                   Crabtree
                   Robinson             Upright-   Disease resistant; rose-red flowers; 3/8" diam, persistent,
Malus “Robinson�Flowering            Spreading  bright red fruits, bronze-green foliage.
                   Crabtree
                   Sentinel             Narrow-    Slightly susceptible to fire blight and scab; pale pink
Malus “Sentinel�Flowering            upright    flowers; 1/2" diam., persistent, bright red fruits.
                   Crabtree
Malus “White     White Cascade                   Disease resistant; white flowers, 1/2" diam., yellowish
Cascade”         Flowering     S      Weeping    fruits.
                   Crabtree
Ostrya virginiana  Hophornbeam   S      Pyramidal  Dry soil; shade; catkins; elm-like leaves; yellow fall color.
Prunus americana   American Plum F      Horizontal Dry soil; sun; suckering habit; white flowers; yellow to
                                                   orange fall color.
Prunus cerasifera  Newport Plum  M      Round      Sun; reddish-purple summer foliage.
“Newportii”
Prunus virginiana  Chokecherry                     Dry, infertile soil; suckering habit; white flowers; yellow to
                                 M      Upright    orange fall color.
“Canada Red” orShubert                         Sun; foliage changes from green to purple in early summer.
“Shubert”      Chokecherry
Pyrus calleryana   Callery Pear  M      Oval       Sun; early, white flowers; late red fall color.
and cultivars
Saliz matsudana    Corkscrew or                    Wet soil; tolerates poor drainage; sun; twisted branches; pest
“Tortuosa”     Contorted     F      Upright    or disease problem may limit use.
                   Willow
Saliz pentandra    Laurel Willow M      Round      Wet soil; sun; foliage glossy, dark green; dense habit.
Sorbus alnifolia   Korean        S      Oval       Cool soil; simple leaves; small flowers and fruits; orange to
                   Mountainash                     red fall color; pest or disease problem.
Sorbus aucuparia   European      M      Oval       Cool soil; orange fruits; pest or disease problem.
and cultivars      Mountainash
Sorbus decora      Showy         S      Upright    Cool Soil; large, reddish fruits; pest or disease problem.
                   Mountainash
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree S      Horizontal Sun; large, pyramidal, cream-white flower clusters in June;
                   Lilac                           tan fruits.
KEY:   S=Slow      M=Medium   F=Fast
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Evergreen Trees
Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Evergreen Trees
Botanical Name        Common Name Growth Form Adaption and Remarks
                                  Rate
Abies concolor        White Fur   M      70'  Dry soil; heat; gray-green
                                              foliage.
                      Norway                  Deep soil; dark green foliage;
Picea abies           Spruce      F      75'  long cones; pendulous
                                              branchlets.
Picea glauca          White       M      50'  Moist soil; sun; light green
                      Spruce                  needles.
Picea omorika         Serbian     S      50'  Sun; narrow habit; pendulous
                      Spruce                  branchlets.
                      Blue                    Sun; urban; blue needles;
Picea pungens glauca  Colorado    S      60'  stiff, formal habit.
                      Spruce
Pinus cembra          Swiss Stone S      50'  Sun; narrow habit.
                      Pine
                      Austrian                Sun; urban; stout, dark green
Pinus nigra           pine        M      50'  needles, pest or disease
                                              problem.
Pinus resinosa        Red Pine    F      50'  Dry soil; sun; reddish bark;
                                              yellow-green winter color.
                      Eastern                 Moist soil; sun; picturesque;
Pinus strobus         White Pine  M      75'  soft, green foliage, pest or
                                              disease problem.
Pinus sylvestris      Scots Pine  F      50'  Dry soil; sun; orange bark;
                                              bluish needles.
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir M      70'  Half-shade; flat, dark green
                                              needles.
Tsuga Canadensis      Canada      M      75'  Moist soil; soft, feathery
                      Hemlock                 foliage.
                      American                Wet soil; half-shade; light
Thuja occidentalis    Arborvitae  M      40'  green, soft, scale-like
                                              foliage.
Juniperus chinnensis  Keteleer    S      20'  Dry soil; sun; green foliage;
“Keteleeri”       Juniper                 large fruits.
Juniperus chinnensis  Mountbatten S      20'  Dry soil; sun; narrow, columnar
“Mountbatten        Juniper                 form; large fruits.
Juniperus virginiana  Eastern Red             Dry soil; sun; brownish winter
                      Cedar                   color.
                      Burke                   Fine-textured, gray-green
“Burkii”          Eastern Red             foliage.
                      Cedar
                      Canaert
“Canaertii”       Eastern Red S      20'  Dark green, tufted foliage.
                      Cedar
                      Silver                  Silver-gray foliage; informal
“Glauca”          Eastern Red             habit.
                      Cedar
                      Hill Dundee             Gray-green foliage turns purple
“Hillii”          Eastern Red             in winter, no fruits.
                      Cedar
Picea                 Black Hills S      20'  Dry soil; sun; narrow, dense
glauca “Densata” Spruce                  habit.
                      Japanese                Shade; urban, deep green
Taxus cuspidata       Yew         S      20'  needles; often sold as Taxus
                                              cuspidata “Capitata.”
Thuja occidentalis    Pyramidal   M      25'  Narrow columnar form.
“Fastigiata”      Arborvitae
Thuja occidentalis    Techny      S      20'  Deep green foliage, year round.
“Techny”          Arborvitae
KEY:   S=Slow      M=Medium   F=Fast
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Tall Deciduous)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Tall Deciduous)
Botanical Name       Common Name         Form            Adaption and Remarks
                                                         Shade; alkaline soil;
                                                         white flowers; edible
Amelanchier sp.                                          purple fruits;
(See also low trees) Serviceberry        Upright         smooth, gray bark;
                                                         yellow to orange fall
                                                         color; fireblight a
                                                         problem.
                                                         Dry, alkaline soils;
Caragana arborescens Siberian Peashrub   Erect, Oval     yellow flowers; green
                                                         twig.
Chionanthus                                              Moist soil; shade;
virginicus           Fringetree          Spreading       white flowers; blue
                                                         fruits; coarse.
                                                         Moist soil; shade;
                                                         white flowers; blue
Cornus alternifolia  Pagoda Dogwood      Spreading       fruits; horizontal
                                                         branches; early,
                                                         maroon fall color.
                                                         Shade; urban; yellow
                                                         flowers in April;
Cornus mas           Corneliancherry     Oval            flower buds may be
                     Dogwood                             injured or killed
                                                         during some winters;
                                                         edible red fruits.
                                                         Dry or wet soils;
Cornus racemosa      Gray Dogwood        Erect           shade; white flowers;
                                                         white fruits; purple
                                                         fall color.
Cornus sericea       Redosier Dogwood    Spreading       Wet, moist soils;
                                                         tolerates poor
                                                         drainage; white
Cornus sericea       Bailey Redosier                     flowers; white
baileyi              Dogwood             Erect           fruits; red twigs;
                                                         often sold a C.
                                                         stolonifera.

                                                         Sun; well-drained
Cotoneaster          Manyflowered                        soil; white flowers;
multiflora           Cotoneaster         Mounded         red fruits; very
                                                         wide-spreading;
                                                         pests/diseases.
                                                         Poor, dry soil; sun;
Elaeagnus umbellata  Autumnolive         Spreading       fragrant flowers;
                                                         edible, red fruits;
                                                         twiggy.
                                                         Sun or shade; well-
Euonymus alata       Winged Euonymus     Spreading       drained soil; corky,
                                                         winged twigs; pink to
                                                         rose fall color.
                                                         Moist soil; shade;
Euonymus             Eastern Wahoo       Tree-like       tiny, purplish
atropurpurea                                             flowers; orange to
                                                         purple fall color.
                                                         Dry-soil; urban;
                     Spindletree of                      striped bark;
Euonymus europaea    European Euonymus   Tree-like       persistent pink
                                                         fruit; orange to
                                                         purple fall color.
“Aldenhamensis”  Aldenham European                   Bright pink fruit;
                     Euonymus                            shrubby form.
“Redcap”         Redcap European                     Bright red fruit.
                     Euonymus
                                                         Sun; pearl-like
Exochorda racemosa   Pearlbush           Leggy           flower buds; tan
                                                         fruit capsules.
Hamamelis virginiana Common Witchhazel   Spreading       Shade; yellow October
                                                         flowers.
                                                         Moist soil; white to
Hydrangea paniculata Peegee Hydrangea    Upright         pink flowers in
“Grandiflora”                                        August; persistent,
                                                         tan flower clusters.
                                                         Alkaline soil; sun;
Kolkwitzia amabilis  Beautybush          Upright         pink flowers in June;
                                                         shredded bark; leggy.
                                                         Dry soil; white
Ligustrum amurense   Amur Privet         Erect           flowers; black
                                                         fruits; hedge plant.
Ligustrum vulgare                                        Dry soil; urban;
“Cheyenne”       Cheyenne Privet     Erect           white flowers; black
                                                         fruits; hedge plant.
                                                         Dry soil; white
Lonicera x bella     White Belle         Upright-mounded flowers; red fruits;
“Candida”        Honeysuckle                         may become weedy,
                                                         pest problem.
                                                         Dry soil; urban; red
                                                         flowers; dense, red
Lonicera tatarica                                        fruits; may become
zabelii              Zabel Honeysuckle   Rounded         weedy, pest or
                                                         disease problem, may
                                                         be sold as L.
                                                         korolkowii zabelii.
                                                         Rich soil; white
Magnolia stellata    Star Magnolia       Rounded         flowers; orange
                                                         fruits; finest
                                                         textured magnolia.
                                                         Dry soil; semi-shade;
Physocarpus                                              white flowers; red,
opulifolius          Eastern Ninebark    Vase            capsular fruit;
                                                         shredded bark;
                                                         course.
                                                         Dry soil; sun; white
Prunus tomentosa     Manchu Cherry       Rounded         flowers; edible, red
                                                         fruits.
Prunus triloba       Double Flowering    Rounded         Sun; double, pink
                     Plum                                flowers; no fruit.
Rhamnus frangula     Tallhedge Glossy                    Moist soil; shade;
“Columnaris”     Buckthorn           Columnar        red to black fruits;
                                                         holds leaves late.
                                                         Dry soil; sun;
Rhus glabra          Smooth Sumac        Suckering       persistent red
                                                         fruits; smooth stems;
                                                         scarlet fall color.
                                                         Dry soil; sun;
                                                         persistent red
Rhus typhina         Staghorn Sumac      Suckering       fruits; felty stems;
                                                         orange to red fall
                                                         color.
                                                         Dry soil; sun; red
Rhus typhina         Shredleaf Staghorn  Picturesque     fruits; dissected
“Dissecta”       Sumac                               leaves, orange to red
                                                         in fall.
                     Goat Willow or                      Wet or dry soil; sun;
Salix caprea         French Pussy Willow Oval            large silver catkins
                                                         in early spring.
                                                         Dry soil; sun;
                                                         yellowish flowers;
Shepherdia argentea  Buffaloberry        Irregular       dioecious; edible red
                                                         fruits; silvery
                                                         foliage.
                                                         Moist soil; shade;
                                                         whitish flowers;
Staphylea trifolia   American Bladdernut Upright         green to brown,
                                                         bladder-like fruits;
                                                         white-striped bark.
                                                         Dry, alkaline soil;
Syringa x chinensis  Chinese Lilac       Vase            purple-lilac flowers;
                                                         fine texture.
                                                         Sun; white, pink,
Syringa x            Hyacinth Lilacs     Upright         lilac, purple
hyacinthiflora cvs.                                      flowers; early
                                                         blooming.
                                                         Sun; pink to purple
Syringa x prestoniae Preston Lilacs      Rounded         flowers; late-
cvs.                                                     blooming; coarse
                                                         textured.
                                                         Sun; white flowers in
                                                         June; tan fruits;
Syringa reticulata   Japanese Tree Lilac Tree-like       cherry-like bark;
                                                         often sold as S.
                                                         amurensis japonica.
                                                         Well-drained soil;
                                                         sun; white, pink,
                                                         lilac, purple,
Syringa vulgaris cvs Common Lilac        Upright         fragrant flowers;
                                                         pest or disease
                                                         problem may limit
                                                         use.
                                                         Dry soil; sun; tiny,
Tamarix ramosissima  Tamarisk            Irregular       pink flowers; very
                                                         fine texture; often
                                                         sold as T. pentandra.
                                                         Moist soil; shade;
Viburnum dentatum    Arrowwood Viburnum  Vase            white flowers in
                                                         June; blue fruits;
                                                         maroon fall color.
                                                         Dry soil; shade;
Viburnum lantana     Wayfaringtree       Upright         white flowers; red to
                     Viburnum                            black fruits; late
                                                         maroon fall color.
                                                         Moist or dry soil;
                                                         sun or shade; white
Viburnum lentago     Nannyberry Viburnum Upright         flowers; black
                                                         fruits; leggy; maroon
                                                         fall color; pest or
                                                         disease problem.
                                                         Dry soil; shade;
                                                         white flowers; black
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum   Spreading       fruits; single or
                                                         multi-trunked; maroon
                                                         fall color.
                                                         Rich soil; white
Viburnum sieboldii   Siebold Vibernum    Tree-like       flowers; red to black
                                                         fruits; large, coarse
                                                         leaves.
                     American                            Moist soil; shade;
Vibernum trilobum    Cranberrybush       Upright         lacy, white flowers;
                     Vibernum                            persistent, edible
                                                         fruits.
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Medium Deciduous)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Medium Deciduous)
Botanical Name           Common Name  Form       Adaption and Remarks
Aronia arbutifolia       Red          Erect      Wet soil; shade; tolerates poor drainage; white flowers; red fruits; red
                         Chokeberry              fall color.
Cornus alba              Creamedge    Mounded    Moist soil; white flowers; white fruit; variegated foliage.
“Argenteomarginata”  Dogwood
                         American
Corylus americana        Filbert or   Rounded    Dry soil; shade; catkins in March; orange fall color.
                         Hazelnut
Cotoneaster divaricatus  Spreading    Mounded    Dry alkaline soil; red fruits; fine texture; late maroon fall color; not
                         Cotoneaster             fully hardy in zone indicated—needs a special site or ideal conditions.
Cotoneaster lucidus      Hedge        Upright    Dry soil; shade; black fruits; orange to maroon fall color; good hedge
                         Cotoneaster             plant; C. acutifolius is similar.
Euonymus alatus          Dwarf Winged Spreading  Sun or shade; pink and orange fruits; red fall color.
“Compacta”           Euonymus
Forsythia x intermedia   Border       Vase       Sun; urban; large, pale to yellow flowers; flower buds may be injured or
cvs.                     Forsythia               killed at termperatures lower than -14°F.
Forsythia ovata          Early        Mounded    Sun; urban; smaller, earlier, yellow flowers; flower buds may be injured
                         Forsythia               or killed at temperatures lower than -25°F.
Forsythia suspensa       Weeping      Mounded    Sun; urban; yellow flowers; slender, drooping twigs; flower buds may be
                         Forsythia               injured or killed at temperatures lower than -15°F.
Ilex verticillata        Winterberry  Upright    Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; dioecious; red fruits.
Ligustrum obtusifolium   Regel's                 Dry soil; shade; white flowers; blue-black fruits; late, purple fall
regelianum               Border       Spreading  color.
                         Privet
Malus sargentii “Tina�Sargent      Spreading  Disease resistant; 5' mature height.
                         Crabapple
Myrica pensylvanica      Bayberry     Upright    Dry soil; sun; gray, fragrant fruits; dioecious; semi-evergreen;
                                                 suckering.
Philadelphus x           Glacier      Rounded    Sun; double, white, fragrant flowers.
virginalis “Glacier” Mockorange
                         Purple-
Prunus x cistena         leaved Sand  Rounded    Dry soil; sun; white flowers; purple foliage all season.
                         Cherry
Rhodotypos scandens      Jetbead      Spreading  Dry soil; shade; white flowers; sparse red fruits; fine texture.
Rosa hugonis             Father Hugo  Vase       Poor soil; sun; yellow flowers; sparse red fruits; fine texture.
                         Rose
Rosa rugosa cvs.         Rugosa Rose  Rounded    Dry soil; sun; white, yellow, pink, or red flowers; large edible red
                                                 fruits; fall color; wrinkled leaves; tolerant of salt.
Rosa setigera            Prairie Rose Sprawling- Sun; pink flowers in July; red fruits; orange fall color; can be used as
                                      mounded    a climber.
Spiraea prunifolia       Bridalwreath Upright    Sun; double, white flowers; orange to red fall color.
                         Spirea
Spiraea thunbergii       Thunberg     Vase       Sun; white flowers; yellow to orange fall color; fine-textured.
                         Spirea
Spiraea x vanhouttei     Vanhoutte    Vase       Sun; white flowers; arching branches.
                         Spirea
Syringa meyeri “PalibinPalibin      Rounded    Sun; purple flowers; dense; fine-textured; good informal hedge plant
                         Lilac                   often sold as S. palibiniana.
Viburnum carlesii        Koreanspice  Rounded    Shade; urban; pink to white, fragrant flowers; blue-black fruits; red
                         Viburnum                fall color.
Viburnum cassinoides     Witherod     Rounded    Wet, acid soil; tolerates poor drainage; white flowers; pink to red to
                         Viburnum                blue fruits; red fall color.
                         Old-
Weigela florida          fashioned    Spreading  Well-drained soil; pink, funnel-shaped flowers.
                         Weigela
Weigela x 'Vanicekii'    Vanicek      Spreading  Well-drained soil; red flowers.
                         Weigela
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Low Deciduous)
Botanical Name Common Name Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Low Deciduous)
Botanical Name            Common Name     Form      Adaption and Remarks
Acanthopanax sieboldianus Fiveleaf Aralia Upright   Dry soil; shade; urban; leaves palmately
                                                    compound; thorny.
Amelanchier stolonifera   Running         Suckering Dry soil; shade; white flowers; edible
                          Serviceberry              fruits; orange fall color.
Aronia melanocarpa        Black           Suckering Wet soil; shade; white flowers; black
                          Chokeberry                fruits; red fall color.
Berberis thunbergii       Japanese        Mounded   Dry soil; shade; red fruits; orange fall
                          Barberry                  color; thorns; good hedge plant.
                          Redleaf
“Atropurpurea”        Japanese                  Sun; red summer foliage.
                          Barberry
                          Crimson
“Crimson Pygmy”       Japanese        Low-mound Sun; red summer foliage; 2' tall.
                          Barberry
Buxus microphylla koreana Korean Littleaf Rounded   Shade; broadleaf evergreen; good hedge
                          Box                       plant.
                                                    Dry soil; urban; orange flowers; yellow,
Chaenomeles japonica      Dwarf Japanese  Spreading edible fruits; dense; 1' tall; flower buds
alpina                    Floweringquince           may be injured or killed during some
                                                    winters.
Cotoneaster apiculatus    Cranberry       Mounded   Dry soil; red fruits; red fall color.
                          Cotoneaster
Deutzia x lemoinei        Compact Lemoine Rounded   Well-drained soil; white flowers.
“Compacta”            Deutzia
Diervilla lonicera        Dwarf           Mounded   Dry soil; shade; yellow flowers; good bank
                          Bushhoneysuckle           cover.
Forsythia viridissima     Bronx Forsythia Low-mound Sun; small yellow flowers; fine texture;
“Bronxensis”                                    purple fall color.
Hydrangea arborescens     Annabelle       Mounded   Moist soil; shade; white, clustered
“Annabelle”           Hydrangea                 flowers; dense; blooms on new wood.
Hydrangea arborescens     Snowhill        Mounded   Smaller flower clusters and less dense than
“Grandiflora”         Hydrangea                 Hydrangea arborescens “Annabelle.”
Hypericum kalmianum       Kalm's St.      Rounded   Dry soil; sun; yellow flowers; shiny brown
                          Johnswort                 twigs.
Lonicera x xylosteoides   Clavey's Dwarf  Rounded   Dense growth; good hedge or screening
“Clavey's Dwarf”      Honeysuckle               plant.
Lonicera xylosteum        Emerald Mound   Mounded   Lower growing than preceding; 2'-3'.
“Nanum”               Honeysuckle
                                                    Shade; urban; yellow flowers; blue fruits;
Mahonia aquifolium        Mayhan          Suckering holly-like evergreen foliage; not fully
“Mayhan”              Oregongrape               hardy in zone - need special site or ideal
                                                    conditions.
Philadelphus coronarius   Golden          Rounded   Sun; white flowers; yellow summer foliage.
“Aureus”              Mockorange
Philadelphus x lemoinei   Mont Blanc      Mounded   Sun; single; white, fragrant flowers;
“Mont Blanc”          Mockorange                dense.
Physocarpus opulifolius   Dwarf Common    Rounded   Dry soil; shade; creamy-white flowers; red
“Nanus”               Ninebark                  capsular fruits; shredded bark.
Potentilla fruticosa cvs. Bush Cinquefoil Mounded   Dry soil; sun; yellow and white flowers;
                                                    blooms all summer.
Prunus glandulosa         Pink Dwarf      Rounded   Sun; light soil; double, pink flowers; no
“Sinensis”            Floweringalmond           fruits; narrow leaves.
Rhododendron x kosteranum Mollis Hybrid   Spreading Moist, acid soil; pink flowers; red fall
                          Azaleas                   color.
Rhododendron x “PJM     PJM Hybrid      Rounded   Moist, acid soil; shade; lavender flowers;
Hybrid”                 Rhododendron              evergreen leaves turn purple in autumn.
Rhus aromatica            Fragrant Sumac            Dry soil; sun; red fruits; fragrant
                                          Mounded   foliage; turns orange-maroon in fall.
“Gro-Low”             Gro-low                   Uniform 2 1/2' height; glossy leaves.
                          Fragrant Sumac
Ribes alpinum             Alpine Currant  Rounded   Shade; urban; good hedge plant.
Rosa virginiana           Virginia Rose   Suckering Dry soil; pink flowers; red fruits; red
                                                    stems; good bank cover.
Salix repens argentea     Silver Creeping Spreading Moist soil; sun; silvery foliage.
                          Willow
Spiraea x arguta          Compact Garland Mounded   Sun; white flowers; fine texture.
“Compacta”            Spirea
Spiraea x billiardii      Billiard Spirea Upright   Sun; pink flowers, in July and August.
Spiraea x bumalda         Anthony Waterer Rounded   Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers;
“Anthony Waterer”     Spirea                    unattractive fruits.
Spiraea x bumalda         Froebel Spirea  Rounded   Dry soil; sun; raspberry red flowers;
“Froebelii”                                     orange to maroon fall color.
Spiraea japonica alpina   Daphne Spirea   Low-mound Sun; pale pink flowers in July; 10" height.
Spiraea nipponica         Snowmound       Mounded   Sun; white flowers; blue-green foliage;
“Snowmound”           Spirea                    possible disease problem.
                                                    Dry soil; shade; tiny pink flowers; showy
Symphoricarpos rivularis  Snowberry       Vase      white fruits; often sold as S. albus
                                                    laevigatus.
Symphoricarpos            Indiancurrant   Suckering Dry soil; shade; pink fruits; good bank
orbiculatus               Coralberry                cover.
                          Compact
Viburnum opulus           European        Rounded   Shade; white flowers; persistent, red
“Compactum”           Cranberrybush             fruit; dense habit.
                          Viburnum
                          Dwarf European
Viburnum opulus “Nanum�Cranberrybush   Globe     Shade; no flowers or fruits; twiggy.
                          Viburnum
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Tall to Medium Evergreen)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth  Form Adaption and Remarks
                           Rate
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Tall to Medium Evergreen)
                                    Growth
Botanical Name        Common Name          Form        Adaption and Remarks
                                    Rate
Juniperus chinensis
“Ames”            Ames Juniper  9'     Broad       Sun; bluish green foliage.
                                           pyramid
“Blaauw”          Blaauw        4'     Upright-    Sun; grayish blue foliage.
                      Juniper              vase
“Herzii”          Herz Blue     15'    Ascending-  Sun; silvery blue foliage.
                      Juniper              Spreading
“Maney”           Maney Juniper 6'     Upright,    Sun; bluish green foliage.
                                           bushy
“Old Gold”        Old Gold      4'     Spreading   Sun; green with gold tips.
                      Juniper
“Pfitzerana”      Pfitzer       6'     Wide-       Sun; green foliage; no fruits.
                      Juniper              spreading
“Pfitzerana Glauca�Blue Pfitzer  5'     Spreading   Sun; blue-gray foliage.
                      Juniper
Juniperus communis    Oldfield                         Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in
depressa              Common        4'     Spreading   winter.
                      Juniper
Juniperus sabina “VoVon Ehren     4'     Spreading   Dry soil; sun; light green; brownish in
Ehren”              Savin Juniper                    winter.
Juniperus squamata    Meyer
“Meyeri”          Singleseed    5'     Picturesque Sun; blue foliage.
                      Juniper
Picea glauca “ConicaDwarf Alberta 7'     Pyramidal   Shelter from winter sun; light green
                      Spruce                           foliage.
Pinus mugo            Mugo Pine     4'     Mounded     Dry soil; sun; green foliage.
Taxus cuspidata       Spreading     6'     Spreading   Shade; urban; dark green foliage; needs
“Expansa”         Japanese Yew                     ideal conditions.
Taxus cuspidata       Dwarf         4'     Mounded     Shade; urban very dark green foliage;
“Nana”            Japanese Yew                     needs ideal conditions.
Taxus x hunnewelliana Hunnewell Yew 6'     Spreading   Shade; green.
Taxus x media cvs.    Anglojapanese 1-10'  Round or    Shade; very dark green; needs ideal
                      Yew                  upright     conditions.
Thuja occidentalis    Ware American 8'     Broad       Wet soil; half-shade; dark green foliage.
“Robusta”         Arborvitae           Pyramid     Often sold as T.o. “Wareana.”
                      Woodward
Thuja occidentalis    Globe         6'     Globe       Wet soil; half-shade; bright green.
“Woodwardii”      American
                      Arborvitae
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Low Evergreen)
Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Shrubs (Low Evergreen)
Botanical Name        Common     Growth Form      Adaption and Remarks
                      Name       Rate
 Juniperus chinensis Japanese                    Sun; blue-green, year-
procumbens            Garden     2'     Creeping  round foliage.
                      Juniper
Juniperus chinensis   Sargent    1'     Creeping  Sun; green; or blue-green
sargentii             Juniper                     in cv. “Glauca.”
Juniperus             Creeping   1'     Creeping  Dry soil; sun; variable
horizontalis          Juniper                     color-brown in winter.
                      Bar Harbor                  Dry soil; sun; bluish
“Bar Harbor”      Juniper    8"     Creeping  green foliage; slaty in
                                                  winter.
“Douglasii”       Waukegan   18"    Creeping  Dry soil; sun; steel blue;
                      Juniper                     purplish in winter.
“Plumosa”         Andorra    18"    Radial-   Dry soil; sun; gray-green;
                      Juniper           creeping  purplish in winter.
                      Prince of                   Dry soil; sun; bright
“Prince of Wales” Wales      4-6"   Prostrate green; bronzed in winter.
                      Juniper
“Wiltonii”        Blue Rug   4-6"   Flat-     Dry soil; sun; silvery
                      Juniper           trailing  blue.
“Youngstown”      Youngstown 18"    Radial-   Dry soil; sun; gray-green;
                      Juniper           creeping  purplish in winter.
Juniperus sabina
                      Arcadia           Low-
“Arcadia”         Savin      18"    spreading Sun; green.
                      Juniper
                      Broadmoor                   Sun; soft grayish green;
“Broadmoor”       Savin      2'     Mounded   fine textured.
                      Juniper
                      Skandia           Low-
“Skandia”         Savin      12"    spreading Sun; grayish blue.
                      Juniper
                      Tamarix           Dense,    Sun; bluish green; pest or
“Tamariscifolia”  Savin      2'     spreading disease problem.
                      Juniper
 
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Prohibited Species
Botanical Name Common Name Growth Rate Form Adaption and Remarks
Detailed Classification of Plant Species: Prohibited Species
Botanical Name     Common Name        Growth Rate Form      Adaption and
                                                            Remarks
Acer negundo       Boxelder                                 Weed tree.
                   Buckthorn                                Invasive.
                   Crown Vetch                              Invasive ground
                                                            cover; aggressive.
                                                            Urban; sun;
Crataegus crus-                                             persistent, brick
galli              Cockspur Hawthorn  S           Spreading red fruits; orange
                                                            to red fall color;
                                                            evil thorns.
                                                            Urban; tolerates
                                                            poor drainage; salt
                                                            tolerant;
                                                            dioecious, females
Gleditsia                                                   produce pods; fine-
triacanthos        Common Honeylocust F           Vase      textured foliage;
                                                            wicked thorns;
                                                            yellow fall color;
                                                            pest or disease
                                                            problems may limit
                                                            use.
                                                            Dry soil, white
                                                            flowers; red
Lonicera x bella   Belle Honeysuckle                        fruits; may become
                                                            weedy, pest
                                                            problem.
                                                            Dry soil; urban,
                                                            pink to white
Lonicera tatarica  Tatarian                                 flowers; dense, red
                   Honeysuckle                              fruits; may become
                                                            weedy, pest or
                                                            disease problem.
                                                            Urban, dense, white
Lonicera morrowi   Morrow Honeysuckle                       flowers, pest and
                                                            disease problem,
                                                            weedy.
                                                            Perennial, common
                   Purple Loosestrife                       marsh plant, may
                                                            choke out native
                                                            plants.
Rhamnus cathartica Common Buckthorn                         Becomes weak.
Rhamnus frangula   Glossy Buckthorn                         Becomes weak.
KEY:   S=Slow   M=Medium   F=Fast
 
The following sources were used in compiling the preceding lists of plant
species:
   Department of Natural Resources. Forest Trees of Wisconsin: How to Know
Them. Madison, Wisconsin: Department of Natural Resources, 1987.
   Hasselkus, E.R. A Guide to Selecting Landscape Plants for Wisconsin.
Madison, Wisconsin: College of Agricultural and Life Sciences University of
Wisconsin - Extension, Cooperative Extension Programs, 1982.
   Hightshoe, Gary L. Native Trees, Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural
America: A Planting Design Manual for Environmental Designers. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1988.
   Iowa State University. Landscape Plants for Iowa. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State
University Cooperative Extension Service, May 1984.
APPENDIX B
WIRELESS COMMMUNICATION FACILITY OVERLAY DISTRICT 1
SITES APPROVED FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
03-27-02
NO. ADDRESS STREET/ AVENUE SITE NAME SIZE IN ACRES TOWER TYPE PARCEL NO./
                                                              DESCRIPTION
NO. ADDRESS STREET/   SITE NAME      SIZE IN ACRES TOWER TYPE    PARCEL NO./
            AVENUE                                               DESCRIPTION
1   102     7 Avenue McCandless     3.06          190’ monopolM 1476-A
                      Park
2   926     19 Avenue Vacant land    2.67          190’ monopolM 166
3   1577    34 Avenue Prospect Park  25            190’ monopolM 6087
4   5001    34 Avenue Memorial Park  40.3          120’ monopolSM 243-2
                      Cemetery
5   4700    38 Avenue Fire Station   0.37          190’ monopolSM 331-3
                      #3
6   1526    46 Avenue Fire Station   1.01          Monopole per  SM 12826
                      #2                           FAA
7   7000    Route 150 Vacant land    26.04         Monopole per  CV 11-1
                                                   FAA
8   1201    7 Street  Stephens Park  7.75          190’ monopolM 6812
9   601     11 Street Velie Park     4.13          120’ monopolM 4840
10  701     17 Street Parking        0.53          190’ monopolM 1253
11  500     27 Street Riverside                    120’ flagpolM 3802
                      Cemetery
                                                                 M 883
12  3130    41 Street Library        1.92          120’ flagpolM 884
                                                                 M 214
                                                                 M 213
13  5500    60 Street Green Valley   40.07         190’ monopol*
                      Park
14  2701    30 Street Jefferson      8.2           190’ monopol**
            Court     School Park
15  1714    15 Street Vacant land    0.3           190’ monopolM 2044
            Place
16  3300    5 Avenue  Riverside Park 135.93        190’ monopolM 3807-2
17  3601    8 Avenue  Peterson Park  15            190’ monopolM 9113-A
 
(Appendix B codified 09/16/08 pursuant to scrivener’s error correction of
omission from Ord. No. 2002-05-01 adopted 05/28/02)
Reference Notes: 
Ord. No. 3026-2005; Chapter 35 repealed in its entirety; new Chapter 35
enacted; adopted 04/05/05; effective date 04/25/06 pursuant to the adoption of
the Zoning Map by Ord. No. 3019-2006; corrections made to various scrivener’s
errors contained in Ord. No. 3025-2005; 09/16/08
Ord. No. 3009-2015; repealed Articles I, II and IV and the table of contents in
their entirety; new Articles I, II and IV and table of contents enacted;
adopted 03/24/15)
Subsequent ordinance amendments are referenced by their ordinance numbers and
adoption dates at the end of the corresponding section or subsection.
CHAPTER 36
(RESERVED)
 
