CITY CODE
of
MOMENCE, ILLINOIS
1979
Code current through:
Ord. 897, passed 10-6-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Momence, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 897, passed October 6, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ORDINANCE NO. 881
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Momence, Illinois, desires to ensure
the safety and well being of its citizens, inhabitants, and all other persons
within the City limits of the City of Momence, Illinois; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Momence, Illinois, has considered that
City Code created in1978 concerning general licensing provisions be updated;
and
                
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Momence, Illinois wishes to amend the
City Code, specifically under a portion of the Code known as Title 3, Chapter
1, Sections 1 through 12.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Momence,
Illinois as follows:
 
SECTION 1: That Title 3, Chapter 1, Sections 1 through 12, of the City Code of
the City of Momence, Illinois is hereby repealed.
 
SECTION 2: That there is hereby added to the City Code of the City of Momence,
Illinois the following Sections 1 through 15, under and in substitution for
Title 3, Chapter 1, Sections 1 through 12, of the City Code of the City of
Momence, Illinois hereinabove repealed.
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
(A)   All businesses having a physical location in the city shall be licensed
by the city, unless exempt from municipal licensing by state statutes, by
January 1st of each year. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct,
engage in, maintain, operate, carry on, or manage a business, occupation,
activity, or offer for use by the public, equipment, devices or machines, for
which a license is required, without a license first having been procured for
such business or occupation.
(B)    All businesses having a physical location outside of City limits, at the
time of doing business within City limits, unless exempt from municipal
licensing by state statutes, shall be required to obtain a license, which shall
be in effect for twelve (12) months, and pay a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee
before being issued a permit.
3-1-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
(A)    Application for all licenses and permits required by City Code shall be
made in person at City Hall to the City Collector in the absence of provisions
to the contrary.
(B)    Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered, and the fee to be
paid. Each application shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of City officials in the issuing of the license
for which applied.
(C)    All businesses shall show proof of insurance before a license is
issued. 
3-1-3: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
(A)    Not for profit organizations are required to have a license, but are
exempt from all fees.
(B)    Tax exempt certificate required at time of application.
3-1-4: FEE REGULATIONS:
(A)    In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses shall be paid in advance at the time of application to the City
Collector. The fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
unless otherwise provided by state statutes or as provided elsewhere in this
code.
(B)    When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the
expiration of part of the current license year, an annual license for the
balance of the calendar year will be issued for a proportionate ( by quarters)
part of the annual fee.
(C)    In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee, or
part thereof, by reason of death, or departure of the licensee; nor shall any
rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance
of the operation or conduct or change of ownership of the licensed
establishment, business, or activity.
3-1-5: TERMINATION DATE OF ANNUAL LICENSES:
(A)    All annual licenses shall commence on January 1 each year, and shall
terminate on December 31 of the same year, where no provision to the contrary
is made.
(B)    The City Collector shall notify all annual licensees of license
expiration by December 1 of each year. Failure to make such notification, or
failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee from the
obligation to obtain a new license, nor shall it be a defense based upon
operation without a license.
3-1-6: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
(A)    It shall be the duty of every licensee conducting business in the City
to keep its license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times.
(B)    No license certificate, plate, badge, tag, emblem, or other insignia
shall be permitted to remain posted or displayed after the period for which the
license was issued has expired.
3-1-7: REPLACEMENT OF LICENSE:
In the event any licensee who has been furnished a license certificate by the
City, shall lose same, it shall be within the discretion of the City to
authorize the issuance of a duplicate certificate with the payment of a fee of
five dollars ($5.00) to the City Collector, unless otherwise specifically
provided.
3-1-8: UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE:
(A)    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to loan or give away any license
certificate.
(B)    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display any license
certificate which has been unlawfully acquired.
3-1-9: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP: 
Any change in ownership of a business shall require a new license.
3-1-10: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, if the premises and
building to be used does not fully comply with all applicable City code and
state statutes.
3-1-11: LOCATION:
No license for the operation of a business in the City shall be construed to
permit the operation of a licensed business in more than one location in the
City. A separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed
establishment. For the purposes of this chapter, the existence of a single
location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the
principal or accessory uses shall be connected, or shall be located on the same
lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and
shall be an establishment with the same classification.
3-1-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business may be changed provided that ten (10)
days’ notice is given to the City Collector in the absence of any provision to
the contrary; provided, however, that all applicable City code is complied
with.
3-1-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE; HEARING:
(A)    Revocation Of License: Any license for a limited time may be revoked by
a majority vote of the City Council at any time during the life of such license
for any violation by the licensee of the provisions relating to the license,
the subject matter of the license, or to the premises occupied; such revocation
may be in addition to any fine imposed.
(B)   Notice Of Revocation: Unless any provision of this code provides to the
contrary, no revocation or suspension of any license issued hereunder shall be
deemed effective until notice thereof has been served personally upon, or
mailed to the named licensee at the address specified in the application.
(C)    Hearing: If within ten (10) days of the date of notice of the revocation
or suspension of any license, the named licensee submits to the City Collector
in writing a request for a hearing concerning such revocation or suspension,
said revocation or suspension shall be suspended until such time as the City
Council shall grant the licensee a special hearing.
(D)    Decision Of City Council: If the City Council after such hearing affirms
the revocation or suspension of said licensee, by a majority vote, the same
shall become immediately effective. If the City Council, by a majority vote,
overrides the revocation, the same shall be deemed null and void.
3-1-14: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
(A)    Generally: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life,
or detrimental to health.
(B)    Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
1.   No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
2.   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the City.
(C)    Compliance: All licensees shall comply with the provisions in City of
Momence Code with respect to refuse and garbage disposal.
3-1-15: PENALTY:
Any person who conducts a business for which a license is required shall be
required to pay a late penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to
the annual license fee, if the annual license has not been timely obtained on
or before December 31 of each year. In addition to all other remedies available
to the City, any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
SECTION 3: The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed
separable               and the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity          of the remainder.
SECTION 4: That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its
passage,                adoption, and publication as required by law.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Passed by the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Momence, Illinois,
this ___ day of _______, 2023.
Alderwoman Doody   Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderman Vela      Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderman Huddleston   Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderman Clark      Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderwoman Fordhal   Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderman Cook      Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___    Pass/
Abstain___                  Attendance
Alderman Temple   Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/Abstain___
         Attendance
Alderman Lesyna      Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/
Abstain___
         Attendance
TOTALS      Electronic___   Aye___   Nay___   Absent___   Pass/Abstain___
         Attendance                                                            
 
 
________________________________
ATTEST:            CHARLES STEELE, Mayor of the City of
Momence, Illinois
 
________________________________
CHRISTY RITTER, City Clerk,
City of Momence, Illinois.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 252
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE CITY CODE OF MOMENCE, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Momence,
Kankakee County, Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Momence, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
under the direction of the governing body of the City, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new provision
shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the insertion of
the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3) copies of
which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code of Momence, Illinois.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
enactment as provided by law.
AYES:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
Passed this 16 day of April, 1979.
Approved this 16 day of April, 1979.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-5: Publication Of Ordinances
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Momence. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MOMENCE CITY CODE, and it is
hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1979 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1979 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1979 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1979 Code)
1-1-5: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances of the city imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture, or making any appropriation may be published by printing said
ordinance in book or pamphlet form by authority of the corporate authorities of
the city.
The city clerk is hereby authorized to publish any ordinance as aforesaid, in
accordance with this section. (Ord., 1961)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978; amd. 1979 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance
or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978; amd.
1979 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978; amd. 1979 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978; amd.
1979 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   (A)   Words Used: Whenever any word in any section of this code importing
the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included
although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to by words importing the singular number only or
the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well
as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included. The words
"person, firm or corporation" shall be deemed to include any association or
organization of any kind. Words in the present shall include the future. The
words "this title", "this chapter", "this section" or "this subsection" shall
be held and taken to mean the entire enactment, including each and every
chapter, section, subsection or paragraph thereof. The word "city" whenever
used shall be held and taken to mean the city of Momence, Illinois. The words
"written" and "in writing" may include printing, mimeograph, off-set, or any
other reproduction of the words; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express
provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
of such section may be repugnant thereto.
   (B)   Distinction Between "Wholesaler" And "Retailer": In all cases where
the words "wholesaler" or "wholesale dealer" are used in this code, unless
otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for
the purpose of resale as distinguished from a "retail dealer" who sells direct
to the consumer.
   (C)   Officers And Employees: Whenever reference is made in this code to a
city officer or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though
followed by the words "of the city of Momence, Illinois" and shall be taken to
mean the officer or employee of the city having the title mentioned or
performing the duties indicated. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this code.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" of the city shall commence on May 1 of each and
every year.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
MUNICIPAL YEAR: The "municipal year" of the city shall commence on May 1 and
end on April 30 in each and every year.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violation of said section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978; amd. 1979 Code; Ord.
541, 8-4-2003)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1979 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Presumption Of Liability
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   (A)   Penalty: Whenever in this Code an act, or omission is prohibited, or
declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a violation of this Code, or
whenever in this Code the doing of an act is required, or the failure is
declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a violation of this Code, where no
specific penalty is provided, therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this Code is hereby declared to be an offense, and shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day, or as established in the City of
Momence's approved fines and fees list, located in subsection (B) of this
section. At the discretion of the City, a person may be allowed to perform
community service, in lieu of fines, or be required to attend a City
adjudication hearing. (Ord. 723, 9-19-2011)
   (B)   Fine Schedule:
   LIST OF FINES
           Fines
Violations Code Book Payment     Payment      Payment
           Location  0 - 14 Days 15 - 30 Days After 30 Days
                              Fines
Violations                    Code Book Payment      Payment      Payment
                              Location  0 - 14 Days  15 - 30 Days After 30 Days
Abandoned refrigerator        5-1-1     $75.00 plus  $150.00      $500.00
                                        removal
Animal violations:            5-2-1 to  $ 50.00      75.00        500.00
                              5-2-26
   Dog violations, vicious 5-2-9     150.00       300.00       500.00
dogs
Assault                       5-1-3     75.00        150.00       500.00
Battery                       5-1-4     100.00       150.00       500.00
Bicycles, skates and mini-    8-4 (all) 50.00        100.00       500.00
motorized vehicles
City parks                    7-8 (all) 50.00        100.00       500.00
Curfew                        5-3-1     50.00        100.00       500.00
Damage to City property       5-1-18    $150.00 plus 250.00       500.00
                                        damages
Discharge of firearm (air     5-1-6     $ 50.00      75.00        500.00
gun, pellet gun, BB gun)
Disorderly conduct            5-1-23    100.00       300.00       500.00
Failure to post house address 4-2-6     50.00        75.00        100.00
Fighting                      5-1-26    250.00       400.00       500.00
Fireworks                     5-1-7     100.00       250.00       500.00
Golf carts/utility vehicles   8-4-20    50.00        100.00       500.00
Graffiti                      5-1-20    $100.00 plus 200.00       500.00
                                        restitution
Handicapped parking           8-2-8     $250.00      500.00       750.00
Inoperable vehicles,
abandoned vehicles, repair on 5-5-1 to  50.00        100.00       500.00
City property and residential 5-5-6
areas
Loitering                     5-1-28    50.00        100.00       500.00
Noise nuisance                5-1-5     250.00       350.00       500.00
Panhandling                   5-1-30    75.00        100.00       125.00
Parental responsibility for   5-1-19    100.00       200.00       500.00
acts of minors
Parking violations, stopping, 8-2-1 to
standing (excluding           8-2-20    30.00        75.00        150.00
handicapped)
Peddlers/transient merchants  3-5-1 to  50.00        150.00       500.00
                              3-5-10
Permit violations                    250.00       500.00       750.00
Pools                         4-4 (all) 100.00       250.00       500.00
Possession of alcoholic       5-1-2     75.00        150.00       500.00
liquor
Possession of cannabis        5-1-24    250.00       500.00       750.00
Possession of drug            5-1-21    150.00       250.00       500.00
paraphernalia
Possession of tobacco         5-1-27    50.00        100.00       500.00
Recreational burning:         5-1-29                             
   First offense                    <100.00      150.00       500.00
   Subsequent offense               <250.00      250.00       500.00
Removal of weeds, plants,               $100.00 per
garbage, debris, rodents,     5-4-4     hour         2 x fine     5 x fine
vermin, cutting grass
Vandalism                     5-1-18    $100.00 plus $200.00      $500.00
                                        restitution
Vehicle Code (nonmoving       8-6 (all) $75.00       150.00       500.00
violations)
Vehicles for sale             8-2-4     50.00        100.00       500.00
Violation of parking hours 2: 8-2-6     30.00        100.00       500.00
00 A.M. - 5:00 A.M.
 
(Ord. 833, 11-20-2017; amd. Ord. 835, 11-20-2017)
   (C)   Fee Schedule:
      LIST OF FEES
 
Vehicle storage  $30.00 per day
 
(Ord. 761, 5-20-2013)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where a duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
nuisance, or is a violation of the zoning or subdivision regulations of the
City 1 , in addition to any fine that may be imposed for said breach, the City
Attorney or any attorney retained by the City Council may petition for
injunctive relief to enjoin the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
which constitutes a nuisance or is a violation of the zoning or subdivision
regulations of the City. (Ord. 230, 7-3-1978; amd. 1979 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See titles 9 and 10 of this Code.
1-4-3: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
The occupant of any premises, and the owner of unoccupied premises, upon which
a violation of this Code is apparent, the owner of any object or material
placed or remaining anywhere in violation of this Code, and the occupant and
owner of any premises served by any excavation connection or structure
illegally made or erected, shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the
violation so evidenced and subject to the penalty provided therefor. (Ord. 230,
7-3-1978; amd. 1979 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 230,
7-3-1978; amd. 1979 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Council Established; Vacancy
1-5-2: Term Of Office
1-5-3: Qualifications
1-5-4: Meetings
1-5-5: Standing Committees
1-5-6: Duties Of Standing Committees
1-5-7: Quorum; Failure To Attend
1-5-8: Rules And Regulations
1-5-9: Election Of Officers
1-5-10: Electronic Attendance
1-5-11: Public Participation
1-5-1: COUNCIL ESTABLISHED; VACANCY:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and two (2) aldermen from each
ward. Said council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
own members. If a vacancy occurs in the office of alderman by reason of
resignation, failure to elect or qualify, death, permanent physical or mental
disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment of office, or
removal from office or of residence from the ward, or otherwise, the vacancy
may be filled at the next succeeding general election for aldermen at which
time the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired balance of the term. A
vacancy for alderman shall not be filled by special election in compliance with
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-4-14. The mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, may appoint a person to serve as alderman in the vacancy
until the next general election, as provided in this section and until the
person elected qualifies. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-5-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The aldermen of the city shall hold their offices for the terms of four (4)
years, and until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 199, 2-6-
1978)
1-5-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman unless he is a qualified
elector and resides within the ward for which he was elected nor shall he be
eligible if he is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other liability due
the city; nor shall he be directly or indirectly interested in any contract
whatever to which the city is a party; nor shall he be eligible if he has been
convicted of malfeasance, bribery or corrupt practices or crime; nor shall he
be eligible to any office, the salary of which is payable out of the city
treasury, if at the time of his appointment he is a member of the city council;
nor shall any member of the city council at the time hold any other office
under the city government; nor shall he be, either directly or indirectly,
individually, or as a member of a firm, engaged in any business transaction
(other than official) with the city, through its mayor or any of its authorized
boards, agents or attorneys, where any money is to be paid, directly or
indirectly, out of the city treasury to such member, firm or firms. (Ord. 199,
2-6-1978)
1-5-4: MEETINGS:
   (A)   Regular Meetings: The regular stated meetings of the city council
shall be held in the council chamber at the city hall on the first and third
Mondays of each and every month. The meetings shall be commenced at the hour of
seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M., Central Standard Time or between the dates
when Central Daylight Time is in effect, at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M.,
Central Daylight Time. If at any time the first or third Monday shall happen to
be a legal holiday, the council shall meet at the same hour on the next day
following. Adjourned meetings may be held at such time or times as may be
determined by the council.
   (B)   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the council may be called by the
mayor or any four (4) aldermen whenever, in their discretion, they may deem if
necessary. The meeting shall be called in the following manner: The mayor or
four (4) aldermen, as the case may be, shall file in the office of the city
clerk a statement in writing setting forth the object and purpose of the
special meeting and directing the clerk to give notice of same. Upon the filing
of the statement the clerk shall cause to be served personally upon each member
of the council a notice of the special meeting setting forth the object and
purpose thereof and the time of holding the same. No business other than that
mentioned in the call shall be transacted at any special meeting unless three-
fourths (3/4) of all elected aldermen shall be present and vote. (Ord. 199, 2-
6-1978)
1-5-5: STANDING COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the mayor at the first regular meeting of the council
in May in each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, to appoint the standing
committees of the city council which shall be as follows:
First   Administration and finance, one member each ward
Second  Streets and alleys, one member each ward
Third   Police, one member each ward
Fourth  Local improvements and buildings, one member each ward
Fifth   Election and ordinance, one member each ward
Sixth   Water and sewer, one member each ward
Seventh Public relations, one member each ward
Eight   Economic development, one member each ward
 
(Ord. 199, 2-6-1978; amd. Ord. 893, 5-5-2025)
1-5-6: DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES:
It shall be the duty of the standing committees of the city council to keep a
close watch of the affairs of their respective departments of the city
government. They shall have the general management, control and supervision
over all works and things ordered to be made or done by the council in their
respective departments and they shall make reports to the council of whatever
facts may be deemed of importance. Each committee shall promptly and thoroughly
investigate and report in writing upon all matters referred to it by the
council and do and perform such other and further duties as the council may
from time to time by ordinance, resolution or motion, prescribe. (Ord. 199, 2-
6-1978)
1-5-7: QUORUM; FAILURE TO ATTEND:
A majority of the aldermen elected shall constitute a quorum to do business,
but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the
attendance of absentees, under the penalties prescribed herein.
In case of the want of a quorum at any time of the city council, in case a
majority of the members present shall direct, the mayor or presiding officer
shall direct the chief of police or any police officer to go out and arrest and
bring in any and all absent members that can be found in the city, who are not
unable through sickness to attend; and any member who purposely absents himself
from the city to avoid attending any meeting of the council, or being in the
city, conceals himself from such officer or refuses to be brought in when found
may, with concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen elect, be expelled,
in which event his seat shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled by an
election as in other cases of vacancy. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-5-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Members Required To Vote: Every member of the council shall vote upon
all questions in which they are not directly or personally interested, which
may be brought before the council for its action in such manner as to require a
vote to be taken thereon unless such member be excused by a vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of all the other members present; and in case any member shall refuse to
vote who shall not have been thus excused shall be considered as having voted
with the majority on such question and his vote shall be so recorded.
   (B)   Required Majority Vote: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability
against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in
all other cases at the request of any member which shall be entered on the
journal of the proceedings; and the concurrence of a majority of all the
members elected in the city council shall be necessary to the passage of any
such ordinance or proposition; provided, the city shall require three-fourths
(3/4) of all the aldermen elect to sell any city property.
   (C)   Passing Over Veto: In case the mayor shall veto any ordinance or any
part of an ordinance and return the same to the council together with his
objections thereto, the vote by which the same was passed shall be reconsidered
by the council; and if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the
aldermen elected to the city council shall agree by yeas and nays to pass the
same, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding the mayor may refuse to approve
thereof. The vote to pass the same over the mayor's veto shall be taken by yeas
and nays and entered on the journal.
   (D)   Reconsideration Of Vote: No vote of the city council shall be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting thereof unless at such special
meeting there be present as large a number of aldermen as were present when
such vote was taken.
   (E)   Committee Reports:
      1.   Every committee of the city council, in reporting upon any subject
referred to it, shall attach to its report all papers or documents in the
possession of the committee relative to the matter so referred.
      2.   Any report of a committee of the city council shall be deferred, for
final action thereof, at the next regular meeting of the same after the report
is made, upon the request of any two (2) aldermen present. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-5-9: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
Beginning with the regular election of municipal officers on April 7, 1981, and
for each regular municipal election thereafter all persons elected to a
municipal office: mayor, city treasurer, city clerk and members of the city
council, shall be sworn in and assume their respective duties at the first
regular meeting of the city council in the month of May immediately following
their election in April. (Ord. 268, 4-6-1981)
1-5-10: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE:
   (A)   The member requesting electronic attendance, such as by telephone,
video or internet connection, should notify the mayor, city clerk, or city
collector, at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless
impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be arranged.
Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of
a request for electronic attendance.
   (B)   The city clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request,
shall inform the city council of the request for electronic attendance.
   (C)   The following conditions must be met before a member of the city
council may attend any open meeting electronically 1 .
      1.   After a roll call establishing that a quorum is physically present,
the presiding officer shall call for a motion before one or more members will
be permitted to attend by electronic means. The presiding officer will specify
the reason entitling the absent member, or members, to attend electronically.
The motion must be approved by a vote of a majority of the members present. The
presiding officer shall declare the requesting member, or members, present. The
vote may not be reconsidered.
      2.   If more than one member participates by electronic means, the absent
members may not meet at the same remote location if their joint presence at the
remote location would constitute a violation of the Illinois open meetings act.
      3.   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the city of Momence; or
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
      4.   The member seeking participation shall be available on the telephone
or other communication device not less than five (5) minutes prior to the
meeting.
      5.   Costs associated with the member's participation shall be borne
solely by the member and not the city.
   (D)   The member participating electronically and other members of the city
council must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience
must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing
electronic attendance at any meeting, the city of Momence shall provide
equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
   (E)   If the presiding officer of the public body is attending the meeting
by electronic means, then the person who acts in the absence of the presiding
officer shall chair the meeting. If there is none, then the presiding officer
shall appoint a member of the public body who is physically present at the
meeting to serve as chair of the meeting. The appointment of a chair shall be
subject to the consent of the public body. The presiding officer who is
participating by electronic means shall be authorized to participate in the
meeting to the extent authorized by law or ordinance except for those acts
involved with chairing the meeting.
   (F)   Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site
attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting. The meeting
minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is
physically present or present by electronic means.
   (G)   Any member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express
his or her comments during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as
those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending
electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called
during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the city
clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
   (H)   No member of a public body who is participating electronically in a
public meeting shall be permitted to participate in any portion of the meeting
which is closed to the public, including, but not limited to, executive
sessions which are closed to the public under the applicable provisions of the
open meetings act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
   (I)   No member of a public body may participate electronically in a public
meeting more than twelve (12) times in a fiscal year. (Ord. 748, 10-15-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined in 5 ILCS 120/7.
1-5-11: PUBLIC PARTICIPATION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to address or attempt to address
any regular meeting of the city council except in compliance with this section.
Public participation shall be permitted during the following portions of a
public meeting:
      1.   Citizen forum.
      2.   Public hearing.
      3.   Invited speakers.
   (B)   Public participation shall not be permitted during any meetings or
portions of meeting which are deemed closed sessions under the open meetings
act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq., as amended.
   (C)   The presiding officer may impose reasonable limitations on public
participation at public meetings, such as barring repetitious, irrelevant,
immaterial, or inappropriate comments or testimony. The presiding officer shall
have the authority to halt or suspend the public communications/hearing to a
later date due to the duration of the public forum/hearing or lack of
compliance with this section. In addition to those portions of a meeting set
aside for public participation, the presiding officer shall have the discretion
to permit public comment at any other time during a meeting, subject to the
provisions of this section.
   (D)   Persons wishing to speak during the public participation portion of a
city council meeting shall sign in ten (10) minutes prior to the start of the
meeting stating their name, and item on which they wish to speak. All items
must pertain to city business. All speakers shall comply with this section and
rulings of the presiding officer. Speakers shall be called by name by the
presiding officer.
   (E)   Speakers shall identify themselves before beginning their comments or
questions. Speakers shall provide their comments or questions, and provide any
supporting documentation and/or evidence they may wish to submit. Speakers
shall refrain from engaging in debates, directing threats or personal attacks
at the presiding officer, city council, city staff, other speakers or members
of the audience. The presiding officer and city council shall have no
obligation to respond to any comments or questions raised by members of the
public.
   (F)   Members of the audience shall refrain from applauding, cheering, or
booing during or at the conclusion of remarks made by any speaker, staff
member, city council member, or presiding officer.
   (G)   Groups of residents should, whenever possible, consolidate their
comments and avoid repetition through the use of representative speakers.
   (H)   All speakers shall limit their comments to approximately five (5)
minutes.
   (I)   The petitioner of an agenda item is a person or entity with a direct
interest in a decision. The petitioner may proceed with a brief presentation of
the petition for no more than ten (10) minutes.
      1.   Speakers may comment or ask questions on the agenda item after the
presentation of the petition provided they comply with all the applicable
provisions of this section.
      2.   The petitioner shall have no more than five (5) minutes to reply to
comments or questions. Public participation after the petitioner's reply shall
be prohibited unless the presiding officer directs otherwise.
      3.   The presiding officer and city council may, but need not ask
questions of the petitioner and speakers at the conclusion of their comments.
      4.   The city council may then deliberate upon the petition. No
additional comment may be made by the public or the petitioner except upon the
express permission of the presiding officer.
   (J)   The rules applicable to the public forum shall generally apply to
public hearings.
   (K)   Any citizen may address the city council by invitation of the
presiding officer or a majority of the city council present. Speakers invited
to participate shall be subject to such limitations as the presiding officer or
majority of the city council shall prescribe. In the absence of other
restrictions, such speakers shall be governed by the same rules which govern
the public forum. (Ord. 799, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6-1: Qualifications, Term Of Office
1-6-2: Oath; Bond
1-6-3: Powers And Duties
1-6-4: Vacancy In Office (Rep. by Ord. 645, 4-21-2008)
1-6-5: Mayor Pro Tem
1-6-1: QUALIFICATIONS, TERM OF OFFICE:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall be a
citizen of the United States, a qualified elector, reside within the city
limits, and shall hold his office for four (4) years and until his successor is
elected and qualified. (Ord. 200, 1-16-1978)
1-6-2: OATH; BOND:
The mayor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath
prescribed for other city officers and shall execute a bond to the city in the
penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office. (Ord. 200, 1-16-1978)
1-6-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   General: The mayor shall devote so much of his time to the duties of
his office as a faithful and efficient discharge thereof may require. He shall
take care that all the regulations of the city be duly enforced, respected and
observed. He shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but shall not
vote except in case of a tie, when he shall give the deciding vote. He shall
preserve order and decorum and generally do and perform all acts and things
which are enjoined upon him by the laws of the state of Illinois and the
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   Appointments; Filling Vacancies: The mayor shall appoint, by and with
the advice and consent of the city council, all officers of the city whose
appointments are not otherwise provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy
shall occur in any office which by law or ordinance he is empowered and
required to fill, he shall at the next regular meeting of the city council
occurring not less than ten (10) days after such vacancy communicate to the
city council the name of his appointee to such office, and pending the
concurrence of the council in such appointment, he may designate some suitable
person to discharge the functions of such office.
   (C)   Supervise Conduct Of Officers: The mayor shall supervise the conduct
of all officers of the city and see that they faithfully and efficiently
discharge the duties of the respective offices. He shall inquire into all
reasonable complaints made against them and cause all their neglects or
violations of duty to be promptly corrected and he shall, in case he becomes
satisfied that any officer wilfully neglects or violates his duty, cause such
officer to be prosecuted and punished. He shall from time to time give the
council such information relative to the affairs of the city as he may deem
proper, and recommend for said council's consideration any measures that he may
deem expedient, tending to the well being, security or improvements of the
city.
   (D)   Removal Of Officers: The mayor shall have the power to remove any
officer appointed by him on any formal charge whenever he shall be of the
opinion that the interests of the city demand such removal but he shall report
the reasons of such removal to the city council at the next regular meeting
thereof to be held not less than five (5) days after such removal; and if the
mayor shall fail or refuse to file with the city clerk a statement of the
reasons for such removal, or if the city council, by a two- thirds (2/3) vote
of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by yeas and nays, to be
entered upon its record, disapprove of such removal, such officer shall
thereupon become restored to the office from which he was so removed; but he
shall give new bonds and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed
a second time for the same offense.
   (E)   Ordinances; Approval, Veto: The mayor shall carefully inspect all
ordinances passed by the city council and affix his official signature to such
as he may approve and return them to the city clerk within ten (10) days after
their passage. All ordinances passed as aforesaid which do not meet his
approval shall be returned to the council with his objections thereto in
writing at the next regular meeting of the council occurring not less than five
(5) days after the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more
items or appropriations contained in any ordinance, or to the entire ordinance,
and in case the veto only extends to a part of such ordinance the residue
thereof shall take effect and be in force. In case the mayor shall fail to
return any ordinance with his objections thereto, by the time aforesaid, he
shall be deemed to have approved such ordinance and the same shall take effect
accordingly.
   (F)   Commissions, Warrants: The mayor shall sign all commissions and
warrants granted, issued or drawn by the order of the city council, or
authorized by the ordinances of the city. In all contracts where the city is a
party, he shall sign the same on behalf of the city and it shall be his special
duty to see that the other contracting party faithfully complies with the
contract, and on all suits wherein the city is a party, it shall be the duty of
the mayor to advise with the city attorney in prosecuting or defending the
same, as the case may be.
   (G)   Licenses; Issuance And Revocation: The mayor shall grant licenses, for
purposes authorized by any provision of the city, to such persons duly
qualified according to ordinance, as he may deem proper, unless the city
council shall otherwise provide, and may revoke the same at pleasure; provided,
that licenses for the operation of saloons or dramshops shall first be
authorized by the city council.
   (H)   Additional Duties: In addition to the above and foregoing, the mayor
shall perform all such duties as may be prescribed by law, or by the city
ordinances and shall take care that the laws and ordinances of the city are
enforced. (Ord. 200, 1-16-1978)
1-6-4: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 645, 4-21-2008)
1-6-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall
elect one of its number to act as mayor pro tem who, during such absence or
disability, shall possess all the powers of the mayor. (Ord. 200, 1-16-1978)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election, Qualifications
1-7-2: Bond
1-7-3: Records Of Council
1-7-4: General Duties
1-7-5: Records Given To Successor
1-7-1: ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS:
The city clerk shall be elected and shall hold office as provided by law and
the provisions of this code. He shall be a qualified elector and resident of
the city. (Ord. 201, 1-16-1978)
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon his duties, the city clerk elect shall give bond to the
city with two (2) or more resident sureties, to be approved by the city
council, in the sum of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties as such city clerk, and
that he will safely keep and pay over all money intrusted to his keeping as
such city clerk. (Ord. 201, 1-16-1978)
1-7-3: RECORDS OF COUNCIL:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attend all meetings of the city
council, keep a full and correct journal of its proceedings and of all
ordinances which the council may ordain. He shall carefully preserve all books,
records and papers which may come into his possession belonging to the city and
do and perform all other duties which may be required of him by ordinance of
the city or by the city council or mayor. (Ord. 201, 1-16-1978)
1-7-4: GENERAL DUTIES:
The city clerk shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Receive and collect all monies, except taxes, due or payable to the
city whether for fines, water rents or for any other purpose whatsoever, and on
the first Monday following the date upon which such monies are received by the
city clerk, he shall pay over all of such monies to the city treasurer who
shall thereupon issue to such clerk a receipt for all monies so paid to him.
   (B)   Keep a full and correct record of all of the financial transactions of
the city and of the waterworks system of the city including a record of all
monies due and owing the city, by whom and what claim, account or demand owing,
and a record of all sums of money received by him for the city, the date when
received, the amount received, the name of the party making the payment and the
account to which each payment was credited; a record of the dates when such
monies were paid over to the city treasurer; and a full and complete account
with every person using city water.
   (C)   Keep a full and correct record of every order granted by the city
council, the amount thereof, the name of the person for whom issued and the
claim, account or demand for which issued.
   (D)   At the regular monthly meeting of the city council, or whenever
requested by the council or the financial committee thereof, make a full and
correct report of the condition of the city's finances and of all monies
received by him and of all orders issued by him since making his last report or
during such other period during his term of office as shall be inquired of.
(Ord. 201, 1-16-1978)
1-7-5: RECORDS GIVEN TO SUCCESSOR:
At the expiration of his term of office the city clerk shall turn over and
deliver to his successor in office all books, records, papers and other
property belonging to the city over which as city clerk he is custodian. (Ord.
201, 1-16-1978)
CHAPTER 8
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appointment
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: Receipt, Disbursement Of City Monies
1-8-4: Reports To City Council
1-8-5: Treasurer's Records
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT:
The City Treasurer shall be appointed and shall be selected from time to time
in the same manner as other appointed officers of the city, which would be the
salary of the appointed City Treasurer shall be that otherwise established by
ordinance or other official municipal action. (Ord. 853, 9-8-2020)
1-8-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of an appointed Treasurer, such person so
appointed shall furnish a good and sufficient bond to the City to be approved
by the city council in the penal sum of not less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), signed by two (2) responsible parties who are residents of the
city, conditioned that he will well and truly perform all of the duties of the
office of city treasurer and that he will fully account for all monies received
by him as such treasurer. (Ord. 202, 1-16-1978; amd. Ord. 853, 9-8-2020)
1-8-3: RECEIPT, DISBURSEMENT OF CITY MONIES:
The city treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the city, collected by
the city clerk. He shall also receive the city taxes and shall keep a full and
correct record of all the financial transactions of the city, including a
proper and regular account of all monies received and disbursed; of whom
received and to whom paid out; for what claim, account or demand received or
paid out; and the date of such receipt or payment.
The city treasurer shall in no case pay out money except in pursuance of an
order signed by the city council countersigned by the city clerk.
All checks disbursing city monies shall require the signature of two (2) of the
following elected officials: the mayor, the city treasurer, or the city clerk.
(Ord. 588, 5-2-2005)
1-8-4: REPORTS TO CITY COUNCIL:
   (A)   Monthly Report: The city treasurer shall, at the second regular
meeting of the city council in each month, exhibit to the council an abstract
of his accounts of all monies received and paid out.
   (B)   Annual Report: At the second city council meeting after the budget is
approved in each year the city treasurer shall exhibit to the city council, and
more often if required, a full and detailed account of all receipts and
expenditures since the date of the last annual report, all monies due to the
city and the state of the city's treasury. The report herein provided for shall
be filed with the city clerk and shall be published in some newspaper published
in Kankakee County. (Ord. 650, 7-21-2008)
1-8-5: TREASURER'S RECORDS:
The treasurer's records, including monthly invoices, city checks, documents
concerning receipts and expenditures and any other treasurer's records, shall
be maintained and kept at the Momence city hall. The treasurer's records shall
not be removed from the Momence city hall without action and consent by the
city council. (Ord. 591, 5-2-2005)
CHAPTER 9
CITY COLLECTOR
SECTION:
1-9-1: Office Established; Appointment; Term; Vacancy
1-9-2: Oath; Bond
1-9-3: Books And Accounts
1-9-4: Monthly Report
1-9-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; TERM; VACANCY:
The office of the city collector is hereby established in the city. The mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council, shall annually appoint a city
collector who shall hold his office for a term not exceeding one year, or until
his successor is appointed and qualified. The mayor and city council may at any
time fill any vacancy that may occur in the office of city collector. (Ord.
123, 5-1-1916)
1-9-2: OATH; BOND:
The city collector, before entering upon the duties of his office shall take
the oath prescribed for city officers and shall execute a bond to the city in
such sum as the mayor and city council shall decide from time to time, with at
least two (2) good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the city council,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office and the
payment of all money received by him according to law and ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 123, 5-1-1916)
1-9-3: BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS:
The city collector shall keep his books and accounts in such a manner as to
show with entire accuracy all monies received and disbursed by him for the
city, stating from whom and on what account received and to whom and on what
account paid out, and the same shall be at all times open to the mayor and
clerk and the finance committee or any member of the city council. (Ord. 123,
5-1-1916)
1-9-4: MONTHLY REPORT:
The city collector shall make a monthly report on all delinquent bills and all
miscellaneous monies collected, said report to be submitted at the second
meeting of the month. (Min., 1-18-1960)
CHAPTER 10
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Bond
1-10-2: Duties
1-10-3: Special Assessment Proceedings
1-10-1: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall execute
a bond in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) with approval of the city
council. (Ord., 6-15-1891)
1-10-2: DUTIES:
The city attorney shall perform such duties as the council, by ordinance or
resolution, may prescribe from time to time. (Ord., 5-27-1895)
1-10-3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS:
The city attorney shall have no authority whatever to appear for the city in
any special assessment proceedings for waterworks or anything relating thereto
without a resolution passed by a majority of all the members elect. The city
council, by resolution, shall designate such officer or attorney as said
council deems proper to represent the city in all special assessment
proceedings, and none other shall represent the city. (Ord., 5-27-1895)
CHAPTER 11
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-11-1: Salaries
1-11-2: Police Department Rules And Regulations
1-11-3: Director Of Public Works
1-11-1: SALARIES:
The salaries and compensation for elected officials, appointed officials and
City employees shall be as set from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
   (A)   The salary of the Mayor of the City is hereby set at two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per regular meeting or special meeting attended.
   (B)   The salary of the Liquor Commissioner of the City is hereby set at one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per month.
   (C)   The salary of the City Clerk is hereby set at two hundred dollars
($200.00) per regular meeting or special meeting attended. (Ord. 653, 10-20-
2008)
   (D)   The salary of the City Treasurer is hereby set at two hundred dollars
($200.00) per regular meeting or special meeting attended. The Treasurer does
not have to attend the first meeting of the month in order to be compensated.
(Ord. 653, 10-20-2008; amd. Ord. 831, 11-6-2017)
   (E)   The salary of the Aldermen of the City is hereby set at one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per regular meeting or special meeting attended. Aldermen
shall receive no compensation for any regular meeting or special meeting they
fail to attend if they miss more than two (2) meetings in any calendar year.
   (F)   The compensation fixed by this section shall be effective as to each
respective office on the first day of the term for that office when said term
begins at least one hundred eighty (180) days after the date this section
becomes law. The compensation established by prior ordinance for each office
shall continue to be paid to that office until the compensation set forth in
this section becomes effective as to that office. (Ord. 653, 10-20-2008)
1-11-2: POLICE DEPARTMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Authority: The Chief of Police is the Chief Executive Officer of the
department and the final departmental authority in all matters of policy,
operation, and discipline subject to these rules and regulations. He shall
plan, direct, coordinate, and control all officers and activities of the
department and shall be responsible for the continued operation of the
department. The Chief may promulgate reasonable orders relating to the
operation of the department and its officers not inconsistent with these rules.
He shall keep an inventory of all property of the department and shall maintain
all other records deemed necessary for the safe and orderly operation of the
department. In the absence of the Chief of Police or in the case of his
inability to act, the next officer in command shall be established by the Mayor
of Momence with the advice and consent of the City Council and shall exercise
the powers and duties of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Orders: Officers of the department shall obey and properly execute all
lawful orders from the Chief of Police or the officer in command. Orders may be
oral unless the Chief proposes to establish a rule of general application, and
then such orders shall be in writing and posted on the police bulletin board.
Failure of any officer to obey a lawful order shall be considered
insubordination and subject said officer to the discipline hereinafter set out.
An officer who receives an unlawful or improper order shall report the same to
the Chairman of the Police Committee of the City Council. If the Chairman is of
the opinion that such order is unlawful or improper, he shall call a meeting of
the Police Committee for the purpose of considering the allowance or revocation
of said order. Said meeting shall be called within ten (10) days and the Chief
of Police and the officer objecting to the order shall be present at such
meeting. The order shall be obeyed until overruled. (Ord. 328, 7-21-1986)
   (C)   Personnel Matters:
      1.   No person shall become a member of the Momence Police Department
except upon making application for employment in writing on a City of Momence
employment form and upon exhibiting satisfactory evidence to the Police
Committee of the City of Momence that he or she qualifies in all respects to be
a police officer within the City of Momence and State of Illinois. All police
officers, other than those officers who shall be employed on a full time basis,
shall be qualified to enter and successfully complete any training mandated by
the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. The aforesaid hiring
standard, particularly with respect to part time police officers employed by
the City of Momence, Illinois, shall be submitted to the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board, as required by statute. Upon the Police
Committee determining the need for a police officer and the passing on the
fitness of the proposed employee to serve in such capacity, the Police
Committee shall recommend the hiring of said person to the City Council. At the
time of hiring, the City Council, or the current labor contract, shall set the
wages of said officer. (Ord. 701, 1-3-2011)
      2.   All persons hired by the City Council as a police officer of the
City of Momence shall be on probation for a period of twelve (12) to eighteen
(18) months. At the time of hiring, the City Council shall determine and fix
the period of probation and communicate said fact to the officer. The officer
may at any time during said period be fired for any reason by the City Council
and said fact shall further be communicated to the officer at the time of his
or her hiring.
      3.   Whenever a condition exists which is deemed by the Chief of Police
to be an emergency, regular tours of duty may be extended and personal leaves
may be canceled.
      4.   Any officer injured while on duty shall when able, considering the
severity of the injury, report the same orally to the Police Committee of the
City of Momence and shall within five (5) days thereafter file a written report
with the Chief of Police advising him of the nature and circumstances
surrounding the injury. Any injured officer absent from work for more than one
week as a result of said injury shall submit to an examination by a physician
selected by the Chief of Police to determine the nature and extent of said
injury. No officer so examined shall return to work until said physician gives
his written opinion to the Chief of Police that the officer is capable of
returning to work.
      5.   Any officer absent from work on account of illness or injury shall
notify the Chief of Police as soon as the illness or injury occurs. Such notice
must be given at least two (2) hours prior to the time said officer is to
report for duty, if possible; otherwise said officer shall not be paid for the
sick day. All officers claiming pay for sick leave in excess of five (5)
consecutive days shall, before returning to work, submit a physician's
certificate stating the nature and extent of the illness or injury causing the
absence and also stating whether the physician is of the opinion that the
illness or injury is cured and the officer is able to return to work as a
police officer.
      6.   All officers shall be granted five (5) personal days off each year
with pay which can be used for illness, business, or any other lawful reason.
Personal days off shall be allowed to accumulate up to five (5) days per year,
not to exceed ten (10) days in any one year. No officer shall take a personal
day unless, however, such officer shall give two (2) days' notice to the Chief
of Police prior to using such day.
      7.   Officers served with notice that they are being sued shall
immediately notify in writing the Chief of Police and the Chairman of the
Police Committee of such suit. In addition, said officer shall deliver to the
Chief of Police copies of all documents served upon him.
   (D)   Vacation: Each full time police officer shall be entitled to a
vacation from duty with pay as set from time to time in accordance with the
annual vacation schedule of all employees adopted by the City Council. The
Chief of Police shall designate when such vacation shall be taken and may
schedule said vacations in such a manner to ensure that at all times adequate
personnel remain on and available for duty within the City of Momence. Any days
taken as vacation shall be taken in blocks of at least two (2) consecutive
days.
   (E)   Secondary Employment: No officer shall accept any other employment
unless and until the officer shall submit a request for permission to do so to
the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall have the final decision on
whether or not to grant the right to such officer to be employed in any other
occupation other than as a police officer. Any officer who engages in
employment outside of his regular duties as a police officer of the City of
Momence shall be subject to call at any time to perform the duties and fill the
responsibilities of a police officer of the City of Momence. In the event that
the Chief of Police determines that any secondary employment previously granted
permission for is conflicting with the ability of the officer to perform his
duties as a police officer of the City of Momence, he shall notify the officer
and the officer shall forthwith terminate such secondary employment. The Chief
of Police or the acting Chief of Police shall not, however, unless expressly
authorized by the Police Committee of the City of Momence, accept any other
employment while acting in the capacity as Chief of Police or acting Chief of
Police of the Momence Police Department. In the event that the Chief of Police
or acting Chief of Police desires to accept secondary employment, he shall
notify the Chairman of the Police Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman of the
Police Committee shall call a meeting as soon as is reasonably possible for the
purpose of discussing and deciding whether or not to authorize the Chief of
Police to so accept such secondary employment. In the event that the Police
Committee deems it acceptable for the Chief of Police to accept such secondary
employment, it shall so determine by a majority vote of those members present
at said meeting and may set certain restrictions and parameters on the nature
and extent of such secondary employment. In the event that the Police Committee
finds that said secondary employment would provide a conflict with said chief
of police's duties and responsibilities as chief of police, it shall so
determine. The decision of the police committee in this matter shall be final.
   (F)   Intergovernmental Cooperation: All officers shall cooperate with the
department and all other governmental agencies in the conduct of investigations
of criminal matters or instances involving police officers. Refusal to testify
before federal, state, county, or local courts, grand juries, investigative
committees, or the police committee of the city of Momence shall constitute
improper conduct and subject the officer to discipline.
   (G)   Property And Equipment:
      1.   Officers are responsible for the proper care of the department
property entrusted to them. Upon separation from the employ of the city of
Momence, all officers shall turn in and surrender to the chief of police all
department property in their possession.
      2.   All officers shall exercise diligence in their use of city property
and shall immediately report to the chief of police any loss or damage to any
department property or equipment assigned to them. All equipment shall be in
clean and good working order.
   (H)   Complaints Against Department Members: Any officer who receives a
complaint against another officer, known or unknown, from any source or agency,
whether written or oral, shall take such complaint in a courteous and efficient
manner. This complaint shall be forwarded in writing to the chief of police and
the chairman of the police committee. If the chief of police believes there is
a basis for further investigation, he shall so advise the chairman of the
police committee and the chairman shall then call a meeting of the police
committee to investigate and determine if there is any need for any further
action in regard to any of the allegations made in such complaint.
   (I)   Firearms:
      1.   Officers are considered to be on duty or eligible for duty at all
times and, therefore, shall be civilly armed but shall not be required to carry
a weapon while off duty if it would unreasonably impede the nature of their
activity. The chief of police is authorized to develop, promulgate, and form
rules and regulations regarding the equipment, uniforms, and weapons to be used
by all officers.
      2.   Whenever an officer discharges his firearm for whatever reason,
except in a firing range, he shall verbally notify the chief of police of such
discharge and the circumstances surrounding it and shall, within twenty four
(24) hours thereafter, make a full and complete written report of the incident
to the chief of police. A copy of such report shall also be sent to the
chairman of the police committee. Officers shall not possess their firearms in
any tavern or other place where alcoholic beverages are served except in the
line of duty.
   (J)   Communications And Correspondence: All officers shall read the
bulletin board daily when reporting to work for all orders and directions of
the chief of police. No other notices or documents may be posted on the
bulletin board without the prior consent of the chief of police.
   (K)   City Property: No officer shall use any city property for any private
or personal purpose.
   (L)   Public Activity: No officer shall appear as a representative of the
Momence police department at any public appearance, speech, or demonstration
without the prior permission of the chief of police. Officers shall at all
times be courteous and orderly in their dealings with the public. They shall
perform their duties in a professional manner avoiding harsh, violent, profane,
or insolent language and shall always remain calm regardless of the
provocation. Upon request of any citizen, officers shall supply their name and
number. They shall tend to requests of the public quickly and accurately
consistent with their obligations of the law and shall not criticize any other
officer or the chief of police in such a public fashion which would tend to
impair the operation of the department by impairing its efficiency and
interfering with the ability to maintain discipline. All officers shall make
maximum utilization of the grievance procedures as hereinafter set out to
resolve differences and disputes.
   (M)   Accidents: Accidents involving an officer and city property shall be
communicated in writing to the chief of police and the chairman of the police
committee as soon after such accident as is reasonably proper. Such report
shall describe the nature of the business of the officer at the time of the
activity, the names and addresses of all persons involved and all witnesses to
the accident, whether or not any person suffered injury and the nature of the
injury, and what the damage was to the vehicle involved.
   (N)   Department Use Of Motor Vehicles:
      1.   Officers shall not use any department vehicles for anything other
than official business while on duty and shall keep and maintain at all times a
valid driver's license necessary to operate said police vehicle. Each officer
assigned to such a vehicle shall be responsible for the proper use and care of
said vehicle and all property located therein. At the beginning of each tour of
duty, the officer assigned a vehicle shall inspect the vehicle to assure that
it is in good condition and any defect or damage shall be verbally reported to
the chief of police with a written report prepared at the end of tour duty. In
the event that the condition of any vehicle is such that the officer believes
it unsafe, he shall so notify the chief of police immediately who shall then
remedy the situation by causing the vehicle to be repaired and put in good
working condition and order.
      2.   Officers shall operate vehicles in a reasonable and prudent manner
having due regard for the traffic laws and shall at all times obey the traffic
laws and courtesies of the road and shall not be excused from obeying such laws
except when operating a police vehicle as an emergency vehicle.
      3.   When operating a vehicle in response to an emergency assignment, the
officer shall take due care and caution to maintain control of said vehicle and
when operating the vehicle in pursuit of a known offender shall always weigh
the risk involved against the nature of the offense which caused the pursuit.
Pursuit will be terminated when the risk of the high speed pursuit outweighs
the desirability of apprehension. Sirens shall be used only in those situations
in which an emergency is thought to exist or where the officer is so directed
by the chief of police.
   (O)   Personal Conduct: Officers will abide by all federal, state, county,
and city laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances. In addition to engaging in
the proper conduct of a police officer under the direction of the chief of
police and without limiting the obligations of all officers, all officers
shall: 1) obey all lawful orders, 2) perform their duties in a prompt and
expeditious fashion, 3) refrain from unnecessary shouting or the use of obscene
vocal language, and 4) promptly respond to requests for police service.
Officers shall not take a meal or refreshment break in a public place while on
duty without the approval of the chief of police and shall not solicit gifts,
presents, money, free admissions, or other gratuities as a police officer.
Officers working part time jobs wearing their police uniforms shall be subject
while on such job to perform their obligations in a manner consistent with
these rules and regulations. They shall conduct their private and professional
lives in a manner to avoid bringing the department to disrepute.
   (P)   Performance Of Duties:
      1.   Officers shall abide by and enforce all state and local laws and
ordinances and shall do their best to protect life and property, prevent crime,
and arrest persons believed by officers to have committed crimes when found
within the city of Momence.
      2.   Officers who are subpoenaed to testify at any civil trial or hearing
shall notify the chief of police upon receipt of the subpoena as well as the
city attorney.
      3.   Any officer appearing as a witness before any court or hearing
board, including the police committee of the city of Momence, exercising his
constitutional privilege and refusing to testify on the grounds of self-
incrimination, shall be subject to disciplinary action.
      4.   All money or property coming into the possession of an officer,
whether lost, abandoned, recovered, or to be used as evidence, shall be
delivered to the chief of police and the officer shall take a receipt therefor.
      5.   Officers shall discharge their duties in a firm, impartial, and
efficient manner. Officers shall act together and assist and protect each other
in the maintenance of law and order in the city of Momence. Any officer who
acts in a manner tending to bring discredit and disrepute to the city of
Momence or fails to assume responsibility and exercise his duties in a proper
fashion shall be subject to disciplinary action.
      6.   Officers shall perform those specific duties and responsibilities
assigned to them and shall perform all other duties as may be required of them.
      7.   Officers shall not take any action in any criminal case arising
outside of the city of Momence without the approval of the chief of police
unless there is an imminent threat to persons or property as a result of any
such perceived criminal activity. Officers shall not go outside the city of
Momence except when in fresh pursuit of a suspected criminal or when authorized
by the chief of police or unless a request is received from an outside
authority because of a grave emergency or urgent need for assistance. Officers
shall not have access to department records or reports except those cases
directly involved with such officer or unless authorized by the chief of
police.
      8.   It shall be the responsibility of each officer to thoroughly
familiarize himself or herself with these rules and regulations and the orders
and policies of the chief of police and the department. Each officer shall have
a working knowledge of all laws and ordinances. All officers shall observe such
laws and ordinances and shall render service to the city with courage,
discretion, and loyalty.
      9.   Officers shall work such hours as assigned to them by the chief of
police.
      10.   The first officer to arrive at the scene of a crime or other
incident requiring police supervision shall be responsible for the following
actions as they may apply: a) summoning medical assistance and administering
first aid, b) arresting persons which the officer has reasonable grounds to
believe has committed a crime, c) securing the scene of the incident, and d)
obtaining further police assistance.
   (Q)   Arrests: When making an arrest, the officer shall: 1) employ all
reasonably necessary force and restraint to assure safe custody and the safety
of the officer and the public, 2) transport the person in custody to the county
detention center as soon as practicable, and 3) deliver to the appropriate
emergency hospital any person in custody requiring medical attention and the
officer shall be responsible for the security of the prisoner until properly
relieved.
   (R)   Department Discipline:
      1.   Any officer who violates any laws of the United States of America,
the state of Illinois, local ordinances, any of these rules or regulations, or
written or verbal orders of the chief of police or who is incompetent to
perform his duties is subject to discipline. Disciplinary actions may be
instituted by either the chief of police or by the police committee. In the
event that the chief of police institutes disciplinary proceedings, he shall
notify the officer in writing of the grounds for such discipline and the
discipline imposed. The chief of police shall have the power to suspend any
officer for up to five (5) days without pay. In the event that upon receipt of
the notice of discipline by the officer from the chief of police the officer
disagrees with the discipline, he may appeal to the police committee by
delivering written notice of his appeal to the chairman of the police committee
within five (5) days after the date of the written discipline notice from the
chief of police. Thereafter within one month, the police committee shall hold a
hearing to determine whether or not the discipline was justified. If the police
committee finds that the discipline was justified, it shall so rule. If the
police committee finds that the chief of police was not justified in imposing
discipline, it shall order such discipline expunged from the officer's record
and if the form of discipline was suspension without pay, the officer shall be
reimbursed for the period of time suspended.
      2.   The police committee may also institute discipline proceedings by
notifying any officer in writing of any charges it wishes to bring against him
or her. Thereafter within ten (10) days, the police committee shall hold a
hearing and determine what, if any, action it wishes to take. The police
committee shall have the authority to suspend any officer without pay for up to
ninety (90) days. In the event that the police committee determines that the
violation by the officer warrants his or her firing, it shall so recommend to
the city council and the city council shall have the final authority, after
reviewing all evidence considered by the police committee, to terminate any
such officer upon the recommendation of the police committee.
      3.   The police committee and the chief of police shall exercise the
authority to discipline concurrently and may each act on the same incident if,
in the opinion of the police committee, the violation of the officer warrants
punishment in excess of five (5) days' suspension without pay.
   (S)   Definition Of Year: Whenever any benefit accrues or is required to be
taken or is measured by the period of one year including, but not limited to,
under subsections (C) and (D) of this section regarding sick leave or vacation
time or under any other subsection or provision of these rules and regulations,
a year shall be considered to commence on May 1 and terminate on April 30 of
the succeeding year. For the transitional period of these rules in 1986, upon
the adoption of the same, the year shall commence on May 1, 1986, and shall
terminate on April 30, 1987.
   (T)   Savings Provision: Except as herein specified or delegated within
these rules and regulations, all other powers and discretionary authority
recognized by either federal, state, or local law or ordinance are vested in
the city council to the extent not inconsistent therewith. (Ord. 328, 7-21-
1986)
   (U)   Part Time Police:
      1.   Employment: The city of Momence may employ part time police officers
from time to time as they deem necessary.
      2.   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in this code, general orders and code of conduct. The hours a part
time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time police
officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
      3.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
         (a)   Be of good moral character, temperate habits, sound health, and
physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
         (b)   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
         (c)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
         (d)   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
         (e)   Possess no prior felony convictions.
         (f)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have
been honorably discharged.
      4.   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time police officers serve at the
discretion of the city of Momence and shall not have any property rights in
said employment unless otherwise outlined in the present labor relations
agreement, and may be removed by the city authorities at any time. Part time
police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general orders
issued by the police department. (Ord. 736, 5-21-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
1-11-3: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   (A)   Office Created: There is created the office of director of public
works, who shall be appointed each year by the mayor with the consent and
approval of the city council.
   (B)   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The director of public works shall be responsible for the
administration of all public works in the city of Momence, Kankakee County,
Illinois, which shall include all city departments, with the exception of the
collection's office, building inspection's department, and the police
department. The person shall be directly responsible to the mayor and the city
council.
      2.   The city of Momence water/sewer, and streets/alleys and maintenance
department heads, will act under the direct supervision of the director of
public works and will be directly responsible to said director of public works.
      3.   The duties of the director of public works shall include, but not be
limited to, the following. He shall:
         (a)   Have under his direct supervision all city utilities and
services and shall directly oversee any and all construction projects in the
city of Momence, Kankakee County, Illinois;
         (b)   Be in charge of working with the department heads to utilize the
manpower employed by the city so as to more efficiently provide the various
services that are required from the city;
         (c)   Be responsible for the creation, implementation and maintenance
of all public works facilities;
         (d)   Be responsible for all public relations in regard to the public
works services;
         (e)   Be responsible for working with the various city committees and
agencies and shall be in charge of integrating the various activities of these
committees, commissions and agencies in connection with all city ordinances
and/or policies formulated by the city of Momence, and shall be responsible for
sharing proper communication between the various parts of city government;
         (f)   Be responsible for that portion of the annual budget dealing
with the department of public works and will be responsible for its
implementation;
         (g)   Be in charge of all purchasing by the department of public works
and will be responsible for the coordination and implementation of the various
procedures and policies for purchasing;
         (h)   Represent the city in all matters relating to public works and
in any other way deemed necessary by the mayor or the city council.
      4.   The director of public works shall have all the powers necessary to
delegate any responsibilities aforementioned and will be responsible only to
the mayor and the city council.
      5.   The director of public works shall have charge of the maintenance
and repair of all city owned buildings.
      6.   All physical property of the city, not assigned by the city council
to some other department or officer or employee, shall be in the care and
custody of the director of public works.
   (C)   Appointment: The appointment of an individual as director of public
works shall create no property interest or other manner of contractual right in
said position. Said position shall be deemed to create an employment at will
relationship between the city and newly appointed director of public works.
   (D)   Compensation: The compensation or other benefits paid to the director
of public works shall be such as may be duly established by the mayor, with the
approval of the city council. (Ord. 685, 5-3-2010)
CHAPTER 12
CITY FINANCES, TAXATION
SECTION:
1-12-1: Annual Appropriation Ordinance
1-12-2: Expenditures, Borrowing Money
1-12-3: Contracting Liabilities Limited
1-12-4: Annual Tax Levy
1-12-5: Manner Of Collecting Taxes; Payment To Treasurer
1-12-6: Special Tax Levy
1-12-7: Uniformity Of Taxation
1-12-8: City Investment Policy
1-12-1: ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE:
The city council shall, within the first quarter of each fiscal year, pass an
ordinance to be termed the annual appropriation bill in which the city council
shall appropriate such sum or sums of money as it may deem necessary to defray
all necessary expenses and liabilities of the city for the current fiscal year;
and in such ordinance shall specify the objects and purposes for which such
appropriations are made and the amount appropriated for each object or purpose.
No further appropriations shall be made at any other time within such fiscal
year unless the proposition to make each appropriation has been first
sanctioned by a majority of the legal voters of the city either by a petition
signed by them or at a general or special election duly called therefor. (Ord.
199, 2-6-1978)
1-12-2: EXPENDITURES, BORROWING MONEY:
Neither the city council nor any department or officer of the city shall add to
the corporate expenditures in any one year anything over and above the amount
provided for in the annual appropriation bill of that year except as herein
otherwise specially provided; and no expenditure for an improvement to be paid
for out of the general fund of the city shall exceed in any one year the amount
provided for such improvement in the annual appropriation bill; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the city council from
ordering by a two- thirds (2/3) vote any improvement, the necessity of which is
caused by any casualty or accident happening after such annual appropriation is
made. The city council may, by a like vote, order the mayor and the committee
on finance to borrow a sufficient amount to provide for the expense necessary
to be incurred in making any improvements, the necessity of which has arisen as
is last above mentioned, for a space of time not exceeding the close of the
next fiscal year which sum, and the interest, shall be added to the amount
authorized to be raised in the next general tax levy and embraced therein.
Should any judgment be obtained against the city, the mayor and the committee
on finance, under the sanction of the city council, may borrow a sufficient
amount to pay the same for a space of time not exceeding the close of the next
fiscal year, which sum and interest shall in like manner be added to the amount
authorized to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced
therein. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-12-3: CONTRACTING LIABILITIES LIMITED 1 :
No contract shall hereafter be made by the city council or any committee or
member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or
departments of the city, whether the object of the expenditure shall have been
ordered by the city council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been
previously made concerning such expense, except as herein otherwise expressly
provided. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title for regulations regarding contracts.
1-12-4: ANNUAL TAX LEVY:
The city council shall annually, on or before the second Tuesday in December of
each year, ascertain the total amount of appropriations for all corporate
purposes legally made and to be collected from the tax levy of that fiscal
year; and by an ordinance specifying in detail the purposes for which such
appropriations are made, and the sum or amount appropriated for each purpose,
respectively, levy the amount so ascertained upon all the property subject to
taxation within the city, as the same is assessed and equalized for state and
county purposes for the current year. A certified copy of such ordinance shall
be filed with the county clerk of Kankakee County, whose duty it shall be to
ascertain the rate percent which, upon the total valuation of all the property
subject to taxation within the city, as the same is assessed and equalized for
state and county purposes, will produce a net amount not less than the amount
so directed to be levied; and it shall be the duty of said county clerk to
extend such tax in a separate column upon the book of the collector of the
state and county taxes, within the city; provided, the aggregate amount of
taxes levied for any one year, exclusive of the amount levied for the payment
of the bonded indebtedness or interest thereon, and for library purposes, shall
not exceed the rate of two percentum (2%) upon the aggregate valuation of all
property within the city subject to taxation therein, as the same was equalized
for state and county taxes for the current year. (Ord. 364, 10-2-1989)
1-12-5: MANNER OF COLLECTING TAXES; PAYMENT TO TREASURER:
The tax so assessed shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and by
the same officers as state and county taxes, and shall be paid over by the
officers collecting the same to the city treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the officer collecting such tax to settle with and pay
over to the city treasurer, as often as once every thirty (30) days, when
required by said treasurer to do so, the amount of tax that he may have
collected, and at the same time shall render to said treasurer a statement, in
writing, of the amount of tax collected for the city, until the entire tax
collected shall be paid over. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-12-6: SPECIAL TAX LEVY:
Whenever the city if required to levy a tax for the payment of any particular
debt, appropriation or liability, the tax for such purpose shall be included in
the total amount assessed by the city council, and certified to the county
clerk as aforesaid; but the city council shall determine, in the ordinance
making such assessment, what proportion of such total amount shall be
applicable to the payment of such particular debt, appropriation or liability
and the city treasurer shall set apart such proportion of the tax collected and
paid to him for the payment of such particular debt, appropriation or
liability, and shall not disburse the same for any other purpose until such
debt, appropriation or liability shall have been discharged. (Ord. 199, 2-6-
1978)
1-12-7: UNIFORMITY OF TAXATION:
All taxes levied or assessed by the city, except special assessment for local
improvements, shall be uniform upon all taxable property and persons within the
limits of the city, and no property shall be exempt therefrom other than such
property as may be exempt from taxation under the constitution and general laws
of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 199, 2-6-1978)
1-12-8: CITY INVESTMENT POLICY:
   (A)   Scope Of Investment Policy: This investment policy applies to the
investment activities of the city of Momence. All financial assets in other
funds, including the general fund, motor fuel tax funds, special tax allocation
funds, sewer and water funds, and any new funds created by the city council
unless specifically exempted, shall be administered in accordance with the
provision of this policy.
   (B)   Investment Objectives: The expected results of the investment policy
are identified:
      1.   Safety of principal is the foremost objective. Investments of the
city of Momence shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure that
capital losses are avoided, whether they are from securities default, or
erosion of market value.
      2.   The city of Momence's investment portfolio shall be designed with
the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and
economic cycles, taking into account the city's investment risk constraints,
and cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
      3.   In order to further guarantee asset safety, the city of Momence
shall diversify investments to avoid incurring unreasonable risks from the
practice of concentrating investments in specific security types and/or
individual financial institutions.
      4.   The city of Momence will avoid any transaction that might impair
public confidence. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which personnel of prudence, discretion, and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. Such standards,
therefore, avoid unwarranted speculation. Emphasis is placed on the probable
safety of capital, rather than the probable income to be derived.
   (C)   Responsibility For The Investment Program: The establishment of
investment policies is the responsibility of the mayor, and city council.
Management and administrative responsibilities for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the city treasurer or his/her designee. The city treasurer
or his/her designee shall prepare and follow written procedures for the
operation of the investment program, be responsible for all transactions
undertaken, and shall establish a system of accounting controls to safeguard
city assets. The city treasurer or his/her designee, may from time to time
amend the written procedures in a manner consistent with this policy or with
state law. The mayor and city council must approve any modification made
thereto.
   (D)   Ethics And Conflict Of Interest: Full disclosure must be made by
investment personnel to the city council of any material interests they may
hold in a financial institution (brokers/dealers, banks, etc.) which conducts
business with the city.
   (E)   Cash Management: The city treasurer or his/her designee shall prepare
written cash management procedures, which shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Receipts: All monies due the city shall be collected as promptly as
possible. Monies that are received shall be deposited in an approved financial
institution no later than the next business day after receipt by the city. The
city council shall subject to any available legal means of collection
previously approved, amounts that remain uncollected, after a reasonable length
of time. One of the objectives of the city's cash management procedures is to
comply with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes which mandates
prompt investment of funds.
      2.   Disbursements: Any disbursements to suppliers for goods and/or
services or to employees for salaries and wages shall be contingent upon
available appropriation.
      3.   Financial Forecast: At least annually, a financial forecast will be
prepared using expected revenue sources and items of expenditures to project
cash requirements for future years of the city. Analysis will be prepared for
both operating and nonoperating revenues and expenditures. These analyses will
provide a guide for determining the length and amount of investments.
      4.   Pooling Of Cash: Except where otherwise provided by the city
council, the treasurer, or his/her designee, will be authorized to pool the
cash of various funds to maximize investment earnings, where, in his/her
opinion, it is advantageous and prudent to do so. Investment income will be
allocated to the various funds based upon their respective participation.
   (F)   Accounting: The assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenditures of
each fund are maintained as separate entities on the modified accrual basis.
All investment transactions shall be recorded in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles as promulgated by the governmental accounting
standards board. Accounting principles will include:
      1.   Investments will be carried at cost or amortized cost with
approximate market value.
      2.   Any premium or discount on investment will be amortized over the
life of the investment.
      3.   Gains and losses of investments in all funds will be recognized at
the time of the disposition of the security.
   (G)   Financial Institutions: It shall be city policy to select financial
institutions on the following basis:
      1.   Security: The city of Momence shall maintain funds in a financial
institution only if the institution is federally insured.
      2.   Location: Every attempt will be made to invest city funds locally
provided local institutions are price competitive with respect to rates of
return on comparable investment products.
      3.   State Of Condition: The city of Momence will maintain for public and
managerial inspection, current statements of condition for each financial
institution named as depository. If, for any reason, the information furnished
is considered by the city of Momence to be insufficient, the city may request
additional information.
      4.   Statement: Each institution shall be required to submit, in writing,
a statement that they have received, read, and understood the city's investment
policy.
   (H)   Investment Selection: The city may invest in any type of security
allowed for in the Illinois Compiled Statutes regarding the investment of
public funds. Approved investments include:
      1.   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills, or other
securities, which are guaranteed as to principal by the full faith and credit
of the government of the United States Of America.
      2.   Interest bearing savings accounts, interest bearing certificates of
deposit, or interest bearing time deposits, or any other investment
constitutionally direct obligations of any institution as defined by the
Illinois banking act and that is insured by the federal deposit insurance
corporation.
      3.   Illinois public treasurer's investment pool (Illinois funds).
   (I)   Collateral: It shall be city policy to encourage that all funds on
deposit in banks in excess of FDIC limits be secured by some form of
collateral. Direct investments guaranteed by the United States, or any agency
of the United States do not require collateral.
      1.   The city is hereby adopting, by reference, the provisions of the
Illinois public funds investment act 1 , and all amendments from time to time
made therein, and excepting any portions thereof specifically superseded by
this title.
      2.   Pledged collateral will be held by the city in safekeeping and
evidenced by a safekeeping agreement. The collateral agreement will preclude
the release of the pledged assets without authorized signatures of the city
treasurer, but the agreement may allow for an exchange of collateral of like
value.
      3.   All securities should be rated "A" or better by Moodys, or Standard
And Poors.
         (a)   Negotiable obligations of the United States government.
         (b)   Negotiable obligations of any agency or instrumentality of the
United States government guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United
States government.
   (J)   Internal Control: The city treasurer or his/her designee, shall
establish a system of internal controls, which shall be documented in writing.
These internal controls and this investment policy shall be reviewed by an
independent certified public accountant in conjunction with the annual
examination of the financial statements of the city of Momence. The controls
shall be designed to prevent loss of city funds arising from fraud, employee
error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes in financial
markets, or imprudent actions by employees.
      1.   One requirement of internal control is timely reconciliation of all
checking, saving, and investment accounts under the jurisdiction of the
treasurer's office. Reconciliation shall be performed on a monthly basis and
shall be completed no later than thirty (30) days after the end of the monthly
cycle.
   (K)   Reporting: The city treasurer shall submit a monthly cash and
investment report to the city council for review.
      1.   The annual financial report shall include all investment information
as promulgated by the government accounting standards board.
      2.   The city treasurer or his/her designee shall periodically suggest
policies and improvements that might be made in the investment program.
   (L)   Standards Of Prudence: The standard of prudence to be used by the
employees responsible for the investment of public funds shall be the "prudent
person" standard, subject to the foregoing limitations, which states:
      1.   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, with persons knowledgeable of investment
practices, and persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercised in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculations of the investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the possible
income to be derived.
      2.   The above standard is established as the standard of professional
responsibility, and shall be applied in the context of managing the city
investment portfolio. This policy recognizes that there are circumstances
beyond the control of even the most prudent investor, which impact the return
obtained. However, officials and employees of the city, acting in accordance
with this investment policy, and written procedures as may be established, as
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an
individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided that
deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion, and appropriate
action is taken to control adverse developments.
   (M)   Investment/Policy Adoption: The city of Momence's investment policy
shall be adopted by ordinance. The city council and/or treasurer shall review
this policy on an annual basis, and the city council must approve any
modifications made thereto. (Ord. 788, 11-17-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 235.
CHAPTER 13
CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Ascertain Expenditure
1-13-2: Special Assessment (Rep. by Ord. 758, 4-1-2013)
1-13-3: Plans, Specifications Of Public Improvement
1-13-4: Advertising For Bids
1-13-5: Submitting Bids
1-13-6: Opening Bids
1-13-7: Performance Bond
1-13-8: Failure To Fulfill Contract; Interest In Contract
1-13-9: Council Approval
1-13-10: Suspension Of Work
1-13-11: Payment To Contractors
1-13-12: Sale Of Surplus Earth
1-13-13: Inspection; Advance Payment
1-13-14: Extra Work
1-13-15: Authority By Ordinance Or Resolution
1-13-16: Employment
1-13-17: Wage Rates For Public Works Employees
1-13-1: ASCERTAIN EXPENDITURE:
When any public work shall be ordered or proposed by the city council and
before the letting of contract therefor by the city, the probable cost of such
work shall be first ascertained, and no expenditure for any public work or
improvement to be paid out of any general fund of the city shall exceed in any
year the amount appropriated for such improvement in the annual appropriation
bill or ordinance of such year or the monies then in the treasury or of taxes
levied which may be used lawfully for such purpose. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-2: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 758, 4-1-2013)
1-13-3: PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT:
Whenever any local or public improvement shall be ordered by the city council
which is to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the city engineer or such other
person as the council, by resolution, shall designate to prepare a plan or
profile of the proposed improvement and specifications for the construction of
same, which shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office and be open to
inspection of city officers and other persons interested therein or the city
council may use any plans otherwise provided. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-4: ADVERTISING FOR BIDS:
The city council, by resolution, may authorize at any time the advertising for
bids by the city clerk in any one or more newspapers of general circulation
printed or published in the city, for proposals to furnish the material or do
the work of any public improvement, according to the plans and specifications
which may be filed. Such advertisement shall be published for at least three
(3) weeks in a weekly paper before the day fixed for opening said proposals,
and shall state the nature and the extent of the improvements ordered and place
where specifications thereof may be seen and the time and place when and where
bids may be opened.
The right to reject any and all proposals or bids, or any part thereof received
shall be reserved in the advertisement, or the city council may advertise for
bids for public improvements without such specifications if they deem proper.
(Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-5: SUBMITTING BIDS:
All proposals for any such improvement shall be signed by the person bidding
and be enclosed in a sealed envelope and directed to the city clerk, and each
bid shall be accompanied by a bond or certified check, or cash in currency or
coin in such amount as may be named in such advertisement or notice, and in
case of bond with sureties to be approved by the city council, conditioned that
in case the contract is awarded to such a bidder, he will then enter into bond
and contract as required, to perform the same according to the terms of his
bid. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-6: OPENING BIDS:
All proposals or bids shall be opened and read by the clerk at the next regular
or some special meeting of the council after the receipt of the same in the
presence of the council, and such bidders and other persons as may attend, and
upon the examination of the same, the council shall award the contract to the
lowest responsible and best bidder, then or at some adjourned or other meeting,
or may authorize some officer or committee of the council to enter into
contract. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-7: PERFORMANCE BOND:
The performance of the contract shall be secured by a good and sufficient bond,
to be approved by the city council, or some committee thereof, conditioned
among other things, for the faithful execution of the terms of such contract,
which terms shall be substantially set forth in said bond. If any bidder shall
fail to enter into contract and give bond in ten (10) days, as hereinbefore
required, the contract for such work may be awarded to the next lowest bidder
and most responsible bidder; or if it shall be deemed best for the interests of
the city, not to accept any of the bids made, such bids may be rejected and the
clerk shall thereupon readvertise for proposals in like manner as before,
unless by the council otherwise ordered. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-8: FAILURE TO FULFILL CONTRACT; INTEREST IN CONTRACT:
Any bidder who shall fail to enter into any contract so awarded, or shall fail
to fulfill any contract entered into by him with the city, shall not be
permitted to bid again for any city work, unless the city council shall for
good cause shown remove his disability. No member of the city council or other
city officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract for
work of the corporation or become surety for any contractor or other person
upon any bond, to secure the performance of any contract with the city. (Ord.,
8-19-1895)
1-13-9: COUNCIL APPROVAL:
All such contracts shall be run to and in the name of the city, and before the
same shall be in force, they shall be signed or approved by the city council.
Contracts may be signed by any officer of the city, member of the council or
committee as the council, by resolution, shall direct. Said contract shall be
filed and kept in the office of the clerk, who shall furnish copies thereof
when required. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-10: SUSPENSION OF WORK:
Each contract shall contain a clause in substance to the effect that it is made
subject to the provisions of this code and the city council to suspend work,
and of the council to annul the contract for a failure on the part of the
contractor to execute the same according to the terms thereof, but that such
suspension shall not affect the right to all damages claimable by the city on
account of the nonperformance of such contract according to the terms thereof.
(Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-11: PAYMENT TO CONTRACTORS:
All contracts in which the contractor or contractors agree to be paid wholly
from special taxes or special assessments shall contain covenants to the effect
that they shall have no claim or any lien upon the city, in any event, except
from the collection of the special taxes or special assessments levied for the
work contracted; and that no liability shall attach to the city by reason of
entering into any such contract, except for the payment of such contractor or
contractors of the monies received by the city from the special taxes or
special assessments levied or assessed for the improvement mentioned in such
contract. No contract for work to be paid for as aforesaid shall be let to any
contractor who will not so agree. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-12: SALE OF SURPLUS EARTH:
In all contracts for street or alley improvements, no contractor or
subcontractor shall in any manner sell or dispose of any surplus earth. (Ord.,
8-19-1895)
1-13-13: INSPECTION; ADVANCE PAYMENT:
When any contract except as provided in section
1-13-10 of this chapter shall have been completed and on filing in the office
of the city clerk of the certificate of the committee appointed by the city
council or a majority thereof, under whose charge such work shall have been
done or other officer under whose supervision the work was done, stating that
he has inspected said work and that it is done according to the contracts and
specifications, the city council may issue a voucher for the amount due such
contractor or contractors; and they may, when stipulated in the contract, from
time to time during the prosecution of the work, (upon the filing of the
certificate of the proper committee or officer, stating that they have examined
and computed or measured such work, and that they believe there is enough done
to cover the estimate, and that it is done in accordance with the contract, and
the acceptance and approval as aforesaid) advance to the contractor and draw a
warrant upon the treasurer for such advance, or issue a voucher for the amount
due, reserving, in all cases, at least fifteen percent (15%) of the estimate,
to be paid when the contract is completed, which said voucher may be signed by
any person or persons by the resolution designated by the council, and the same
shall be binding upon the city. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-14: EXTRA WORK:
No payment shall be made upon any work done by contract for any extra work not
specified therein, to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), unless such extra work
shall have been done by special order of the city council. No officer of the
city or special superintendent employed thereby shall certify the amount of any
contractor who has failed to comply with the terms of his contract, nor in any
case in advance of the progress of the work and if he shall do so, he shall be
liable to the city for all loss that may arise therefrom. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-15: AUTHORITY BY ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION:
In all contracts by the city the same may be made either by resolution or by
ordinance; provided however, that any contract authorized by resolution shall
receive a vote of the majority of all members elected and the city council may
by resolution designate any member of their body, or any officer of the city
who may upon such resolution being passed, authorizing him so to do, contract
in the name of the city. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-16: EMPLOYMENT:
In the prosecution of any public work, the city council by resolution may
employ such persons to perform such duties as they deem proper with such
compensation as established in section
1-13-17 of this chapter. (Ord., 8-19-1895)
1-13-17: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workers employed in any public works by state, county, city
or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the city council
of the city of Momence, county of Kankakee, state of Illinois, is hereby
ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction
work in the Kankakee County area as determined by the department of labor of
the state of Illinois as of July 2011, a copy of that determination being
attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference.
As required by said act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages
by the department of labor of the state of Illinois shall supersede the
department's July determination and apply to any and all public works
construction undertaken by the city council of the city of Momence, Kankakee
County, state of Illinois. The definition of any terms appearing in the
ordinance codified herein which are also used in aforesaid act shall be the
same as in said act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the city council of the city of Momence, county of
Kankakee, state of Illinois, to the extent required by the aforesaid act.
   (C)   The city clerk of the city of Momence, county of Kankakee, state of
Illinois, shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of the city council of the city of Momence,
county of Kankakee, state of Illinois, this determination or any revisions of
such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of the current
revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect shall be
attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The city clerk of the city of Momence, county of Kankakee, state of
Illinois, shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to any
association of employers and to any person or association of employees who have
filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating
the particular rates and the particular class of workers whose wages will be
affected by such rates. (Ord. 715, 7-18-2011)
CHAPTER 14
DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Depositories Designated
1-14-2: Bank Statements
1-14-3: Amount Of Deposits
1-14-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
The following banks and savings and loan associations are hereby designated as
depositories for the funds and monies received by the city treasurer:
   (A)   Centrue Bank.
   (B)   Municipal Trust And Savings.
   (C)   First National Bank Of Grant Park/Midland States Bank.
   (D)   Bank Of Bourbonnais.
   (E)   HomeStar Bank.
   (F)   Federated Bank.
   (G)   First American Bank.
   (H)   First Trust Bank.
   (I)   Main Source Bank.
   (J)   PNC Bank.
   (K)   National Bank Of St. Anne. (Ord. 757, 4-1-2013)
1-14-2: BANK STATEMENTS:
The said banks herein designated as depositories for such funds and monies
shall, while acting as such depositories, furnish the city council with a copy
of all bank statements which it is required to furnish to the auditor of public
accounts or to the comptroller of the currency. (Ord. 241, 5-6-1935)
1-14-3: AMOUNT OF DEPOSITS:
When the funds or monies are deposited in the said banks herein designated as
depositories, the amounts of such deposits shall not exceed seventy five
percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus of such banks and the treasurer
shall not be discharged from responsibility for any such funds or monies
deposited in said banks in excess of such limitation. (Ord. 241, 5-6-1935)
CHAPTER 15
CITY JAIL
(Rep. by Ord. 726, 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 16
ELECTION WARDS
SECTION:
1-16-1: Wards Established
1-16-1: WARDS ESTABLISHED:
This code is hereby amended and that four (4) wards are hereby established
within the city in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3 et seq.,
and the description boundaries and designation of each ward as follows:
   (A)   The first ward of the city shall be that portion of the city bounded
on the south by the central line of Second Street commencing at the
intersection of the centerline of Second Street and the westerly corporate
limits of the city, thence easterly along the centerline of Second Street to
the centerline of Franklin Street, thence north along the centerline of
Franklin Street to the centerline of Third Street, thence east along the
centerline of Third Street to the centerline of the North Dixie Highway;
bounded on the east by the centerline of North Dixie Highway extended from the
intersection of the centerline of North Dixie Highway and the centerline of
Third Street to the northerly corporate limits of the city along the centerline
of North Dixie Highway; bounded on the west and the north by the corporate
limits of the city.
   (B)   The second ward of the city shall be that portion of the city bounded
on the west centerline of North Dixie Highway between the intersection of the
centerline of North Dixie Highway and the centerline of Washington Street and
the intersection of the centerline of the North Dixie Highway and the northerly
corporate limits of the city; bounded on the south by a line commencing at the
intersection of the centerline of the North Dixie Highway and the centerline of
Washington Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Washington Street
until the centerline of Washington Street as extended intersects with the
northern bank of Kankakee River, thence continuing easterly along the northern
bank of the Kankakee River to the corporate limits line of the city; and
bounded on the north and east by the corporate limits line of the city.
   (C)   The third ward of the city shall be that portion of the city bounded
on the north by a line commencing at a point at the intersection of the north
bank of the Kankakee River and the westerly corporate limits line of the city,
thence easterly along the north bank of the Kankakee River to the intersection
of the north bank of the Kankakee River with the centerline of the North Dixie
Highway, thence north along the centerline of the North Dixie Highway to the
intersection of the centerline of said North Dixie Highway with the centerline
of Washington Street, thence easterly along the centerline of Washington Street
until the centerline of Washington Street as extended intersects with the north
bank of the Kankakee River, thence continuing in an easterly direction along
the north bank of the Kankakee River to the intersection of the north bank of
the Kankakee River and the easterly corporate limits line of the city; and
bounded on the south, east and west by corporate limits of the city.
   (D)   The fourth ward of the city shall be that portion of the city bounded
on the north by a line commencing at the intersection of the centerline of
Second Street and the westerly corporate limits line of the city, thence
easterly along the centerline of Second Street to the intersection of the
centerline of Second Street and the centerline of Franklin Street, thence north
along the centerline of Franklin Street to the centerline of Third Street,
thence east along the centerline of Third Street to the centerline of North
Dixie Highway; bounded on the east by the centerline of North Dixie Highway
between the intersection of the centerline of North Dixie Highway and the
centerline of Third Street on the north and the intersection of the centerline
of North Dixie Highway and the north bank of the Kankakee River on the south;
bounded on the south by the north bank of the Kankakee River from the
intersection of said north bank and the centerline of North Dixie Highway,
westerly along the north bank of the Kankakee River to the corporate limits
line of the city; and bounded on the west by the corporate limits line of the
city. (Ord. 265, 1-5-1981)
CHAPTER 17
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
SECTION:
1-17-1: Definitions
1-17-2: Drugs To Be Tested For
1-17-3: Job Applicant Testing; General Standard
1-17-4: Current Employee Testing; General Standard
1-17-5: Supervisor Training
1-17-6: Prior Notice Of Testing Policy
1-17-7: Consent
1-17-8: Refusal To Consent
1-17-9: The Right To A Hearing
1-17-10: Mandatory Employee Assistance Program (EAP) Referral
1-17-11: Confidentiality Of Test Results
1-17-12: Privacy In Drug Testing
1-17-13: Laboratory Testing Requirements
1-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
EMPLOYEE: A person, independent contractor or person hired by an independent
contractor who performs services for the municipality.
JOB APPLICANT: A person, independent contractor or person hired by an
independent contractor who applies to become an employee of the municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Momence, Illinois.
REASONABLE SUSPICION: An articulable belief based on specific objective facts
and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Having the presence of a drug or alcohol at or above the
level of a positive test result. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-2: DRUGS TO BE TESTED FOR:
When drug and alcohol screening is required under the provisions of this
chapter, a urinalysis test will be given to detect the presence of the
following drugs:
Alcohol (ethyl)
Amphetamines (e.g., speed)
Barbituates (e.g., amobarbital, butabarbital, phenobarbital, secobarbital)
Cocaine
Methaqualone (e.g., quaalude)
Opiates (e.g., codeine, heroin, morphine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone)
Phencyclidine (PCP)
THC (marijuana)
Drugs specified on the state of Illinois schedule of controlled dangerous
substances. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-3: JOB APPLICANT TESTING; GENERAL STANDARD:
Job applicants offered the following safety sensitive positions and positions
which allow access to sensitive information will be required to undergo a drug
and alcohol test as part of a preemployment physical examination prior to their
final appointment:
   (A)   Any person required to drive a motor vehicle as part of his
employment.
   (B)   Any police officer. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-4: CURRENT EMPLOYEE TESTING; GENERAL STANDARD:
The municipality may require a current employee to undergo drug and alcohol
testing if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the
influence of drugs or alcohol during work hours. Circumstances which constitute
a basis for determining reasonable suspicion may include, but are not limited
to:
   (A)   A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior;
   (B)   Information of recent drug use provided by a reliable and credible
source;
   (C)   Direct observation of drug or alcohol use; or
   (D)   Presence of the physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (i.e., glassy
or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination
and/or reflexes).
Supervisors are required to detail in writing the specific facts, symptoms or
observations which formed the basis for their determination that reasonable
suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. This documentation
shall be forwarded to the appropriate department head or designee. The facts
underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion should be disclosed to the
employee at the time the demand is made. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-5: SUPERVISOR TRAINING:
The municipality shall develop a program of training to assist supervisory
personnel in identifying drug and alcohol use among employees. Such training
will be directed towards helping supervisors to recognize the conduct and
behavior giving rise to a reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use, to
identify employees who need drug counseling and employee assistance programs,
and to be aware of those employees who pose an immediate safety threat. (Ord.
415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-6: PRIOR NOTICE OF TESTING POLICY:
The municipality shall provide written notice of its drug and alcohol testing
policy to all employees and job applicants. The notice shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   The need for drug and alcohol testing;
   (B)   The circumstances under which testing may be required;
   (C)   The procedure for confirming an initial positive drug test result;
   (D)   The consequences of a confirmed positive test result;
   (E)   The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test;
   (F)   The right to explain a positive test result and the appeal procedures
available; and
   (G)   The availability of drug abuse counseling and referral services. (Ord.
415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-7: CONSENT:
Before a drug and alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants
will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting
release of test results to those municipal officials with a need to know. The
consent form shall provide space for employees and applicants to acknowledge
that they have been notified of the municipality's drug testing policy.
Employees and applicants may at this time provide a list of those medications
that he or she has recently used. The list of medications, if provided, shall
be sealed and held as confidential until there has been a positive test result.
In the event of a confirmed positive test result, the list of medications shall
only be disclosed to the medical official who will determine whether the
positive result was due to the lawful use of any of the listed medications.
Employees and applicants may choose to provide such a list after being notified
of a confirmed positive result.
The consent form shall also set forth the following information:
   (A)   The procedure for confirming an initial positive test result;
   (B)   The consequences of a confirmed positive test result;
   (C)   The right to explain a confirmed positive test result and the appeal
procedure available; and
   (D)   The consequences of refusing to undergo a drug and alcohol test. (Ord.
415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-8: REFUSAL TO CONSENT:
   (A)   Applicants: A job applicant who refuses to consent to a drug and
alcohol test will be denied employment with the municipality.
   (B)   Employees: An employee who refuses to consent to a drug and alcohol
test when reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use has been identified is
subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. An employee,
upon written request to the appropriate department head within three (3) days
of his or her refusal, shall be entitled to a hearing prior to the
municipality's decision that such refusal warrants disciplinary action. The
reason(s) for the refusal shall be considered in determining the appropriate
disciplinary action. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-9: THE RIGHT TO A HEARING:
   (A)   Positive Test Results: If an employee's positive test result has been
confirmed, the employee is entitled to a hearing prior to any disciplinary
action taken by the municipality. The hearing should be conducted by an
official who did not take part in the initial decision to require the drug
test. The employee must make a written request for a hearing to the appropriate
department head or designee within five (5) days of receipt by the employee of
the confirmed test results. Employees may be represented by legal counsel,
present evidence and witnesses on their behalf, and confront and cross examine
any witnesses testifying against them.
   (B)   Discipline; Supporting Evidence: No adverse personnel action may be
taken against an employee based on a confirmed positive drug test result unless
the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that:
      1.   The employee's supervisor had reasonable suspicion to believe that
the employee was under the influence of drugs or alcohol while on the job; and
      2.   The employee's drug test results are accurate.
   (C)   Decision: Within fourteen (14) days following the close of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and brief summary
of the facts and evidence supporting that decision. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-10: MANDATORY EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP) REFERRAL:
   (A)   Upon the first confirmed determination that an employee has been under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, the municipality shall refer the employee to
an employee assistance program (EAP) for assessments, counseling and
rehabilitation unless the employee's drug or alcohol use has resulted in an
accident serious enough to warrant dismissal. Participation in an EAP is
voluntary and no disciplinary action may be taken against an employee for
failure to begin or complete an EAP program. Disciplinary action based on a
violation of the municipality's drug and alcohol policy is not automatically
suspended by an employee's participation in an EAP and may be imposed when
warranted.
   (B)   Voluntary participation in an EAP prior to a confirmed positive test
result is encouraged. No disciplinary action will be brought as a result of
volunteering to participate in such a program. Employees who, prior to a
positive test result, voluntarily identify themselves as drug or alcohol users
and obtain counseling and rehabilitation through the municipality's EAP shall
not be disciplined for their drug and/or alcohol use if they thereafter refrain
from violating the municipality's policy on drug and alcohol abuse. All
employees, however, can be disciplined for any incidents resulting from their
violation of the municipality's policy on drug and alcohol abuse. (Ord. 415, 5-
2-1994)
1-17-11: CONFIDENTIALITY OF TEST RESULTS:
All information from an employee's or applicant's drug and alcohol test is
confidential and only those with a need to know are to be informed of test
results. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency or organization
is prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or
applicant. The results of a positive drug test shall not be released until the
results are confirmed. The records of unconfirmed positive test results and
negative test results shall be destroyed by the testing laboratory. (Ord. 415,
5-2-1994)
1-17-12: PRIVACY IN DRUG TESTING:
Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar
enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing
the sample. Bags, briefcases, purses and other containers may not be carried
into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with blue dye to
protect against dilution of test samples. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
1-17-13: LABORATORY TESTING REQUIREMENTS:
All drug and alcohol testing of employees and applicants shall be conducted at
medical facilities or laboratories selected by the municipality. To be
considered as a testing site, a medical facility or lab must submit in writing
a description for the procedures that will be used to maintain test samples.
The municipality shall not select a test facility that does not employ:
   (A)   Testing procedures that ensure privacy to employees and applicants
consistent with the prevention of tampering;
   (B)   Methods of analysis that ensure reliable test results, including the
use of gas chromotography/mass spectrometry to confirm positive test results;
   (C)   Chain of custody procedures that ensure proper identification,
labeling and handling of test samples; and
   (D)   Retention and storage procedures that ensure reliable results on
confirmatory tests of original samples. (Ord. 415, 5-2-1994)
CHAPTER 18
ETHICAL CONDUCT
SECTION:
1-18-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-18-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of sections 5-15 1  and article 10 2 of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to
the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by
any officer or employee of the city is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city.
   (I)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois supreme court.
   (J)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city. (Ord. 624, 1-2-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 19
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-19-1: Administrative Adjudication For Traffic Violations
1-19-2: Administrative Adjudication For Violations Of City Ordinances
1-19-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION FOR TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Administrative Adjudication: This section concerns administrative
adjudication of violations of traffic regulations concerning the standing,
parking, or condition of vehicles.
      1.   The provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as
amended from time to time by the legislature of the state, is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein as if fully set out herein, and any provisions of this
section which conflict with said statute, as amended, shall be made to conform,
interpreted and enforced in conformity with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-208.3.
      2.   State law reference municipal adoption of codes and records act, 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 220/0.01 et seq.
   (B)   Penalties:
      1.   The fine for any parking, standing, or compliance violation, shall
be as provided in the city of Momence fine schedule in section
1-4-1 of this title. Payment is to be received by the adjudication system
administrator, police chief, or his designee, within fourteen (14) calendar
days from the date of the violation notice. After such fourteen (14) day
period, the fine shall be the amount as provided in the city fine schedule.
   (C)   Traffic Compliance Administrator:
      1.   A traffic compliance administrator shall be appointed by the mayor,
with the advice, and consent of the city council. The administrator shall be
authorized to adopt, distribute, and process parking and compliance violation
notices, and other notices required by this section, collect money paid as
fines, and penalties for violation of parking and compliance ordinances, and
operate an administration adjudication system. The traffic compliance
administrator may also make a certified report to the secretary of state under
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, as amended.
   (D)   Content; Payment; Hearing:
      1.   Content: The following information shall be on a violation notice:
         (a)   A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall
specify the date, time, and place of the violation;
         (b)   The particular regulation violated;
         (c)   The fine that may be assessed for late payment provided by the
city of Momence fine schedule in section
1-4-1 of this title;
         (d)   The vehicle make and state registration number;
         (e)   The identification number of the officer issuing the notice.
      2.   Payment:
         (a)   The violation notice shall provide that the payment of the
indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate
as a final disposition of the violation. The notice also shall contain
information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be
contested on its merits.
      3.   Hearing:
         (a)   The violation notice shall specify the manner in which a hearing
may be had.
   (E)   First Service Of Violation Notice:
      1.   Service of the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice
shall be made by affixing the original, or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully parked vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle
if he or she is present. Any police officer, or the chief of police, of the
city of Momence, is authorized by this section to issue and serve parking,
standing, and compliance violation notices, and shall certify as to the
correctness of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing his name to
the notice at the time of service. The original, or a facsimile of the
violation notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator, and
shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business. A copy of the
parking, standing, or compliance violation notice issued, signed and served in
accordance with this section, a copy of the notice shall be prima facie correct
and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
notice. The notice, copy, or computer generated record shall be admissible in
any subsequent administrative, or legal proceedings.
   (F)   Hearing:
      1.   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in the parking, standing,
or compliance violation notice, shall be given an opportunity for a hearing in
which the owner may contest the merits of the alleged violation, and during
which formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply; provided, however,
that under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, as amended, the lessee of
a vehicle cited in the violation notice likewise shall be provided an
opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded the registered owner. The
hearing shall have the audio recorded and the traffic compliance administrator,
or his designee, shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by
subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and the production of
relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at the hearing under this section
may be represented by counsel at their own expense.
   (G)   Service Of Additional Violation Notices:
      1.   Service of additional notices may be sent by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the
cited vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state, or, under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, as amended, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at
the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the
lease. The service shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail. The notices shall be in the following sequence, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the information specified herein:
         (a)   Second Notice Of Violation: This notice shall specify the date
and location of the violation cited in the parking, standing, or compliance
violation notice, the particular regulation violated, the vehicle make and
state registration number, the fine, and any penalty that may be assessed for
late payment when so provided in the list of fines in the city of Momence fine
schedule in section
1-4-1 of this title, the availability of a hearing in which the violation may
be contested on its merits, and the time and manner in which the hearing may be
had. The notice of violation shall also state that failure either to pay the
indicated fine, and any applicable penalty, or to appear at the hearing on the
merits in the time and manner specified, will result in a final determination
of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or
penalty indicated, and that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to
exhaust, available judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due, and owing the municipality.
         (b)   Notice Of Final Determination Of Parking, Standing, Or
Compliance Violation Liability: This notice shall be sent following a final
determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability and the
conclusion of the judicial review procedures taken under this section. The
notice shall state that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due, and owing the
municipality. The notice shall contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or
penalty due and owing to the city of Momence within the time specified, may
result in the municipality's filing with state of Illinois local debt recovery
program (LDRP), or may result in suspension of the person's driver's license
for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations
under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, as amended.
   (H)   Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension:
      1.   This notice shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or
penalty that remains due, and owing on ten (10) or more parking violations. The
notice shall state that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty
five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the city notifying the
secretary of state, that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, as amended. The
notice shall also provide that the person may obtain a copy of an original
ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self- addressed, stamped
envelope to the city requesting same. The notice of impending driver's license
suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address recorded with the secretary of state.
   (I)   Final Determinations Of Violation Liability:
      1.   A final determination of violation liability shall occur following
failure to pay the fine, or penalty after a hearing officer's determination of
violation liability, and the exhaustion of, or failure to, exhaust any
administrative review procedures provided by this section. Where a person fails
to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner
specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of
violation liability shall become final:
         (a)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or
         (b)   Upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a
filing having been made.
   (J)   Petition To Set Aside A Determination Of Liability Filed By A Person
Owing Unpaid Fine Or Penalty:
      1.   The petition shall be filed with and ruled upon by the traffic
compliance administrator with a petition stating the applicable grounds for the
setting aside of the final determination is filed with the traffic compliance
administrator within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of final
determination. The grounds for the petition shall be limited to:
         (a)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited
vehicle in question; or
         (b)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violation in question; or
         (c)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      2.   If the determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation
liability has been set aside upon a showing of just cause, the registered owner
shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation.
   (K)   Procedures For Nonresidents:
      1.   A nonresident of the city may contest the merits of the alleged
violation without attending the scheduled hearing by serving the traffic
compliance administrator with a written answer to the alleged violation stating
all grounds upon which the nonresident claims to be not liable for the alleged
violation which the hearing officer shall consider along with all the other
evidence at the hearing. (Ord. 775, 1-21-2014)
1-19-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION FOR VIOLATIONS OF CITY ORDINANCES:
   (A)   Administrative Adjudication: The purpose of this section is to provide
a fair and efficient enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law
through an administrative adjudication of violations of such city ordinances.
This section applies to all violations of this code or other ordinances of the
city.
   (B)   Adoption:
      1.   The city hereby adopts division 2.2 of the Illinois municipal code,
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., as amended, for adjudication
of violations of this code to the extent permitted by the state constitution.
   (C)   Hearing Officer:
      1.   The hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
      2.   The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice
and consent of the city council.
   (D)   Procedures For Code Enforcement:
      1.   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, he shall note the violation on a
multiple copy report form that indicates:
         (a)   The name and address of the defendant;
         (b)   The type and nature of the violation;
         (c)   The date and time the violation was observed;
         (d)   The names of witnesses to the violation;
         (e)   The fine that may be assessed for late payment provided by the
city of Momence fine schedule in section
1-4-1 of this title;
         (f)   The identification number of the officer issuing the notice;
         (g)   The report form shall contain information as to the availability
of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits.
   (E)   Payment:
      1.   The code violation report shall provide that the payment of the
indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment shall operate as
a final disposition of the violation.
   (F)   Procedures For Hearing:
      1.   Subpoenas; Defaults:
         (a)   At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may,
at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear, and give testimony
at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing, the defendant or his
attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in
default, and shall proceed with the hearing, and accept evidence to the
existence of a code violation.
      2.   Continuances; Representation At Code Hearings:
         (a)   No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this section, except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. The case for the defendant
may be presented by the defendant, the defendant's attorney, or any other agent
or representative of the defendant, at the defendant's expense.
      3.   Evidence; Procedures For Hearing:
         (a)   Hearing Officer To Preside: At the hearing, a hearing officer
shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to
the existence or nonexistence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by
this section. The correctness of facts contained in the code violation notice
shall be certified by the police officer, or other individual authorized to
issue a code violation issuing said notice by signing his name to the notice at
the time of service.
         (b)   Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation notice issued, signed,
and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima
facie correct, and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts set forth on the notice.
         (c)   Notice Admissible In Legal Proceedings: The violation notice or
a copy shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceeding.
         (d)   Hearings Recorded: All hearings pursuant to this section shall
have the audio recorded.
   (G)   Determination By Hearing Officer:
      1.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing, as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination may be in writing,
and may be designated as findings, decision, and order.
      2.   A monetary sanction for a violation under this section shall not
exceed the amount provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1 et seq., as
amended. A copy of any finding, decision, and order shall be served on the
defendant within five (5) days after it is issued. A monetary sanction for a
violation under this section shall not exceed penalties, as provided in the
city of Momence fine schedule in section
1-4-1 of this title. Furthermore, a penalty may include, or consist of, a
requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public service work.
   (H)   Review Under Administrative Law:
      1.   The determination of the hearing officer shall be subject to review
in the circuit court of the county. The provisions of the administrative review
law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under
this section.
      2.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative
review law, shall be a debt due, and owing the city, and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law, and may result in the
municipality's filing with the state of Illinois local debt recovery program
(LDRP). (Ord. 775, 1-21-2014)
CHAPTER 20
TRAVEL EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-20-1: Travel, Meal, And Lodging Expenses
1-20-1: TRAVEL, MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the city of Momence, Illinois,
to carry out the responsibilities of city business.
   TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the city of Momence, Illinois, or by wards or charges of the
city of Momence, Illinois, involving reimbursement to travelers or direct
payment to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
   (B)   Reimbursable Expenses: The city of Momence, Illinois, shall only
reimburse the following types of travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by
its employees and officers up to the following maximum allowable amounts:
      1.   Travel for hourly city employees on city business should be
scheduled during normal business hours.
      2.   Travel arrangements should be made using the most cost and time
efficient method available.
      3.   Any personal preferences concerning travel (drive versus fly) must
be approved by the employee's supervisor, or mayor. Any additional costs
generated by personal preferences will be paid by the employee.
      4.   Travel by hourly city employees will be considered time worked, and
paid as if the employee worked an eight (8) hour day. Any overtime travel must
be approved by the employee's supervisor, or mayor.
      5.   A cost efficient hotel selection should include a free breakfast.
Lunch will be reimbursed at a maximum of ten dollars ($10.00), receipts
required. Dinner will be reimbursed at a maximum of twenty five dollars
($25.00), receipts required.
      6.   Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
      7.   All salaried city employees, or officers, must have travel plans
preapproved by the mayor or his/her designee. All travel, hotel, and meal
parameters for salaried employees will be the same as hourly employees, as
detailed in subsections (B)1 through (B)6 of this section.
      8.   Travel plans for any elected official must be preapproved by a
majority of the city council. Travel parameters apply as detailed in this
chapter for hourly employees.
      9.   Entertainment will not be reimbursed, unless approved by a majority
of the city council, and mayor.
      10.   No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a
city of Momence, Illinois, employee or officer shall be authorized unless the
"Travel, Meal And Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form", attached to the
ordinance codified herein, has been submitted and approved. All documents and
information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the
freedom of information act 1 .
      11.   Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or
employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations
adopted under this section or b) any member of the corporate authorities of the
city of Momence, Illinois, may only be approved by roll call vote at an open
meeting of the corporate authorities of the city of Momence. However, in the
event of an emergency, or other extraordinary circumstances, the corporate
authorities may approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set forth
above.
      12.   The city of Momence, Illinois, shall not reimburse any elected
official, employee, or officer for any activities which would be considered
entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment,
but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being
ancillary to the purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 823, 12-19-2016, eff. 3-
2-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
(Rep. by Ord. 522, 6-3-2002)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Established
2-2-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a board of local improvements for the city, which
board shall consist of three (3) members, the mayor and two (2) aldermen.
The mayor shall be the president of the board of local improvements, as
provided by statute. (Ord., 6-7-1965)
CHAPTER 3
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Coordinator
2-3-3: Functions
2-3-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-3-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-3-6: Emergency Action
2-3-7: Compensation
2-3-8: Reimbursement By State
2-3-9: Purchases And Expenditures
2-3-10: Oath
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Momence ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in
accordance with "the Illinois emergency services and disaster act of 1975".
This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may
be selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the city ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor and shall
serve until removed by the same. The coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of
the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the mayor as provided by
statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the coordinator, the mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act
as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-3: FUNCTIONS:
The city ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
"the state ESDA act of 1975". (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the city ESDA organization may be designated as members
of a mobile support team created by the director of the state ESDA as provided
by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator
of the city ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the city council and by the state
director of ESDA. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city
ESDA to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called
for training by the state director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the mayor. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA prescribed by the state director of ESDA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the city in response to a call by the governor or state director of ESDA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA
activities as provided by law. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The city council, on recommendation of the city coordinator of ESDA, may
authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the city in a position
to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear
or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such
disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the city coordinator of ESDA is
authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by
"the state ESDA act of 1975", provided that if the city council meets at such
time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that
body. (Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
2-3-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city ESDA organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the coordinator:
I,                , do solemnly swear that I will support and defend and bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear
that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time
I am affiliated with the City of Momence Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 241, 1-2-1979)
CHAPTER 4
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Creation Of Plan Commission And Assignment Of Its Duties To The Members
Of The Zoning Board Of Appeals
2-4-1: CREATION OF PLAN COMMISSION AND ASSIGNMENT OF ITS DUTIES TO THE MEMBERS
OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A plan commission for the city of Momence is hereby created as a seven (7)
member board. The duties of the plan commission shall be those established in
the zoning regulations of the city and shall be the same as those which are
established as the powers of the plan commission under state statutes. The
members of the zoning board of appeals shall serve as the members of the plan
commission. (Ord. 801, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Board Established
2-5-2: Meetings
2-5-3: Jurisdiction
2-5-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board shall consist
of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City
Council. Members may be removed by the Mayor for cause after written charges
have been filed and after a public hearing has been held if demanded by the
member so charged.
One (1) of the members of said Board shall be designated by the Mayor, with
consent of the City Council, as Chairman of said Board, and shall hold office
as Chairman until a successor is appointed. Such Chairman, or in his absence,
the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
One (1) of the members of the Board, shall act as Clerk for the Board, and keep
records of all its meetings and official acts. (Ord. 827, 4-3-2017)
2-5-2: MEETINGS:
   (A)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. There shall
be at least fifteen (15) days' but not more than thirty (30) days' notice of
the time and place of such meeting published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City; said notice to contain a statement of the particular
purpose of such meeting and a brief description of the location of the property
or properties under consideration of such meeting.
   (B)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (C)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes on each case and the
reasons for granting or denying each application shall be specified. Every
rule, regulation and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Board shall immediately be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be a
public record.
   (D)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure; a copy of which and
all amendments thereto shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
   (E)   The minutes of the Board shall be open to public examination at
reasonable hours.
   (F)   Expenses incurred by the Zoning Board of Appeals are to be itemized
and shall be borne by the City. (Ord., 4-13-1959)
2-5-3: JURISDICTION:
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals, as herein created, is a body of limited
powers. It shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector charged
with the enforcement of the zoning title 1 .
   (B)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or
amend the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from to the
extent and in the manner that the Board may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises, and to that end, the Board shall also have all the powers of the
office from whom the appeal is taken.
   (C)   The Board shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or
upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title.
   (D)   When an application is made to the City for a variance in the terms of
the zoning ordinance, the Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing upon such
request and shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether or
not the requested variance shall be granted. The applicant must show that a
strict application of the zoning title would impose practical difficulties or
particular hardships.
   (E)   The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
building inspector or to decide in favor of the applicant, any matter upon
which it is authorized by the zoning title to render decisions or to present a
favorable recommendation to the City Council regarding an application for a
variance. (Ord. 554, 4-5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 9 of this Code.
CHAPTER 6
HISTORICAL HOUSE BOARD
SECTION:
2-6-1: Board Created
2-6-2: Duties
2-6-3: Budget
2-6-4: Treasurer, Funds
2-6-5: Annual Report
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a Historical House Board under provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-45.1-1 through 5/11-45.1-6, for the City. The
Historical House Board shall consist of five (5) members. All Historical House
Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing body. Members shall serve
without compensation. The Historical House Board shall choose one (1) of its
members as Chairman, and another as Secretary. The Historical House Board may
adopt and amend its rules of procedure. (Ord. 824, 3-20-2017)
2-6-2: DUTIES:
All acts of the Historical House Board shall be subject to approval by the
Mayor and City Council. Subject to such approval, the Historical House Board
shall maintain and regulate the Historical House. Rules, regulations, and other
acts provided for by the Illinois Compiled Statutes hereinabove cited may be
proposed by the board, but shall be enacted only with the approval of the Mayor
and City Council. (Ord. 824, 3-20-2017)
2-6-3: BUDGET:
The Mayor and City Council shall each year prior to the first Monday in April,
prepare a budget for the Historical House Board for the ensuing fiscal year
ending April 30. The budget shall be as follows, and shall be balanced.
   (A)   Estimated revenues, divided as follows:
      1.   Federal and State grants;
      2.   Contribution from City;
      3.   Contribution from County;
      4.   Miscellaneous revenues.
   (B)   Estimated expenditures, divided as follows:
      1.   Personal services;
      2.   Services other than personal;
      3.   Supplies and materials;
      4.   Equipment;
      5.   Real estate and improvements;
      6.   Miscellaneous expenditures. (Ord. 824, 3-20-2017)
2-6-4: TREASURER, FUNDS:
The Historical House Board shall and is hereby empowered to appoint a
Treasurer. The Treasurer so appointed by the Historical House Board shall have
the right to receive funds raised by said board by way of donations, gifts,
fund drives, etc., and to deposit the same in a bank account in the name of the
Historical House Board, and said Treasurer shall be authorized to issue drafts
and checks on said account upon direction of said board. The Secretary of the
Historical House Board shall, not less than annually, report to the City
Council setting forth all funds received by the board, and setting forth all
disbursements of said account including the person to whom such funds were
paid, and the amount thereof. Said accounting may be included in the
comprehensive annual report prepared and presented to the City Council by the
Historical House Board. (Ord. 824, 3-20-2017)
2-6-5: ANNUAL REPORT:
The Historical House Board shall, as soon as possible, at the end of each
fiscal year, prepare and present to the City Council a comprehensive annual
report of its activities. The Historical House Board shall also prepare and
present to Federal and State officials, any reports that may be required by law
or other regulations. (Ord. 824, 3-20-2017)
CHAPTER 7
CITY TREE BOARD
SECTION:
2-7-1: Purpose
2-7-2: Authority And Power
2-7-3: Term Of Office
2-7-4: Duties
2-7-5: Applicability
2-7-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the city.
(Ord. 431, 8-21-1995)
2-7-2: AUTHORITY AND POWER:
There is hereby created and established a city tree board, which shall consist
of five (5) members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members of the
board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 431, 8-21-1995)
2-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three
(3) years, except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the
first board shall be for only one year and the term of two (2) members of the
first board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the
unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 431, 8-21-1995)
2-7-4: DUTIES:
The city tree board shall have the following duties:
   (A)   To review all existing ordinances and regulations of the city
governing the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants within the city and to make recommendations to the mayor and city
council concerning revisions to the existing regulations and the adoption and
implementation of new and additional regulations.
   (B)   To review all landscaping plans submitted to the city for new
developments in and about the city, when such landscaping plans are required to
be submitted as a part of the zoning, subdivision, or building permit process,
and to make recommendations to the plan commission and the city council
regarding appropriate landscaping to be installed and maintained.
   (C)   To establish and maintain a list of recommended species of trees to be
planted in and about the city and to make recommendations to the plan
commission and the city council regarding the appropriate location for the
planting of trees, shrubs, and other vegetative materials and to recommend
guidelines for the establishment and maintenance of "green areas" within the
city.
   (D)   To examine, on a periodic basis, all trees and shrubs located on
public properties within the city for the purpose of discovering any
destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the
growth or health of trees or threatens to spread disease or insect infestation
and to make recommendations to the appropriate municipal officials for the
treatment, maintenance or removal of any diseased or infected trees, and to
perform similar examinations and evaluations of trees and shrubs located on
private property, with the consent of the property owner, and to make
recommendations to the property owner and to the appropriate municipal
officials concerning the treatment and/or removal of any diseased or infected
trees or shrubs.
   (E)   To promulgate and to recommend adoption and subsequent enforcement of
rules, regulations and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying,
removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, and
other plants upon the rights of way of any street, alley, sidewalk or other
public place within the city. (Ord. 431, 8-21-1995)
2-7-5: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and
shrubs located within street rights of way, parks and public places of the
city; and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that
constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (Ord. 431, 8-21-1995)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Application For License
3-1-2: Investigation Of Applicant
3-1-3: Fees
3-1-4: Termination Of License
3-1-5: Building And Premises
3-1-6: Frontage Consents
3-1-7: Inspection Of Premises
3-1-8: Posting License
3-1-9: Transfer Of License; Change Of Location
3-1-10: Revocation Of License; Notice; Hearing
3-1-11: Nuisances
3-1-12: Exceptions To Provisions
3-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by the provisions of this
code shall be made in writing to the clerk in the absence of provision to the
contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or
license desired, the location to be used if any, the time covered and the fee
to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as
may be needed for the proper guidance of the city officials in the issuing of
the permit or license applied for. Forms for all licenses and permits and
applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the clerk.
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the mayor and the
clerk of the city in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (Ord. 203,
1-16-1978)
3-1-2: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where the provision
of this code necessitates an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. (Ord. 203, 1-16-
1978)
3-1-3: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for the
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the clerk.
When a business is commenced after the expiration of a part of the license
year, an annual license for the balance of the year will be issued for a
proportionate part of the annual fee. (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-4: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses and permits shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal
year of the city in which they are issued where no provision to the contrary is
made. Each daily license shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of
the day for which the license or permit is granted. (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-5: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No licenses shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit for
any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do
not fully comply with the requirements of the city 1 . No such license or
permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any
act which would involve a violation of the zoning provisions of this code 2 .
(Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
2 2. See title 9 of this code.
3-1-6: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
Whenever the consent of adjoining or neighboring owners is required as a
prerequisite of the conduct of any business or occupation, or the location of
any establishment, such consents must be obtained by securing the necessary
signatures to a written consent petition. Such petition shall be filed with the
clerk when signed. Consents once given and filed shall not be renewed for the
continuous conduct of the same business whether by the same proprietor or not.
It shall be unlawful to forge any name to such a petition or to falsely
represent that the names thereon have been properly placed thereon if such is
not the fact.
Each consent when filed shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the person
securing the signatures that each signature appearing thereon was properly
secured and written on and that the petition contains the necessary number of
signatures required by ordinance.
The frontage consent requirements contained in this chapter shall not be
construed as amending or changing any zoning provision of the city; and no such
provision shall be construed as permitting the erection of a structure or
building; or the conduct of a business; or the commission of any act in any
location where such structure, building, business or act is prohibited by any
zoning provision of the city. (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-7: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
any provision of this code or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance
with this code or detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making such inspection at any reasonable time that
admission is requested, any authorized officer or employee of the city.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke
the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city who
refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such
inspection, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the
performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided, that no license
shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee
or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city, stating that such
inspection is desired and the time it is sought to make the inspection. (Ord.
203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-8: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-9: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Licenses issued may be transferred by the original licensee provided that
written notice thereof is given to the clerk within ten (10) days before the
transfer is made, but no more than one transfer of any license shall be made
within the license year; provided, that it shall be unlawful to transfer any
peddler's or transient merchant's license or permit, and any attempted transfer
of such a license or permit shall have no effect 1 . (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978; amd.
Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may
be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice in writing thereof is given to the
clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the
building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of the provisions of this
code are complied with 2 . (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  3-5-4 of this title.
2 1. See titles 4 and 9 of this code and section
  3-1-6 respectively of this title.
3-1-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE; HEARING:
   (A)   Revocation Of License: Any license or permit for a limited time may be
revoked by the mayor at any time during the life of such license or permit for
any violation by the licensee or permittee of the provisions relating to the
license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit or to the
premises occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation: Unless any provision of this code provides to
the contrary, no revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued
hereunder shall be deemed effective until notice thereof has been served
personally upon or mailed to the named licensee or permittee at the address
specified in the application for the said license or permit.
   (C)   Hearing: If, within five (5) days of the date of notice of the
revocation or suspension of any license or permit, the named licensee or
permittee submits to the city clerk in writing a request for a hearing
concerning such revocation or suspension, said revocation or suspension shall
be suspended until such time as the city council shall grant the licensee or
permittee a special hearing.
   (D)   Decision Of City Council: If the city council after such hearing
affirms the revocation or suspension of said license or permit, the same shall
become immediately effective. If the city council by a majority vote overrules
the revocation or suspension, the same shall be deemed null and void. (Ord.
203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-11: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact. (Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
3-1-12: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
The city council shall have the power to waive the fees for vending licenses
required under any provisions of this code, upon application for such license
by disabled veterans who are residents of the city; provided, however, that
such waiver is recommended by the veterans' relief officer of Kankakee County.
(Ord. 203, 1-16-1978)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Exceptions
3-2-3: License Required
3-2-4: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-5: Powers And Duties Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-6: Application For License
3-2-7: Management Entities
3-2-8: Restrictions On Issuance Of Licenses
3-2-9: Classification Of Licenses And Schedule Of Fees
3-2-10: Temporary Licenses
3-2-11: Number Of Licenses
3-2-12: License Fee
3-2-13: Term; Prorating Fee
3-2-14: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
3-2-15: Transfer Of License, Termination
3-2-16: Change Of Location
3-2-17: Posting License; Confiscation
3-2-18: Sanitary Conditions
3-2-19: View Of Premises
3-2-20: Inspection By Police Officers
3-2-21: Designated Manager
3-2-22: Unlicensed Gambling, Immorality Prohibited
3-2-23: Package Containers; Off Premises Sales
3-2-24: Consumption On Premises
3-2-25: Hours Of Sale
3-2-26: Employees And Agents
3-2-27: Signs
3-2-28: Improper Influence
3-2-29: Complaint Of Violation
3-2-30: Fines, Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Hearing
3-2-31: Provision To And Use Of Alcohol By Underage Persons
3-2-32: Violations And Penalties
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
refortified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and synthetic,
ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol and intended for consumption as a beverage
by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol
used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with act of
congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquor or solid
containing one-half of one percent (.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
APPLICANT: Any form of legal entity, which seeks to be licensed under the
provisions of this chapter. In the case of a corporation, it shall mean the
officers, directors, all persons owning directly or beneficially five percent
(5%) or more of the stock of such corporation and the person operating as
manager of the premises to which a license applies.
BAR: A counter upon or over which alcoholic liquor is the principal commodity
served for consumption by persons at such counter.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, salt and hops in water. Beer shall
include, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager, porter and the like.
CITY: The city of Momence, Kankakee County, Illinois.
COMMISSIONER: The local liquor control commissioner.
CONTROL OF PREMISES: The legal or beneficial ownership, rental or lease of a
premises or the holding of a license shall constitute control of property.
Control may also exist where none of these legal relationships apply, but where
an adult is otherwise in charge of or charged with controlling a particular
premises.
DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: The sale, giving or exchange of an alcoholic
liquor from one person to another. Delivery is meant to include the provision
of any alcoholic liquor by whatever means to one person from another.
DRUGSTORE: A commercial establishment open to the public where prescription
drugs and pharmaceuticals are sold and dispensed by a registered pharmacist.
FALSE IDENTIFICATION: Any document used for identification or proof of age that
has been altered or defaced or that contains false or misleading information or
that contains a name that is not the actual name of the person using it.
FOOD STORE: A commercial establishment open to the public where primarily food
and food products are sold at retail for consumption off the premises. This
definition shall not include any establishment where gasoline is sold.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered
for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential and where a restaurant may be located.
IMPAIRMENT: Any diminution or compromise of a person's physical, mental or
perceptual abilities due to the consumption of an alcoholic liquor. Impairment
does not require that the blood alcohol content be in excess of any particular
gram of alcohol to milliliters of blood or breath ratio.
LICENSE OR LIQUOR LICENSE: That specific grant of the privilege and authority
to a licensee to sell or offer for sale alcoholic liquor at retail in the
manner set forth in the text of the particular license classification.
LICENSEE: That person who by issuance of a license has been given the privilege
by the commissioner to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the
city. This shall include the holder of a city of Momence liquor license or any
officer, principal, employee or agent of the license holder.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER: The mayor of the city of Momence shall be
the local liquor control commissioner.
LOUNGE: That portion of a licensed premises that is kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public as a place where alcoholic liquor is
offered for retail sale for consumption on the premises only and not
necessarily in conjunction with the full service of meals. This definition may
also include the term "cocktail lounge".
OFF SITE CATERER: A catering business which, pursuant to a contractual
agreement, serves food and/or alcoholic beverages not at a catering hall, but
at a site designated by the party engaging the services of the caterer.
OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE: The operation or control of a motor vehicle
anywhere in the city of Momence, whether on private or public property. To be
in physical control, the person need not be actually driving the motor vehicle
and the vehicle need not be running. If there is only one person inside of a
motor vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control
regardless of the person's location within the vehicle. If there is only one
person in a front seat or front passenger area of a motor vehicle, that person
shall be presumed to be in physical control regardless of the person's location
in the front passenger area. If there are persons in the vehicle, but not in
the front passenger area, the owner of the vehicle or the person to whom
permission was given to operate the vehicle, shall be presumed to be in
physical control of the vehicle.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit corporation supported by the dues of its members
and organized solely for the promotion of some common objective other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
PUBLIC SPACE: Includes all of the interior space except those spaces used for
cooking, food preparation, or food storage.
RESTAURANT: Any public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served at tables or in booths. Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, the term "restaurant" does not include limited food service
establishments, luncheonettes, diners, pubs, coffee shops, drive- ins or self-
service and/or carryout establishments and shall not include room service where
the restaurant is located in a hotel.
SALE AT RETAIL: The sale or delivery of an alcoholic liquor to the consumer or
general public as differentiated from the wholesale delivery for legal resale.
SALE, SELL: Transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any other means
for consideration. This shall include and mean all sales, soliciting or
receiving an order for keeping or exposing for sale and keeping with intent to
sell. It shall also include the exchange, transfer or trade for a ticket or
token obtained for consideration.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY: That liability which is implied as a matter of law even
though the person may not have directly caused an injury to another person.
WINE: Any alcoholic liquor obtained from the natural contents of fruits or
vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the
addition of alcohol. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in
accordance with act of congress and regulations promulgated hereunder;
      2.   Flavoring extracts and syrups and food products;
      3.   Patent and proprietary medicines or medicinal, antiseptic, culinary
and toilet preparations;
      4.   Scientific, industrial and chemical products not made for human
consumption;
      5.   Any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (.5%) or less
of alcohol by volume.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any of the following
from using or possessing alcoholic liquor in strict professional practice:
      1.   A duly licensed practicing physician or dentist.
      2.   Hospitals or like institutions in the treatment of bona fide
patients of that hospital or like institutions.
      3.   Drugstores employing a licensed pharmacist in the concoction of
prescriptions of duly licensed physicians.
      4.   The authorized representative of any house of worship dispensing
wine for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony
typically conducted by that house of worship. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the city any
alcoholic liquor, without having a city of Momence liquor license, or in
violation of the terms of such license. It shall be unlawful for any
restaurant, hotel, private club, catering establishment, food store, drugstore
or any other place to hold, store or keep on its premises any alcoholic liquor
without a license, or in violation of the terms of such license.
   (B)   The issuance to or possession by any person of a retail liquor dealer
tax stamp issued for a current tax period by the United States government or
any of its agencies shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person is
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Within fifteen (15) days after obtaining a license pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the licensee shall obtain a similar liquor license
required by the state of Illinois for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor.
No alcoholic liquor may be purveyed by the licensee until the state license has
been obtained.
   (D)   All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent place that is visible to patrons. (Ord. 800, 10-5-
2015)
3-2-4: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The mayor of the city shall be the local liquor control commissioner
("commissioner") and shall have the authority to administer the appropriate
provisions of this chapter. The commissioner may designate one or more persons
to assist in the exercise of such powers and the performance of such duties, as
he or she may deem necessary. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties in
addition to others set forth in this chapter:
   (A)   Accept and review original and renewal applications for liquor
licenses and to approve or disapprove them. Applications may be approved only
in strict accordance with this chapter and only if the city council has created
a sufficient number of licenses in a particular classification.
   (B)   Receive license fees and forward the same to the city treasurer.
   (C)   Make or cause to be made, by the various city departments such
investigations as may aid the commissioner in the performance of his or her
duties.
   (D)   Recommend to the city council the approval or rejection of any request
to create an additional liquor license in any licensing classification.
   (E)   Enter or authorize any law enforcement officer or peace officer to
enter and inspect a licensed premises at any time.
   (F)   Receive complaints from any citizen that any applicable rules or
regulations have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints.
   (G)   Examine or cause to be examined under oath any original or renewal
license applicant or any licensee upon whom notice of charges or notice to
appear has been served. For such purposes the commissioner may issue subpoenas,
which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of
obtaining any information pursuant to this chapter, the commissioner may
authorize an agent to act on his or her behalf.
   (H)   Suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke any liquor
license and/or impose an administrative penalty of not to exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation. These penalties may be imposed only
after notice and a hearing before the commissioner as set forth herein.
   (I)   Keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued
under this chapter with copies furnished to the city clerk, city treasurer,
city collector, and police chief. Upon issuance of any license or the
suspension or revocation of any existing license, the commissioner shall give
written notice of such action to each of these officers within forty eight (48)
hours of such action.
   (J)   Report to the city council all acts enforcing this chapter.
   (K)   Make and publish such other rules, regulations and forms as may be
advisable to carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Application for a local retailer's liquor license, both original and
renewal, shall be made to the commissioner. The application shall be in
writing, upon forms provided by the commissioner. The application shall require
such information as determined appropriate by the commissioner. Only fully
completed forms shall be considered by the commissioner. Each original or
renewal application shall be accompanied by the fee for the class of license
applied for. The fees for licenses shall be as provided in section
3-2-12 of this chapter. Application for renewal of an existing license shall be
submitted not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the license,
i.e., by April 1 of each year. If a fully completed renewal application and
application fee is not received by the city by the date due, a penalty equal to
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be assessed against the applicant in
addition to application and license fees.
   (B)   The application fee, license fee, and any applicable penalty, shall be
paid in full upon submittal of an original or renewal license application. Upon
issuance of any license, the licensee shall keep the information contained on
the application current by furnishing to the commissioner, within thirty (30)
days, written notice of any change in status regarding ownership, residency,
management, or any other information set forth in the application.
   (C)   Before any license may be issued to an applicant, each person holding
a five percent (5%) or more interest in the entity to be licensed and each
designated manager (including the managing partner of a limited liability
company) shall be fingerprinted by the Momence police department and the
fingerprints sent to the appropriate law enforcement agency for a check of
criminal history record information. An investigation will be performed to
enable the commissioner to ascertain whether the issuance of a license will
comply with all applicable regulations of the city. The commissioner may accept
current fingerprints from another jurisdiction for persons not residing or
working within fifty (50) miles of the city. The commissioner may require such
documentation as deemed appropriate to determine actual ownership, and the
commissioner's decision as to who shall be fingerprinted shall be final.
   (D)   The applicant must submit a certificate of insurance, which names the
city of Momence as an additional insured, verifying that the principal has in
effect at the time of the application dramshop or liquor liability insurance in
the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The certificate of insurance
shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner.
   (E)   With any license application submitted for an original or renewal
license to be effective May 1, 2016, or thereafter, the applicant shall include
certificates of completion of BASSETT or TIPS training, as described in
subsection
3-2-26(E) of this chapter, for each employee who will be engaged in serving
alcoholic beverages, and for each person identified as a designated manager of
the licensed premises.
   (F)   Each applicant shall at the time of application submit a surety bond
to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with sureties
to be approved by the commissioner conditioned on the faithful performance of
the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state of Illinois and upon
the payment of all fines and costs which may be assessed against the licensee
for violation of any of the provisions hereof. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-7: MANAGEMENT ENTITIES:
It is recognized that a licensee may, from time to time, desire to hire or
retain, as an independent contractor, a management entity to manage, generally
operate and be responsible for the licensed premises. For purposes of this
section, "management entity" does not mean the designated manager of the
licensed premises, as provided in section
3-2-21 of this chapter. No licensee shall permit a management entity to perform
such a function unless the management entity has been certified to do so by the
commissioner. In order to be certified by the commissioner, a management entity
must execute a liquor license application that reflects the entity's business
status, i.e., sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation. A management
entity must qualify in the same manner (other than for a surety bond and
dramshop coverage) and meet the same standards as a licensee. A management
entity shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the commissioner in the same
manner as a licensee. If there is a violation on the premises, the management
company and the licensee shall be jointly and severally responsible and liable
for any penalty assessed. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-8: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
   (A)   Restrictions On Any Business Entity Desiring To Hold A Liquor License:
      1.   Issuance Or Renewal: No liquor license shall be issued to or renewed
for any person or entity:
         (a)   Which does not legally or beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought, or does not have a lease for the full period for
which the license is to be issued. However, a contract for sale or lease
conditioned upon issuance of a license shall be acceptable.
         (b)   When the premises at which the business is to be conducted is
not in strict compliance with all regulations of the city of Momence.
         (c)   To which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
         (d)   Not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
         (e)   Which owes any fees, fines or taxes to the city.
         (f)   Known to have been convicted of any gambling offense or to be
associated with any illegal gambling activity.
         (g)   Which, upon review of the application taken as a whole by the
commissioner, is deemed not to be in the best interest of the city.
      2.   Issuance Restrictions: No liquor license shall be issued to any
entity when a sole proprietor, partner, manager, officer, director or five
percent (5%) or greater shareholder:
         (a)   Has been found guilty by a court of law of any offense with
regard to the sale or possession of alcoholic liquor or any felony.
         (b)   Has been found guilty of any other crime opposed to decency or
morality if, upon due investigation, the commissioner determines that such
individual has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
         (c)   Has previously had a liquor license revoked in this or any other
jurisdiction.
         (d)   At the time of application for renewal of any Momence license,
would not have been eligible for such a license upon first application.
         (e)   Has been found guilty of a violation of any federal or state law
concerning the manufacture of alcoholic liquor.
         (f)   Has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal
wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period.
         (g)   Has been found guilty of a gambling offense as set forth in the
Illinois criminal code in effect at the time of application or renewal.
         (h)   Is an employee or elected or appointed official of the city.
         (i)   Owes any fees, fines or taxes to the city.
      3.   Additional Restrictions Applying To Corporations Only:
         (a)   No liquor license shall be issued to any corporation unless it
is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation, which is
qualified and registered under the Illinois business corporation act to
transact business in Illinois.
         (b)   By accepting a license a limited liability corporation agrees
that the corporation and its shareholders shall remain subject to the
obligations and liabilities set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-9: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES AND SCHEDULE OF FEES:
There shall be the following classes of liquor licenses, which shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor as provided below:
   (A)   Class A: A class A license shall authorize the selling of any and all
kinds of alcoholic beverages, either in original packages for consumption off
of the premises or by the drink for consumption on the premises and shall allow
the establishment issued the license to be open for business six (6) days a
week, Monday through Saturday.
   (B)   Class B: A class B license shall authorize an establishment which has
been issued any other classification of license to sell alcoholic beverages of
whatever kind and in whatever form said classification so authorizes on Sunday.
   (C)   Class C: A class C license shall authorize the selling of alcoholic
beverages in original packages only for consumption off the premises and shall
not authorize said establishment to sell liquor by the drink to be consumed on
the premises.
   (D)   Class D: A Class D license shall authorize the selling of alcoholic
beverages only in conjunction with the service of food to said person ordering
the alcoholic beverage and shall not authorize the establishment so issued a
Class D license to maintain a portion of the establishment upon which persons
may be served alcoholic beverages without food.
   (E)   Class E: A Class E catering license shall authorize the selling of
alcoholic beverages anywhere in the City where the licensee is acting as an off
site caterer, in conjunction with parties, or events where the licensee is also
providing food services. During any quarterly period, the income the licensee
derives from the sale of food, must comprise at least fifty percent (50%) of
the gross revenue of the amount earned from the sale of food and alcoholic
beverages at such parties or events. In addition to the other requirements of
this section, a Class E license shall only be issued to those persons who
possess a valid and current Class A or Class D license.
   (F)   Class F: Class F license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on premises where food is sold. Alcoholic beverages
shall only be served at tables or other designated areas.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent any establishment from obtaining
multiple license classifications for the purpose of combining the methods and
means by which alcoholic beverages are sold upon the premises.
A holder of any license which permits sale for consumption on the licensed
premises shall not permit any customer to leave the premises with any open
alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-10: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
   (A)   Not-For-Profit Organizations: The Commissioner shall have the
authority to issue for a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) a temporary permit for the
sale of beer only; or for a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the sale of
wine and hard liquor is included, to be consumed on premises to include, but
are not limited to, at a banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair or similar private or
public assembly where food or drink is sold, served or dispensed and approved
by the Commissioner. Such temporary permit may be issued to a club, society,
fraternal or benevolent organization not for pecuniary profit and shall be
valid for a period of not more than three (3) days. No more than one temporary
permit shall be granted to any one organization in any one period of thirty
(30) days. The applicant must provide proof that the event will be covered by
insurance in at least the same amount and type as is required and in effect at
the location of the permanent licensed premises. The temporary permit shall
specify the days and hours to which the permit shall apply. The Commissioner
shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of the issuance of a temporary
license, providing all necessary information as to time, place and manner of
such temporary service.
   (B)   Business Entities With Existing Liquor License: So long as the
business entity first obtains a State of Illinois Special Use Permit or other
required licensing from the State of Illinois, the Commissioner shall also have
the authority to issue for a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) a temporary
license for the sale of beer, wine, and hard liquor to the holder of an
existing license to be consumed on premises to include, but are not limited to,
a fair, street festival, community event, or similar public assembly approved
by the Commissioner. Such temporary license can be issued for no more than
three (3) days per temporary license and no more than one temporary permit
shall be granted to any one business entity holding an existing liquor license
in any calendar month. The applicant must provide proof that the event will be
covered by insurance in at least the same amount and type as is required and in
effect at the location of the permanent licensed premises. The Commissioner
shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of the issuance of a temporary
license. If license violations applicable at the license's regular place of
permanent license should occur at the place of the temporary permit, the
penalty for violation can be applied to the permanent license. The temporary
permit shall specify the days and hours to which the permit shall apply. All
other regulatory provisions of this Chapter shall apply to such temporary
permits. (Ord. 830, 8-21-2017; Ord. 860, 6-7-2021)
3-2-11: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The liquor control commissioner shall review all liquor license requests, and
upon his or her approval, present his or her findings to the City Council. The
City Council must approve each liquor request by a majority of the City
Council.
No license of any class may be issued by the Commissioner unless the City
Council has first adopted an ordinance creating a license of the class to be
issued.
 
Class A license No Limit
Class B license No Limit
Class C license No Limit
Class D license No Limit
Class F license No Limit
 
Nothing herein shall prevent any establishment from obtaining multiple licenses
of different classes for the purpose of combining the methods and means by
which alcoholic beverages are sold. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015; amd. Ord. 872, 3-7-
2022; Ord. 885, 3-8-2024)
3-2-12: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for each liquor license, whether original or renewal, shall be
as follows:
 
Class A license $ 800.00
Class B license 300.00
Class C license 800.00
Class D license 800.00
Class E license 0.00
Class F license 1,100.00
 
(Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-13: TERM; PRORATING FEE:
Each license shall commence on May 1 and shall terminate on April 30 next
following the date of issuance. Where the license is obtained after May 1 of
any license year, the fee shall be reduced in proportion to the number of full
calendar months that have expired in the license term. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-14: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All fees shall be made payable to the city and submitted to the commissioner at
the time application is made. The fee shall be immediately turned over to the
city treasurer. In the event the license is denied, the fee, except for the
nonrefundable application fee and any late penalty, shall be returned to the
applicant. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-15: TRANSFER OF LICENSE, TERMINATION:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance, unless sooner revoked as set forth in this chapter. The license
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable, voluntarily or
involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or alienated. The license is not
transferable to any other person, party, entity or location either for
consideration or not for consideration. As to a closely held corporation, an
illegal transfer will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall
become null and void if any person owning twenty percent (20%) or more of the
stock transfers the stock to another person who previously held less than fifty
percent (50%) of the stock. As to a public corporation, an illegal transfer
will be deemed to have been attempted and the license shall become null and
void if there has been a buyout, a takeover or any other transaction involving
the sale or transfer of more than fifty percent (50%) of the stock or assets of
the corporation. A license issued to an individual or a partnership shall cease
upon the death of the licensee or a partner of a licensee and shall not descend
by the laws of testate or intestate devolution. However, the executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor may, upon written notice to the commissioner, continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court. In such
cases, the executor, administrator or trustee may exercise the privileges of
the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of decedent, or
such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of the license, or until six
(6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of the licensee, whichever
occurs first. If a corporation to whom a license has been issued is ordered
into receivership or files for bankruptcy, the receiver or trustee may continue
the operation of the business under the existing license under order of the
appropriate court until the expiration of the license or until the passage of
six (6) months from the date of appointment of a receiver or trustee, whichever
comes first. Upon the death of any person owning five percent (5%) or more of
the shares in a closely held corporation, the commission shall be notified and
if the shares are transferred to a person who is not currently named in the
application as a shareholder, then the licensee shall apply for a new license.
Upon the alienation, sale, transfer, assignment or donation of the business
that underlies the license to any third party or person other than the
licensee, the liquor license shall automatically become void and the number of
available licenses in that classification as authorized by the corporate
authorities shall automatically and immediately be reduced by one. Any licensed
establishment that has discontinued the sale or service of alcoholic liquor or
that has not been open for business at least four (4) days per week for a
period of thirty (30) days or more shall automatically forfeit its license. Any
licensed establishment that has discontinued the sale or service of alcoholic
liquor, has not been open for business at least four (4) days per week for a
period of thirty (30) days or more or whose license shall have been terminated,
shall automatically forfeit its license. Upon the forfeiture of the license,
for any of these reasons, the number of available licenses set forth in Section
3-2-1, shall be automatically reduced by one, even without an Ordinance
actually reducing the number. However, the City, in its broad discretion as
provided by law, wishes to issue another license, it may do so up to the number
of licenses that remain listed within Section
3-2-11. City shall notify any entity seeking a license whether based upon the
number shown in Section
3-2-11, or automatically reduced in accordance with Section
3-2-15, the applicant is applying for a then available license or will need to
seek the broad discretion of the City in issuing what in effect will be a new
license but within the maximum number of licenses then contained within Section
3-2-11. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015; amd. Ord. 872, 3-7-2022)
3-2-16: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises
described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only
upon written permission to make such change, issued by the commissioner after a
report to the city council. No change of location shall be permitted unless the
proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor under
the laws of this state and the regulations of the city. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-17: POSTING LICENSE; CONFISCATION:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
immediately post and keep posted and in effect, in a conspicuous place on the
premises, the license so issued. In the event such license shall be lost or
destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be issued by the city clerk upon
direction of the commissioner. In the event such license is suspended or
revoked, the posted license shall be confiscated by the police department.
(Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-18: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   (A)   All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage
of such liquor for sale shall be kept in full compliance with the codes
regulating the condition of premises for the storage and sale of food for human
consumption. Sanitary measures for cleaning and caring for all glasses, dishes,
utensils and equipment shall be provided by the licensee.
   (B)   No license shall be granted to any applicant for sale of alcoholic
beverages on the premises unless separate sanitary toilets for men and women
have been installed on the premises. Such toilets shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, shall have hot and cold running
water and shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
   (C)   The licensee and employees on the licensed premises shall comply with
the provisions of the laws of the state of Illinois relative to the health and
cleanliness of employees selling food and drink. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-19: VIEW OF PREMISES:
   (A)   No curtains, drapes, screens, doors, partitions or view obstructing
devices shall be used or built within any licensed establishment for the
purpose of concealment or hiding any person or patron of such establishment.
   (B)   The interior doors of any licensed establishment, except doors to
offices where business records, alcoholic beverage stock or cash are stored,
shall at all times during business hours remain unlocked and the exterior
windows shall at all times be maintained in a condition so as to afford an
unobstructed view of the entire interior of said premises from the exterior of
the premises during hours that alcoholic beverages are sold. (Ord. 800, 10-5-
2015)
3-2-20: INSPECTION BY POLICE OFFICERS:
All licensees shall make all parts of the licensed premises available for
inspection by the commissioner or any police officer. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-21: DESIGNATED MANAGER:
Every licensed establishment, whenever open to the public and engaged in the
sale of alcoholic beverages, shall have a qualified designated manager on the
premises, who shall be responsible for ensuring that the business operates in
conformity with all applicable laws and regulations. The designated manager
shall be the agent of the licensee and the licensee shall be responsible for
all acts or omissions of the designated manager. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-22: UNLICENSED GAMBLING, IMMORALITY PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No licensee shall permit any illegal, disorderly or immoral conduct
upon the licensed premises.
   (B)   No game of chance, gambling or gaming device shall be kept or used in
any licensed premises unless authorized by the city council and properly
licensed by the appropriate enforcement agency. Video gaming terminals may be
operated in licensed establishments to the extent permitted by the video gaming
act and the regulations of the Illinois gaming board. The licensee of an
establishment where video gaming is permitted shall post conspicuously the
license for any video gaming terminal. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-23: PACKAGE CONTAINERS; OFF PREMISES SALES:
Any licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages in original packages for
consumption off the premises shall package said alcoholic beverages only in
clear plastic containers or bags so as to allow for the plain view of the
contents when being transported by the purchaser. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-24: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
   (A)   No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, displayed or
advertised for sale or delivered to any person except at the location, place or
premises described in the liquor license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a license which provides
for consumption on the premises where sold, to offer for sale, deliver or
donate any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, or to permit the
same to be consumed on the premises where sold, delivered or donated.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to consume or permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor in public restaurants, catering establishments or other places of public
gathering not having the appropriate liquor license.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell and/or offer for sale at
retail alcoholic liquor in other than its original package, except for
consumption on the premises where sold. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-25: HOURS OF SALE:
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages may be sold, given or served pursuant hereto in
licensed premises between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to two o'clock
(2:00) A.M., Monday through Thursday and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday (only class A and C).
   (B)   In those premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday, said
premises may only sell, give and serve alcoholic beverages in accordance with
their licenses between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. (class B).
   (C)   Class D license holders may sell liquor from eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M., Monday through Saturday.
   (D)   No licensee shall permit any person other than licensees or employees
to remain in the premises where liquor is offered for sale longer than thirty
(30) minutes after said closing hours. The hours herein stated shall be the
times prevailing in the city.
   (E)   No class F licensee shall permit to be sold any alcoholic liquor
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday of each week, and
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.
on Sunday of each week. No class F licensee shall permit any alcoholic liquor
to be given away. A class F license holder shall clear the premises of all
patrons at or prior to ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. unless such patrons are
engaged in legal commercial activity which does not involve the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-26: EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS:
   (A)   Any act or failure to act of an employee or agent of either the
licensee or a management company with respect to the licensed business shall be
deemed to be the act of the licensee.
   (B)   No employee or other deliverer of alcohol may consume or be permitted
to consume any alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises while on duty or while
performing any duties of employment.
   (C)   No person, including any employee, manager, owner or agent of the
licensee may consume alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises before or after
the permitted hours of operation.
   (D)   No employee or other person, under the age of twenty one (21) years
may tend bar or draw, pour or mix any drink of alcoholic liquor and no employee
or other person under the age of eighteen (18) years may serve or deliver any
alcoholic liquor.
   (E)   Before any liquor license shall be issued, the prospective licensee
shall provide evidence to the commissioner that all employees who will be
engaged in mixing, serving, preparing or delivering of alcoholic liquor to
customers, guests, or patrons and the designated manager, have successfully
completed a beverage alcohol sellers and services education and training
("BASSET") program or training for intervention protocols ("TIPS") program
conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois department of alcohol and
substance abuse. Each new such employee or designated manager hired by the
licensee after issuance of the license shall complete a BASSET or TIPS program
at the next available training session or within sixty (60) days of actually
beginning work, whichever comes first. A copy of the certificate of completion
of such BASSET or TIPS program for each such employee shall be filed with the
commissioner. Each certification shall be renewed every three (3) years from
the date of issue. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-27: SIGNS:
Any signs on premises indicating the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be
subordinate to the sign indicating the principal business of the licensed
premises and shall conform to the description in the license application and
all applicable sign regulations of the city. No such sign shall advertise any
particular brand of alcoholic product. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-28: IMPROPER INFLUENCE:
No applicant or licensee or agent or employee of a licensee shall offer
anything of value to any city official or employee, directly or indirectly, to
influence the issuance of a license or the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-29: COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION:
Any person shall have the right to file a complaint with the commissioner
stating that any licensee has been or is violating the provisions of this
chapter, the liquor control act of the state of Illinois or the rules or
regulations issued pursuant to it. Such complaint shall be in writing in the
form prescribed by the commissioner and shall be signed and sworn to by the
complaining party. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or
regulation believed to have been violated and set forth the facts upon which
the belief is based. If the commissioner is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and is supported by reasonable grounds the
matter shall be set for hearing. Notice shall be served upon the licensee of
the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the
complaint. For purposes of this chapter, any police officer is empowered to
serve subpoenas. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-30: FINES, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
The commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this
chapter and/or may impose an administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) if it is determined that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable rules or regulations.
However, no such license shall be revoked or suspended, or a fine imposed,
except after a public hearing before the commissioner. No hearing shall be
commenced until ten (10) days after written notice to the licensee affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend; provided that, if the
commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of
the community, the commissioner may, upon the issuance of written order stating
the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than ten (10) days, giving the licensee
an opportunity to be heard not later than the end of that period. If the
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business on the
licensed premises, such orders shall not be applicable to such other business.
All hearings before the commissioner shall be on the record as set forth under
Illinois law so that any appeal to the state liquor commission shall be on this
record only and not de novo. Appeals shall be taken to the Illinois liquor
control commission and the circuit court in the manner provided by law. (Ord.
800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-31: PROVISION TO AND USE OF ALCOHOL BY UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   (A)   Delivery Of Alcoholic Liquor To An Underage Person: It shall be
unlawful for any person, regardless of relationship, age or circumstances, to
deliver any alcoholic liquor to any underage person, except as set forth in
this chapter.
   (B)   Use Of Premises For Consumption Of An Alcoholic Liquor: It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly permit or to knowingly or negligently fail
to prevent, on any premises under his or her control, the consumption of an
alcoholic liquor by an underage person. This chapter shall apply to
residential, public and commercial premises.
   (C)   Exceptions: Subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply in
the following circumstances:
      1.   The performance of a bona fide religious service.
      2.   The delivery of an alcoholic liquor within the home to an underage
person, by and under the direct supervision of that underage person's parent;
provided, however, the following rules shall be applied:
         (a)   In any prosecution of an underage person for the commission of
any state or local offense, the prosecutor, upon reasonable grounds, may
request a ruling and the court shall rule as to whether the consumption of an
alcoholic beverage, as permitted by the parent, was a contributing factor to
the commission of the offense. If it is so determined in the affirmative, then
the penalty set forth in subsection (D) of this section shall apply. For
purposes of this section, the consumption of alcohol may be determined to be a
contributing factor if it had the effect of substantially causing an impairment
to the person as "impairment" is defined in this chapter. It need not be shown
that, but for the consumption of alcohol, the offense would not have been
committed.
         (b)   The parent shall remain vicariously liable as set forth in
subsection (E) of this section.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person holding a liquor license issued by the
commissioner who is found guilty by the commissioner of violating subsection
(A) or (B) of this section shall be fined in the mandatory amount of not less
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person found guilty by a court of
law shall be fined in the mandatory amount of seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Prosecution before the commissioner in an administrative proceeding
shall not bar prosecution in a court of law for the same acts.
   (E)   Vicarious Liability Of A Parent Or Other Person Facilitating The Use
Or Abuse Of Alcoholic Liquor: The following persons shall be liable to any
individual who has been injured by an alcohol impaired underage person when the
impairment is a contributing cause of the injury:
      1.   Any person who delivered or permitted the delivery of an alcoholic
liquor to the underage person. The person making or permitting the initial
delivery to an underage person remains liable to anyone injured by the same or
different underage person regardless of how many times the alcoholic liquor
changed hands.
      2.   Any person in control of a premises, who knowingly or negligently
fails to maintain supervision to such an extent that an alcoholic liquor is
consumed on the premises by an underage person.
      3.   Any person who knowingly or negligently allows the operation of a
motor vehicle under his or her control by an underage person, when the person
knew or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that the
underage person was either impaired or had consumed any amount of alcohol
within two (2) hours prior to when this allowance to drive occurred. The
vicarious liability established by this chapter shall not be subject to the
limitations on damages as set forth in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21.
   (F)   Use Of False Identification: Any underage person found guilty by a
court of law of attempting to obtain delivery of an alcoholic liquor by use of
false proof of age shall be subject to a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for the first offense and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each subsequent offense. If the false proof of age was an improperly used
driver's license, the person so using it shall not be permitted, for a period
of six (6) months, to operate a motor vehicle on any public way within the
corporate limits of the city unless accompanied by a licensed driver over
thirty (30) years of age, subject to the provisions of subsection (J) of this
section.
   (G)   False Identification Not A Defense: It shall not be a defense to any
action brought criminally, civilly or administratively against any liquor
licensee or any other person charged with the delivery of any alcoholic liquor
to an underage person that such a person produced false identification or false
proof of age. The person or persons hearing and deciding the charges may
consider such a claim when determining the penalty to be assessed or the
apportionment of damages.
   (H)   Operation Of A Motor Vehicle While In A State Of Impairment: It shall
be unlawful for any underage person to operate a motor vehicle on a street or
highway of the city while in a state of impairment due to the consumption of an
alcoholic liquor or with any alcohol at all in his or her system. For purposes
of this chapter only, "operation of a motor vehicle" shall have the definition
ascribed to it in the Illinois vehicle code rather than the definition set
forth in section
3-2-1 of this chapter.
   (I)   Operation Of A Motor Vehicle By Underage Persons With Alcoholic Liquor
In Or On The Vehicle: When an underage person operating a motor vehicle is
impaired due to alcohol or has alcohol in the system or is operating a vehicle
in violation of a restriction pursuant to this chapter, the following shall
apply:
      1.   The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the
police department.
      2.   The following factors shall not be considerations in determining
whether or not to impound the motor vehicle:
         (a)   Whether the alcoholic liquor is in an opened or an unopened
container.
         (b)   Whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic liquor in the
vehicle.
         (c)   Whether the owner or operator had knowledge of the existence of
the alcoholic liquor within the motor vehicle.
      3.   Upon impoundment, the motor vehicle may be released only to another
person showing proof of ownership or lease rights to the motor vehicle. If the
underage operator is the owner or lessor of the vehicle, then the vehicle may
be released only to a parent or spouse of the underage owner. If the underage
person has no parent or spouse living in the immediate area, the vehicle may be
released, upon satisfactory proof of such fact, as set forth in subsection (I)4
of this section.
      4.   The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a
passenger in the motor vehicle at the time the alcoholic liquor or impairment
was found unless at least twenty four (24) hours have passed from the time of
the finding.
      5.   The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the
release has paid an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the
city, plus any towing or storage costs.
      6.   If the operator is subsequently found guilty of driving with open
alcohol in a motor vehicle or possession of alcohol by a minor or of operating
a motor vehicle while impaired pursuant to subsection (H) of this section, that
person shall not be permitted for a period of six (6) months, to operate a
motor vehicle on any public way within the limits of the city unless
accompanied by a licensed driver over thirty (30) years of age.
      7.   The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the
penalties that may be assessed in a court of law for any charges arising out of
the incident.
      8.   Any law enforcement officer, the police department and the city and
any of its officers or agents shall be absolutely immune from any liability or
exposure to liability of any kind or nature for the enforcement or
implementation of this chapter.
   (J)   Procedure For Driving Restriction Notification; Hearing:
      1.   If a person has committed a violation that subjects the person to a
restriction on driving in Momence, such a restriction shall not take place
until the police department has sent, by regular mail, a notice of the pending
driving restriction. The notice shall be mailed at least two (2) weeks before
the restriction is to go into effect and shall contain: a) a statement that the
restriction applies only to the city; b) the date the restriction is to go into
effect and the date on which it ends; c) a map showing the city limits; d) a
notice that the operator has the right to request a hearing within ten (10)
days of notification to determine the validity of the restriction. The validity
of the restriction may be challenged only on the grounds that the person was
not the actual person found guilty or that there was no finding of guilty for
the underlying offense.
      2.   The hearing shall be conducted by a supervisory member of the city
police department, appointed by the chief of police and whose determination
shall be a final administrative decision.
   (K)   Penalty For Violating Driving Restriction:
      1.   Restriction: No person shall operate and no person, including a
parent, shall permit another to operate a motor vehicle within the corporate
limits of the city in violation of the restrictions set forth in this chapter.
      2.   Penalty: Any person found guilty by a court of law of violating this
subsection (K) shall be fined in the mandatory amount of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   (L)   Zero Tolerance With Respect To Alcohol Use: It shall be unlawful for
any underage person to have any alcohol of any level detectable by observation
or blood/alcohol testing in the person's system. If the blood/alcohol level is
less than .05 milliliters of alcohol per liter of blood, then it shall be a
defense that the alcohol was acquired pursuant to the exceptions set forth in
subsection (C) of this section. Such defense may be established by clear and
convincing evidence by the testimony of the adult providing the alcoholic
liquor.
   (M)   Possession Of Alcohol By Underage Persons: It shall be unlawful for
any person under the age of twenty one (21) to possess, dispense, or consume
alcoholic liquor. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, accept a gift
of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession. (Ord.
800, 10-5-2015)
3-2-32: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted as an
administrative offense before the commissioner if the offender is the holder of
a license issued by the commissioner, and independently in a court of law as a
violation of this code.
   (A)   General: Unless another penalty is set forth in this chapter, every
person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by
the commissioner shall be subject to an administrative penalty of not more than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. Any fines set forth in this chapter shall be assessed regardless
of whether the violator is convicted or placed on supervision by the court.
   (B)   Substance Abuse: If the offense is related to alcohol or substance
abuse and the offender is under twenty one (21) years of age, the court or
administrative adjudication hearing officer may assign the offender to a drug
and alcohol education and abuse counseling program that is licensed by the
Illinois department of alcohol and substance abuse and requires a certified
evaluation program and not less than four (4) hours of counseling. If the
violator agrees to attend such a program, the violator shall pay for the cost
of the program and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense.
For a second offense, the offender shall attend a drug and alcohol education
and counseling program of at least ten (10) hours in duration as determined by
the licensed program and shall pay for the cost of the program and a fine of
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). If the offense is related to
alcohol or substance abuse and the offender is under twenty one (21) years of
age and is either found guilty or pleads no contest and agrees to pay the
applicable fine, the city will report the person to the secretary of state's
office and his/her driver's license will be suspended in accordance with state
law. (Ord. 800, 10-5-2015)
CHAPTER 3
ENTERTAINMENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required
3-3-3: Application For License, Fee
3-3-4: Investigation Of Applicant
3-3-5: Expiration Of License
3-3-6: Licenses Nontransferable
3-3-7: Inspection Of Premises
3-3-8: Regulation Of Adult Use Establishments
3-3-9: Liability For Violation
3-3-10: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: Shall include and mean all territory within the geographical limits of
the city of Momence, state of Illinois.
ENTERTAINMENT: Shall include, but not be limited to, movies, slide shows,
massage parlors, dancing, plays, concerts and campgrounds. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of providing entertainment within the
city without having a valid license to do so, issued by the city council as
hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, FEE:
Each person desiring a license shall file a written application with the city
clerk on forms provided by said clerk stating:
   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share the
profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit, or a club, the
date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors and, if a majority in interest of the
stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and
address of such person.
   (B)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license, specifying the building and the
part of such building, as applicable, sought to be licensed and the nature of
entertainment to be provided.
   (C)   Said application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   The full amount of the license fee required to be paid by this
chapter: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   Proof of ownership or lease of the premises described in the
application for the license term.
      3.   Proof of public liability insurance coverage for the license term.
      4.   Written approval from the fire chief of the fire district in which
the licensed premises is located. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
The city clerk shall forthwith deliver said application and accompanying items
to the city council and said city council shall act on said application as soon
as they have had a reasonable time to investigate the qualifications of the
applicant, the premises and the proofs submitted.
If a license is granted, said city council shall immediately pay the license
fee received to the city treasurer to be deposited in the general fund of the
city. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-5: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire April 30
following their issuance. They shall state thereon the name and address of
licensee and description of licensed premises. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-6: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license shall be transferred, either voluntarily or involuntarily, from the
licensee to any other person, and no licensee shall transfer the control or
operation of his business to an agent, manager or any other person. (Ord. 236,
9-5-1978)
3-3-7: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
All places of business licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be open to
inspection by the chief of police of the city and his police officers,
requested and directed by the city council to make such inspection. (Ord. 236,
9-5-1978)
3-3-8: REGULATION OF ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS:
   (A)   Purpose: The provisions of this section do not prohibit adult
establishments from having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the city. This
section is not for the purpose of, nor is it intended to, impose a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult
oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this
section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult oriented materials
protected by the first amendment or to deny access by distributors and
exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market.
   (B)   Definitions:
    ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: 1. Any business that devotes a substantial or
significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly displayed
merchandise, or devotes a substantial or significant portion of its floor area
(not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) to, or derives a substantial or
significant portion of its gross revenues from items, merchandise, devices or
other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      2.   Any business that engages in any "adult use" as defined in this
subsection.
   ADULT USE: Any of the activities and businesses described below:
    Adult Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business that provides the
service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether transparent or
nontransparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude.
    Adult Bookstore: An establishment or business used for the barter, rental,
or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records,
audiotape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if a substantial or
significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or publicly displayed
merchandise consists of, or if a substantial or significant portion of its
floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any
portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to, or if
substantial or significant portions of its gross revenues is derived from
items, merchandise depicting, exposing, simulating, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Cabaret: A business or establishment that provides dancing or other
live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on: 1) the
depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
or 2) the presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke,
arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.
    Adult Companionship Establishment: A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor: A business or establishment that provides
the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Health/Sport Club: A health/sport club that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
    Adult Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Massage Parlor/Health Club: A massage parlor or health club that
provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Modeling Studio: A business or establishment that provides live
models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.
    Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are used to show images to five
(5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Motion Picture Theater: A motion picture theater that as a prevailing
practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons.
    Adult Novelty Business: An establishment or business that devotes a
substantial or significant portion of its inventory, stock in trade, or
publicly displayed merchandise or devotes a substantial or significant portion
of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements,
or any portion of the business not open to the public) to, or derives a
substantial or significant portion of its gross revenues from items,
merchandise, or devices that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, or items, merchandise or devices that stimulate specified
sexual anatomical areas, or are designed for sexual stimulation.
    Adult Sauna: A sauna that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used
for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the service provided by
the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
    Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building
used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of
pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   NUDE OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: 1. Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
      2.   Human male genitals in the discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   PREMISES: The real property and all building and structures located on the
real property.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: 1. An act of sexual intercourse, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, including genital-genital, anal-genital, or
oral-genital intercourse, whether between human beings or between a human being
and an animal, human being and an inanimate object;
      2.   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed;
      3.   Masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals including any
explicit, close up representation of a human genital organ clothed or
unclothed; and
      4.   Physical contact or stimulated physical contact with the clothed or
unclothed pubic areas or buttock of a human male or female, or breasts of a
female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
   SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION: Twenty five percent (25%) or more.
   (C)   Requirements:
      1.   Other Laws: No adult establishment shall engage in any activity or
conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in the
establishment that is prohibited by any ordinance of the city of Momence, the
laws of the state of Illinois, or the United States of America. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as authorizing or permitting conduct that is
prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including, but not
limited to, statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of obscene material generally, or the exhibition, sale, or
distribution of specified materials to minors.
      2.   Existing Adult Establishments: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, existing adult establishments must comply with all requirements of
this section immediately upon its effective date.
      3.   Hours: No adult establishment shall be open to the public from the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. weekdays and
Saturdays, any time after one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Sundays, or at any time on
national holidays.
   (D)   Business Regulations: Adult establishments are subject to the
following business regulations:
      1.   An adult establishment must prevent off site viewing of its
merchandise or any materials depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" by any visual or auditory
media, including display, decoration, sign, show window, or store window, sound
transmission or other means.
      2.   Adult establishments shall not sell or dispense intoxicating liquor
or 3.2 percent malt liquor nor shall the adult establishment be located in a
building or in or on a premises that contains a business that sells or
dispenses intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor.
      3.   The sale and consumption of alcohol is prohibited on the premises of
an adult establishment, including, but not limited to, any parking areas or
lots that are owned or leased by the adult establishment or its owner, or used
by patrons when they are at the adult establishment.
      4.   All entrances to an adult establishment, with the exception of
emergency fire exits that are not usable by patrons to enter the business,
shall be visible from a public right of way.
      5.   The layout of any display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the adult establishment and any law enforcement personnel inside
the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any merchandise
offered for sale or viewing including, but not limited to, books, magazines,
photographs, videotapes, or any other material, or any live dancers or
entertainers.
      6.   Illumination of the exterior of the premises shall be adequate to
observe the location and activities of all persons on the exterior premises.
      7.   Signs for adult establishments shall not contain representational
depiction of an adult nature or graphic descriptions of the adult theme of the
operation. An adult establishment must prominently display at the entrance of
the business, or no more than two feet (2') of the door opening device of the
establishment, a sign that states:
This business sells or displays material containing adult themes. Persons under
eighteen (18) years of age shall not enter.
The sign must contain letters between three-eighths inch (3/8") and two inches
(2") in height.
      8.   No minor shall be permitted on the premises of an adult
establishment. Adult goods or materials may not be offered, sold, transferred,
conveyed, given or bartered to a minor, or displayed in a fashion that allows
them to be viewed by a minor, whether or not the minor is on the licensed
premises.
      9.   The following additional conditions apply to adult cabarets:
         (a)   No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen
(18) years old.
         (b)   All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform
intended for that purpose and which is raised at least two feet (2') from the
level of the floor.
         (c)   No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress, or touch any patron
and no patron shall fondle, caress, or touch any dancer or performer.
      10.   No person may be nude on the premises of any adult establishment.
      11.   It is unlawful for any person or entity to own, lease, rent, manage
or operate an adult establishment without a valid license issued by the city
pursuant to this section. (Ord. 662, 9-21-2009)
      12.   Within ten (10) working days of the effective date hereof, any
existing adult establishment must apply for a license from the city. Failure to
apply for a license is a violation of this section and is subject to penalty
under section 33 under this act. An existing adult establishment may continue
to operate pending review of the license application by the city. (Ord. 675, 4-
5-2010)
      13.   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
city. The completed application must contain the following information:
         (a)   All Applicants: For all applicants:
            (1) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation,
partnership, or other form of organization.
            (2) The legal description of the premises to be licensed, along
with a sketch or diagram showing the floor plan of the premises. The floor plan
of the premises shall detail all internal operations and activities, including
a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business. The floor plan
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches (±6").
            (3) The name and street address of the business. If the business is
to be conducted under a designated name, or style other than the name of the
applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by Illinois statute,
shall be submitted.
            (4) Whether the applicant has had a previous adult establishment
license suspended or revoked.
         (b)   Applicants Who Are Natural Persons: If the applicant is a
natural person:
            (1) The name, place, and date of birth, street, city and mailing
address, and phone number of the applicant.
            (2) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name
other than the applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places where used.
            (3) The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived
during the preceding two (2) years.
            (4) The type, name, and location of every business or occupation in
which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding two (2) years and
name(s) and address(es) of the applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any,
for the preceding two (2) years.
            (5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross
misdemeanor or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult
establishments.
         (c)   Applicants That Are Partnerships: If the applicant is a
partnership:
            (1) The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership, the name(s) and
address(es) of all partners and all of the information concerning each partner
that is required of applicants in subsection (D)13(b) of this section.
            (2) Whether the partnership is general or limited.
            (3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted
with the application. If the partnership is required to file a certificate as
to a trade name pursuant to Illinois statute, a certified copy of the
certificate shall be attached to the application.
         (d)   Corporate Or Other Applicants: If the applicant is a corporation
or other organization, or other entity requiring registration under the laws of
the state of Illinois:
            (1) The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation.
            (2) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreement and bylaws shall be attached to the
application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certificate of
authority as required by Illinois statute, shall be attached. If the entity is
a limited liability company, then true and accurate copies of the articles of
organization and any membership agreements shall be attached to the
application.
            (3) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in
charge of the business and all of the information concerning each manager,
proprietor or agent that is required of the applicants in subsection (D)13(b)
of this section.
            (4) Accurate and complete business records showing the names,
addresses, and dates of birth of all officers, directors and controlling
stockholders for the business.
            (5) The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered office for service of process.
      14.   Changes in the information provided on the application or provided
during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the city by the
applicant or licensee. If such a change takes place during the investigation,
it must be reported to the city clerk in writing. A failure by an applicant or
licensee to report such a change may result in a denial or revocation of a
license.
      15.   The city will issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30)
days of the application unless one or more of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The applicant is under eighteen (18);
         (b)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information required
on the license application;
         (c)   The applicant gives false, fraudulent, or untruthful information
on the license application;
         (d)   The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross
misdemeanor or felony relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult
establishments;
         (e)   The adult establishment is not in full compliance with this code
and all provisions of state and federal law;
         (f)   The applicant has not paid the required license fee;
         (g)   The applicant has been denied a license by the city or any other
Illinois municipal corporation to operate an adult establishment, or such
license has been suspended or revoked, within the preceding twelve (12) months;
         (h)   The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment for
which the license is issued; or
         (i)   The adult establishment premises holds an intoxicating liquor,
beer or wine license.
      16.   An applicant may qualify for a license:
         (a)   After one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license
revocation;
         (b)   After two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement, whichever is later, in the case of a
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offense;
         (c)   After five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is later, in the case of a felony offense; or
         (d)   After five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is later, if the conviction is of two (2) or more class C
misdemeanors or greater offenses or combination of class C misdemeanor, class
B, or class A misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month
period.
      17.   An adult establishment license expires at the end of the calendar
year.
      18.   A licensee may renew a license by completing an application as
provided in subsection (D)13 of this section. The applicant will be allowed to
continue business until the city has determined that the applicant meets the
criteria for renewal of the license. If the city denies the renewal, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
      19.   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days if it determines that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
section;
         (b)   Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages
while on the adult establishment premises other than at an adult hotel or
motel;
         (c)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult establishment as
authorized by this section; or
         (d)   Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the adult
establishment premises.
      20.   A suspension by the city shall be preceded by written notice to the
licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least ten (10) days'
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
abuses against the licensee. The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the
person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by U.S. mail to the last
known address of the owner or agent authorized to receive legal notices for the
business, as listed on its license application.
      21.   The city may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in
subsection (D)19 of this section occurs and the license has been suspended at
least once before within the preceding twelve (12) months.
      22.   The city may revoke a license if it determines that:
         (a)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process;
         (b)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use,
or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
         (c)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises;
         (d)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;
         (e)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection
(D)15(d) of this section for which the time period required in subsection (D)16
of this section has not elapsed; or
         (f)   Except in the case of an adult hotel or motel, a licensee or an
employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the licensed premises.
      23.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the revocation of the license.
      24.   When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult establishment license
for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to
revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license is
revoked due to a criminal conviction under subsection (D)15(d) of this section,
an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of
years required under subsection (D)16 of this section, has elapsed.
      25.   Nonrenewals, suspensions and revocations of an adult establishment
license are governed by the following:
         (a)   In the event that the city proposes to not renew, to suspend or
to revoke a license, the city will notify the licensee in writing of the basis
for the action. The council will hold a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether to not renew, to suspend, or to revoke the license. The hearing must be
within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. The city council must
determine whether to not renew, to suspend or to revoke a license within thirty
(30) days after the close of the hearing or within sixty (60) days of the date
of the notice, whichever is sooner. The council must notify the licensee of its
decision within that period.
         (b)   If the council determines to suspend or revoke a license, the
suspension or revocation is not effective until fifteen (15) days after
notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within that fifteen (15)
days, the licensee files and serves an action in state or federal court
challenging the council's action the suspension or revocation is stayed until
the conclusion of such action.
         (c)   If the city council determines not to renew a license, the
licensee may continue its business for fifteen (15) days after receiving notice
of such nonrenewal, if the licensee files and serves an action in state or
federal court within the fifteen (15) days for the purpose of determining
whether the city acted properly, the licensee may continue in business until
the conclusion of the action.
      26.   After denial of an application or a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek
prompt judicial review of such action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
The court shall promptly review such action.
      27.   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the
person or entity to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of
the adult establishment. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to the adult establishment. (Ord. 662, 9-21-2009)
      28.   The annual license fee for adult establishments is three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00). If eight (8) months of any current licensing year have
elapsed when an application is made, the fee shall be reduced to one-half (1/2)
the regular amount. The fee is nonrefundable. (Ord. 675, 4-5-2010)
      29.   An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials,
representatives of the police department, fire department, and building
inspector, to inspect the premises of an adult establishment for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business. The licensee is at all times responsible for the conduct, activity
and operation of the business.
      30.   Refusal to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health
officials, representatives of the police department, fire department, or
building inspector at any time it is occupied or open for business is a
violation of this section. Refusal to permit inspections may result in
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the license.
      31.   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult
hotel or motel that are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation. "Temporary habitation" is defined as a
period of time of at least twelve (12) hours.
      32.   A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate an adult establishment under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
      33.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each day the violation continues shall
be considered a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a separate
misdemeanor penalty. The city may also enforce any provision of this section by
mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 662, 9-21-2009)
3-3-9: LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director or manager or other
agent of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer
or licensee; and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
(Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
3-3-10: PENALTY:
The operation by any person of any place of recreation or entertainment, as
hereinbefore defined, without first obtaining a license therefor, or causing or
allowing conduct on the licensed premises as set forth in section
3-3-8 of this chapter, is an offense punishable by fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon conviction
thereof for each offense. Each day any person operates any place of recreation
or entertainment, as hereinbefore defined, without first obtaining a license
therefor, shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 236, 9-5-1978)
CHAPTER 4
LICENSED GAMES
SECTION:
3-4-1: License Required
3-4-2: Application
3-4-3: License Conditions
3-4-4: Fees
3-4-5: Minors Restricted (Rep. by Ord. 255, 7-16-1979)
3-4-6: View Of Premises
3-4-7: Hours
3-4-8: Revocation
3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall set up, keep or cause to be kept by his agent or servant any
shooting gallery, billiard, bagatelle, video game, pool or other kind of table
or place whatsoever on or at which games of skill or of chance are played, and
for the use of which, or privilege of playing thereon or thereat, any money or
its equivalent shall be required, paid or received without first obtaining a
license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This
chapter shall not be construed to prohibit, restrict, regulate or otherwise
license the operation of video gaming terminals in the manner described and
permitted by the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.,
as amended, it being the intent of the city for such video game terminals to be
outside the scope of this chapter. (Ord. 734, 5-21-2012)
3-4-2: APPLICATION:
All applications for licenses provided for by this chapter shall be made to the
city clerk. Such applications shall give the name of the applicant, the kind of
license desired and shall specify particularly the place where the thing for
which a license is asked is to be kept and used. (Ord. 247, 1-2-1979)
3-4-3: LICENSE CONDITIONS:
If the city clerk grants an application so made to him, the applicant for such
license shall thereupon pay to the city clerk the sum required for such
license, who shall give a duplicate receipt therefor, one of which receipts
shall be presented to the mayor, who shall thereupon direct a license to be
issued to the party. Such license shall give the name of the party to whom, and
the purpose for which it is granted, the time of its continuance and a
particular description of the place where the thing licensed is to be kept or
used. In all these particulars the license shall correspond with the
application for such license. Such license shall not be assigned nor shall the
place where it is to be operated be changed without the consent of the mayor.
(Ord. 247, 1-2-1979)
3-4-4: FEES:
   (A)   The license fee for each billiard table shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) and for the purpose of this chapter every billiard, pool or bagatelle
table shall be deemed a billiard table.
   (B)   For each shooting gallery, the license fee shall be sixty dollars
($60.00) per year. (Ord. 695, 9-20-2010)
   (C)   For each video game machine, the license fee shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year per machine. (Ord. 746, 10-1-2012)
   (D)   License fees required by this section shall be paid by the owner of
the table, gallery or machine. (Ord. 695, 9-20-2010)
3-4-5: MINORS RESTRICTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 255, 7-16-1979)
3-4-6: VIEW OF PREMISES:
All places of amusement where any billiard room, pool, bagatelle or billiard
table is kept and games thereon are played shall be kept open to public view
and the proprietor or operator thereof shall not permit or maintain any
partition, wall, screen, curtain or other devices between such places of public
amusement and where said game or games are played and the public street or
alley nearest the same, that will obstruct, prevent or interfere with a full
view from such street or alley of the interior of such place of amusement where
said game or games are played. (Ord. 247, 1-2-1979)
3-4-7: HOURS:
All billiard and pool rooms and halls within the city shall be kept closed
between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. Saturday to six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. of the day following, between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock
(11:30) P.M. Friday to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the day following, and
between the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. Sunday to Thursday
inclusive and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the day following. (Ord. 255, 7-16-
1979)
3-4-8: REVOCATION:
The mayor may revoke any license granted under the provisions of this chapter
on proof that any of the provisions herein contained have been frequently
violated by the owner or keeper of any bowling alley or billiard room, his
agent or servant. (Ord. 247, 1-2-1979)
CHAPTER 5
PEDDLERS/TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definition
3-5-2: Transient Merchants
3-5-3: License Required
3-5-4: License Or Badge Nontransferable
3-5-5: Application
3-5-6: License Fee
3-5-7: License; Issuance And Revocation Or Suspension
3-5-8: Prohibited Conduct
3-5-9: Revocation
3-5-10: Penalty
3-5-1: DEFINITION:
PEDDLER: Any person, firm, or corporation who, for itself, or by its agents,
employees, or servants, by going from place to place within the city, sells at
retail, offers for sale, sells and delivers, barters or exchanges any goods,
wares, merchandise, or any other article or thing whatsoever, or any service
not ordered by telephone, computer link, or other remote communication. (Ord.
713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-2: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to any person, firm or corporation
who may open a place of business for the sale within the city, temporarily and
not intending to establish a permanent place for such business, to sell at
retail, offer for sale, sell and deliver, barter or exchange any goods, wares,
merchandise, or any other article or thing whatsoever, or any service not
ordered by telephone, computer link, or other remote communication, and such
person shall be considered a peddler for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 713,
7-5-2011)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler within
the city without having first obtained a license therefor. Any person engaged
in the business of peddler in the city shall maintain on his or her person at
all times the license issued to him or her under this chapter, unless they are
exempt under subsection
3-5-6(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-4: LICENSE OR BADGE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license or badge issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used
or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-5: APPLICATION:
Applicants for permit and license under this chapter must file with the clerk a
sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city collector,
which shall give the following information:
   (A)   Name of the applicant.
   (B)   Phone number.
   (C)   Address (legal and local).
   (D)   A brief description of the nature of the business, goods to be sold,
where the merchandise was obtained, how the merchandise will be delivered, and
in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the
applicant.
   (E)   If employed, the name, phone number, and address of the employer,
together with the credentials establishing the exact relationship.
   (F)   List the most recent cities or villages where the applicant conducted
business.
   (G)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
   (H)   If one or more vehicles are to be used, a description of the same,
together with license number or other means of identification.
   (I)   A statement that, if a license is granted, it will not be used, or
represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any department or
official thereof.
   (J)   Provide a copy of a fingerprint based criminal history record of
conviction in the last ninety (90) days provided by the Illinois state police.
   (K)   At the time of filing the application, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall be paid to the clerk to cover the cost of investigation. (Ord. 713, 7-5-
2011)
3-5-6: LICENSE FEE:
   (A)   Fee: The fee for a peddler's license shall be as established from time
to time by the city council. The mayor, with approval of the city council, at
their next regularly scheduled meeting, shall have the right to waive or adjust
said fees of this chapter.
   (B)   Basis Of Fees: For the purpose of this chapter, any period of seven
(7) calendar days or less shall be considered one week; any period of more than
six (6) calendar months and not more than one calendar year shall be treated as
a year.
   (C)   Exceptions:
      1.   The mayor, with approval of the city council at their next regularly
scheduled meeting, shall have the right to waive or adjust said fees of this
chapter.
      2.   Any person selling fruit, vegetables, farm products, or merchandise,
at an organized farmers' market.
      3.   Any person selling goods, wares, or merchandise at an organized
charitable, religious, civic, local or any other not for profit organization
sponsored event.
      4.   Any local resident under the age of fifteen (15) conducting curbside
nonalcoholic refreshment sales during community festivals.
      5.   Any person selling goods, wares, or merchandise at an organized flea
market.
      6.   Any person conducting what is commonly known as a "garage sale" or
"yard sale" at such person's residence. (Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-7: LICENSE; ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
   (A)   After consideration of the application and all information and data
obtained relative thereto, the city clerk shall license the applicant as a
peddler or transient merchant, if he determines that the applicant has the
qualifications and meets the requirements of this chapter, and all other
applicable laws and ordinances; if not, the application shall be denied and the
applicant shall not engage in or carry out any business herein defined, in the
city of Momence.
   (B)   The application shall be denied if the applicant or any person who is
to participate in the solicitation or any person having management or
supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a felony, or a
misdemeanor which involves lack of moral character, honesty, or integrity, as
determined by the result of an investigation conducted by the chief of police
within ten (10) years prior to the date of the application; or if he or any
person who is to participate in the solicitation has at any time violated the
provision of this chapter or any other applicable laws or ordinances of the
city of Momence or any county or municipality for a period of ten (10) years
prior to the date of the application, or if a license or other such permit to
engage in or carry out such business defined herein has been revoked by the
city or any other governmental agency or body. This application shall also be
denied if the purpose of the business is otherwise unlawful.
   (C)   If the application for a license is approved, the city clerk shall
forthwith issue the applicant a license, provided the applicant complies with
the requirements of section
3-5-3 of this chapter and pays the application fee as determined in section
3-5-6 of this chapter.
   (D)   At all times engaging or carrying out such business as defined herein,
in the city of Momence, the applicant shall prominently display said license
and shall exhibit same whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer
or by any person who approaches the applicant for purposes of engaging in or
carrying on the business defined therein.
   (E)   Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the city clerk if the clerk has reason to believe that the license holder's
organization, or other members of license holder's organization have violated
any provisions of this chapter or any other provision of any ordinance of the
city, or any section of this code, or any statute, rule, or regulation of any
other governmental agency.
   (F)   Upon receiving a complaint or other notification alleging that a
violation has occurred, the city clerk shall fix a date and time for a hearing
and shall notify license holder, or license holder's organization either
verbally or in writing of the charge. At the hearing, the city clerk shall hear
such evidence bearing upon the question as may be presented by the complainant
and the license holder. Based upon the evidence taken at such hearing, the
police chief shall make a determination as to whether or not the license shall
be suspended or revoked, and shall cause his decision to be carried out. (Ord.
713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-8: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to cheat or deceive any person in
the city, or to fraudulently misrepresent the quality, price or amount of the
goods, wares, merchandise, article or thing, or service sold, offered for sale,
sold and delivered, bartered or exchanged.
   (B)   Any peddler, upon arriving upon any private property on which has
conspicuously posted a sign, "No Peddlers", or substantially similar sign,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises without attempting to
contact anyone, and it shall be unlawful for such peddler to remain on the
property.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful, and constitute a trespass, for any person to go
upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or create any sound in any other
manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence,
for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof, and engage
in peddling, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Any peddler who has entered onto any private property, whether invited
thereon or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart therefrom when
requested to do so by the occupant, and it shall be unlawful for such peddler
to remain on the property after such request.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in peddling to use sales
or other tactics based on force, intimidation, or psychological pressure; to
knowingly misrepresent himself or herself or their product to any city officer,
potential or actual customer, or to make or cause to be made, any contract,
order form, or instrument of indebtedness without full knowledge of the
customer.
   (F)   Any peddler shall at all times conduct himself or herself in
accordance with this code, local ordinances, state and federal laws and
regulations, and no peddler shall violate any such code, ordinances, laws or
regulations.
   (G)   No person shall engage in the business of peddler prior to nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and later than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day, Monday
through Saturday. (Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
   (H)   No person shall engage in the business of peddler prior to twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon, and later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Sunday. (Ord.
784, 8-18-2014)
   (I)   Sale of products to any person standing on the roadway is prohibited.
(Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-9: REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the city clerk if the
holder of the license is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license.
   (A)   Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given to the holder of the license, in person or by mail, at the address or
addresses listed on the holder's application. Any license previously issued
shall become null and void immediately upon personal delivery of such notice,
or three (3) days after such mailing.
   (B)   Any person whose license to engage in the business of peddler in the
city has been revoked may appeal such revocation to the city council of the
city by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city clerk. The city
council shall consider said appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting
after the date of filing, and shall render a decision thereon as soon as
practicable. (Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
3-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalty as provided in this code. Each day that any offense shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 713, 7-5-2011)
CHAPTER 6
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-6-1: License Required
3-6-2: Application
3-6-3: Fee
3-6-4: Compliance With State Law
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate for hire a taxicab within the corporate limits of the
city without having a valid license so to do, issued by the city as hereafter
set forth. (Ord. A-28, 6-16-1947)
3-6-2: APPLICATION:
An applicant for such a license shall file with the city clerk an application
under oath stating:
   (A)   His name and residence address.
   (B)   That he has complied with all the statutes of Illinois covering the
safe operation of taxicabs in this state. (Ord. A-28, 6-16-1947)
3-6-3: FEE:
The license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle per annum,
beginning May 1 and ending on April 30, and the number of licenses issued in
the city shall be two (2). Such license fee shall be paid to the city treasurer
and upon the presentation of the treasurer's receipt to the city clerk, the
clerk shall issue said license which shall be signed by the mayor and the
clerk. (Ord. 210, 2-6-1978)
3-6-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW:
Any violation of the laws of the state of Illinois relative to the operation of
taxicabs shall likewise be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. A-28, 6-16-1947)
CHAPTER 7
JUNKYARDS; DEALERS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Vehicle License
3-7-3: Inspection
3-7-4: License To Store Or Collect Junk
3-7-5: License To Operate
3-7-6: Application For License
3-7-7: Issuance Of License
3-7-8: Other Premises
3-7-9: Penalty
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
JUNK: Old iron chain, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope,
old bags, wastepaper, paper clippings, wood scraps, rubber, rags, glass, empty
bottles of different kinds and sizes, when the number of each kind or size is
less than one gross, and all other articles and other things discarded or no
longer a manufactured item or used for their intended purpose, including, but
not limited to, abandoned automobiles, wood and any other such item.
JUNK DEALER: A person who engages in the business of buying and selling or
borrowing and exchanging junk, or who collects, receives, stores, holds in
possession for sale or exchange, or his own personal use any junk, whether
dealing in wholesale or at retail, or as a junk peddler.
JUNK PEDDLER: Any person who deals in junk, but does not occupy any premises
especially for such business. (Ord. 258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-2: VEHICLE LICENSE:
Every vehicle by any junk dealer or junk peddler shall display the name of the
licensee and his license number plainly on the exterior thereof or if a metal
license plate is issued by the city clerk, such metal plate shall be so
displayed. If metal badges are issued by the city clerk, a junk dealer, a junk
peddler and their employees shall wear such badge while engaging in the junk
business. (Ord. 258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-3: INSPECTION:
Every store yard or premises where junk is dealt in or stored shall be subject
to inspection by the police and fire departments. Inspections shall be made at
reasonable hours. (Ord. 258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-4: LICENSE TO STORE OR COLLECT JUNK:
No person not having been issued a license by the city clerk shall allow,
permit or suffer junk to collect or be stored on his premises. (Ord. 258, 6-2-
1980)
3-7-5: LICENSE TO OPERATE:
No person shall operate a junkyard or suffer or permit junk to be stored on his
premises or the premises so leased or occupied by him within the corporate
limits of the city without having a valid license to do so. (Ord. 258, 6-2-
1980)
3-7-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for such a license shall be filed with the city clerk which
shall be signed under oath stating:
   (A)   His name and residence address;
   (B)   The location of the premises intended to be used for the storage or
collection of junk; and
   (C)   That such junkyard shall be surrounded by a solid fence of at least
seven feet (7') high. (Ord. 258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon the filing of an application as set forth and the payment of a license fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, the city clerk shall issue a license. (Ord.
258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-8: OTHER PREMISES:
No person shall make use of any property, private or public, not included
within the premises licensed under this section for the storage, handling, or
display of any junk. (Ord. 258, 6-2-1980)
3-7-9: PENALTY:
Any person found and adjudicated to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day that any such person is found to have violated any
provision of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 258, 6-
2-1980)
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Carnivals
3-8-2: Cigarette Sales
3-8-3: Garage And Yard Sales
3-8-4: Daycare Centers
3-8-1: CARNIVALS:
Any person desiring to run, conduct or show a carnival with tents, booths and
other structures on any of the streets, ways, lots or blocks within the city
limits shall first pay a license fee therefor of ten dollars ($10.00) and
provide the city council of the city with liability insurance, insuring the
city in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 210, 2-
6-1978)
3-8-2: CIGARETTE SALES:
No person shall sell, give away or attempt to sell or give away, either as
principal, clerk or servant, any cigarettes, cigarette papers or any cigarette
tobacco, including thereby any and all paper and mixtures used or to be used in
the making of cigarettes, without first obtaining a license therefor.
There shall be paid as a license fee under this section the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) per year, and all licenses issued under this section shall expire on
May 1 next after the date of issuance. Any person taking out a license under
this section at any time after the commencement of the then current year shall
pay into the city treasury, in advance, a sum at the rate of ten dollars
($10.00) per year for the remainder of the year; provided, that no license
shall be issued under this section for less than one-fourth (1/4) of a year.
(Ord. 210, 2-6-1978)
3-8-3: GARAGE AND YARD SALES:
Any person desiring to run, conduct or hold a garage or yard sale within the
city limits shall first pay a license fee therefor of five dollars ($5.00). No
more than four (4) licenses shall be issued to any household address for garage
and yard sales during any calendar year. A license shall not be issued nor
valid for a period exceeding three (3) consecutive days. (Ord. 396, 9-21-1992)
3-8-4: DAYCARE CENTERS:
   (A)   The definition of daycare center set forth in the child care act of
1969, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/1 et seq., is hereby adopted by and for
the city of Momence, Illinois, including any subsequent amendments to or
revisions thereof.
   (B)   The operator of any daycare center located within the city of Momence
shall annually register said daycare center with the city of Momence by
providing the following information:
      1.   The physical address where the center is located; and
      2.   The name and address of the operator of the daycare center.
   (C)   If the location of the daycare center is changed, the operator of the
daycare center shall notify the city of Momence of the new address within ten
(10) days thereof. (Ord. 587, 5-2-2005)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-9-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-9-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-9-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-9-4: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax And Service Occupation Tax
3-9-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while the provisions of this section are in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to purchasers for
use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 124, 9-
15-1969)
The exclusion contained in section 2(d) of the "retailers' occupation tax act"
approved June 28, 1933, as amended shall not apply to property within the city.
(Ord. 250, 1-2-1979; amd. Ord. 262, 9-15-1980; Ord. 264, 10-6-1980)
3-9-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the city in the business of
making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of
all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-5.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the municipality shall file, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue
required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10,
1961, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 125, 9-15-1969)
The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the "service occupation tax act"
approved July 10, 1961, as amended shall not apply to property within the city.
(Ord. 250, 1-2-1979; amd. Ord. 262, 9-15-1980; Ord. 264, 10-6-1980)
3-9-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning
as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 206, 1-
16-1978; amd. Ord. 262, 9-15-1980; Ord. 264, 10-6-1980)
3-9-4: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   (B)   The City of Momence is a non-home rule Illinois municipality pursuant
to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   (C)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax "upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality" (the "Municipal Grocery Tax") (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (D)   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed "at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales" (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   (E)   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (F)   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, "upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries" as "an
incident to a sale of service" (the "Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax")
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (G)   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   (H)   The City Council believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City and its residents, that the City levy a Municipal
Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (I)   The City Council believe that it is appropriate, necessary and in the
best interests of the City and its residents, that the City levy a Municipal
Grocery Service Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   (J)   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24 ).
   (K)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in subsection (J), above. The imposition of this tax
is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (L)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department or Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter with
the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
   (N)   Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on
January 1, 2026. (Ord. 896, 9-2-2025)
CHAPTER 10
DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING
SECTION:
3-10-1: Purpose
3-10-2: Permitted Areas
3-10-3: Alcoholic Liquor
3-10-4: Application/Permit
3-10-5: Permit Fee And Term
3-10-6: Regulations For Downtown Sidewalk Dining
3-10-1: PURPOSE:
The downtown sidewalk dining permit is intended to facilitate outdoor dining in
the downtown area; to create an active streetscape, enhance the economic and
social vitality of the downtown area; to promote pedestrian and retail
activity; to allow for the use of public sidewalks for such outdoor dining; to
expedite the approval of such facilities while ensuring that the public's use
of the sidewalks will not be significantly impaired by such dining; and to
prevent any adverse impact to adjacent properties from such dining. (Ord. 797,
7-20-2015)
3-10-2: PERMITTED AREAS:
Sidewalk dining shall be permitted only upon a property which is located within
the downtown district and zoned B-1. (Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
3-10-3: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed, or possessed by any
person within a sidewalk dining area unless the sidewalk dining area is
bordering the building face, and the premises has either a class A, B, or D
liquor license. (Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
3-10-4: APPLICATION/PERMIT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk dining area, to engage in,
or allow sidewalk dining without first having obtained a sidewalk dining
permit.
   (B)   An applicant for a sidewalk dining permit shall file an application
with the city collector at city hall on such forms and subject to such
procedures as the mayor and city council may establish for such purpose. The
application shall be made to the city collector in writing, and signed by the
proposed applicant.
   (C)   The application shall state the name, address, and telephone number of
the applicant. It shall include a legal description and the address of the
premises proposed to be operated as a sidewalk dining area.
   (D)   The application shall include a plan with dimensions showing the
layout for the sidewalk dining area which accurately depicts the existing
sidewalk conditions, including sidewalk width from the building face to curb,
location and dimensions of any sidewalk features, or obstructions. The
application will include the design, location, size, and space of the sidewalk
dining area, chairs, tables, barriers, umbrellas, and other facilities to be
located within the sidewalk dining area. The application shall include proof of
insurance, detailed in subsection
3-10-6(N) of this chapter.
   (E)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant if the owner, or any
partner, shareholder, or resident manager, of said applicant is indebted to the
city, county, state of Illinois, United States Of America or any department
thereof.
   (F)   The liquor control commissioner, or his/her designee, shall review the
application to determine if the proposed sidewalk dining area meets the
requirements of this chapter. The liquor control commissioner, or his/her
designee, may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application; upon
receipt of written approval, the city collector shall issue the sidewalk dining
permit. If the liquor control commissioner, or his/her designee, approves the
application, then the approved plan and permit shall be posted at the premises,
and be clearly visible to customers and the public. No material changes to an
approved plan may be made without prior written approval of the liquor control
commissioner, or his/her designee. No additional permit fee will be assessed
for such a change. (Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
3-10-5: PERMIT FEE AND TERM:
The fee for a downtown sidewalk dining permit shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) per year. The fee shall be nonrefundable and shall not be prorated. No
permit shall be assigned or transferred to any other person. The permit year
shall be May 1 through April 30. The permit shall state the name of the
applicant and specifically designate the sidewalk dining area. (Ord. 797, 7-20-
2015)
3-10-6: REGULATIONS FOR DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING:
   (A)   Hours: The sidewalk dining area shall not be open to patrons except
during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
daily. Applicant shall permit no use by any patron, member of the public or
other person within the sidewalk dining area, except during the permitted
hours.
   (B)   Sanitary Conditions: The sidewalk dining area must be kept sanitary,
neat, clean, and litter free at all times; the sidewalk dining area shall be
free from accumulation of food, litter, snow, ice, and other potentially
dangerous or unsanitary conditions.
   (C)   Food Preparation: No food preparation is permitted on the sidewalk
dining area; all food shall be prepared within the kitchen of the
establishment.
   (D)   Sound: See subsection
5-1-5(A) of this code.
   (E)   Storage Of Sidewalk Furniture: Furniture and other property used in
the sidewalk dining area by applicant shall not be stored in the public right
of way, and all such furniture and property must be removed from the sidewalk
dining area when the establishment is closed to the public for any period in
excess of seven (7) days.
   (F)   Smoking: The applicant shall not permit smoking within any sidewalk
dining area. "No smoking" signs shall be posted within the sidewalk dining
area.
   (G)   Space And Clearance: Sidewalk dining is permitted only on sidewalks
with a minimum width of ten feet (10') from the property line to the curb face;
the area designated for sidewalk dining shall be considered an extension of the
establishment; therefore the location of the sidewalk dining area must be
immediately adjacent to and have direct access to the establishment. In the
interest of public safety, sidewalk dining areas must maintain a clear
pedestrian path of at least three feet (3') at all times. This clear pedestrian
path must be free of any obstruction to allow pedestrian passage. Sidewalk
dining shall not interfere with any utilities or signs located on the sidewalk
and in the public right of way. Sidewalk dining shall not interfere with snow
removal within the clear pedestrian path; snow removal within the sidewalk
dining area shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Sidewalk dining areas
may not impinge on required clear distances for maneuvering around entrances or
exits. The sidewalk dining area must be accessible to disabled patrons and
employees. When a sidewalk dining area is located at a street corner, vision
clearance requirements shall be in accordance with city ordinances; and in all
events, the vision of pedestrians and of operators of motor vehicles shall not
be obstructed. These regulations shall also apply if a sidewalk dining area is
adjacent to an alley or driveway.
   (H)   Furniture And Other Elements: Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awning, and
any other elements associated with a sidewalk dining area must be of quality
design, workmanship, and materials to ensure the safety and convenience of
patrons as well as to enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the
streetscape and adjacent neighborhood. All sidewalk dining area elements will
be reviewed as part of the sidewalk dining permit process. Sidewalk dining area
chairs and tables must be placed only inside the area designated for sidewalk
dining. Table size should be kept to a minimum to avoid crowding. Appropriated
density of tables and chairs will be reviewed; and same shall be subject to
reasonable and appropriate conditions and restrictions. Permanent structures
are not permitted within sidewalk dining areas. Elements cannot be attached
permanently to sidewalks or other public rights of way. The applicant is
responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk or other public property if any
damage is caused by applicant's use of the sidewalk for sidewalk dining.
Temporary physical barricades to separate sidewalk dining areas from pedestrian
traffic are allowed if they are constructed of finished quality materials,
including wrought iron chains, rope stanchions, picket fencing, planters, etc.
Physical barriers clearly designating the sidewalk dining area (i.e., licensed
premises) is required if liquor is consumed at a sidewalk dining area. No signs
shall be placed on barricades.
   (I)   Overhead Structures: Umbrellas and other temporary overhead structures
are subject to approval during the sidewalk dining area permit process. No
portion of any umbrella shall be less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalk.
Umbrellas and overhead structures cannot interfere with street trees, must be
weather resistant, and designed to be secure during windy conditions. Awnings,
either permanent or temporary, are subject to approval during the sidewalk
dining area permit process. Awnings shall have no support posts located within
the public right of way, and no portion of an awning shall be less than eight
feet (8') above the sidewalk.
   (J)   Lighting: Lighting for sidewalk dining area is subject to approval
during the dining area permit process. Lighting must complement the existing
building and sidewalk dining area design and shall not cause a glare to passing
pedestrians or vehicles. Electrical wires are not permitted within the sidewalk
dining area. Acceptable tabletop lighting includes candles and low wattage
battery operated fixtures. Additional lighting may be attached to the adjacent
structure provided that written approval from the liquor control commissioner,
or his/her designee and all applicable city requirements are met.
   (K)   Outdoor Heaters, Fans, And Coolers: Outdoor heaters, fans, and coolers
for sidewalk dining areas are subject to approval during the sidewalk dining
area permit process.
   (L)   Vending Machines, Carts: Vending machines, carts, or other objects for
sale are prohibited.
   (M)   Service And Use: All services provided to sidewalk dining area patrons
as well as all patron activity (waiting, sitting, dining, etc.) must occur only
within the designated sidewalk dining area and not encroach on pedestrian
traffic area (i.e., the clear pedestrian path) at any time. Equipment necessary
for dispensing any other items is subject to review during the sidewalk dining
area permit process. The establishment must provide supervision of the sidewalk
dining area at all times.
   (N)   Insurance: Each applicant shall maintain the insurance coverage
required during the permit period. The insurance coverage shall be equal to or
better than, the requirement for any liquor license as set forth in subsection
3-2-6(D) of this title, and shall include all provisions designated in this
subsection. The insurance coverage is to be filed with the city collector, and
presented to the liquor control commissioner, or his/her designee, prior to the
issuance of a permit. Failure of the applicant to maintain any required
insurance shall subject the permit to suspension or revocation. The policy of
insurance shall provide for thirty (30) days' prior notice to the city if
coverage is substantially changed, canceled, or not renewed. The city shall be
named as an additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any
liability arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk
dining area. Each permit holder shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city
harmless from any loss that results directly or indirectly from the permit
issuance or operation of the sidewalk dining area.
   (O)   Liability: The use of the sidewalk dining area by applicant shall be
subject to, and conditioned upon the applicant maintaining liability insurance
as provided above. Permission to establish and maintain the sidewalk dining
area shall not be construed to relieve the establishment of liability for any
negligence on the establishment's part on account of, or in connection with the
sidewalk dining area. By acceptance of the authorization granted by the permit
to establish and maintain a sidewalk dining area and by establishing and
maintaining the sidewalk dining area, the applicant shall be deemed to have
promised and agreed to save harmless the city of Momence, Illinois, from any
and all liability (including attorney fees) and litigation fees arising by
reason of the formation, construction, placement, existence, use, or
maintenance of the sidewalk dining area.
   (P)   Immunity: The authorization granted by a permit approved under this
chapter to establish and maintain a sidewalk dining area is not intended to
constitute, and shall not be deemed to be a waiver of sovereign immunity by or
on behalf of the city of Momence, Illinois, or any of its officers or
employees.
   (Q)   Upkeep Of Sidewalk: Neither the city of Momence, Illinois, nor any
public utility company shall be responsible for damage to property of applicant
placed in the sidewalk dining area during repair, maintenance, or replacement
of the sidewalk, or during repair, maintenance, or replacement of a right of
way, or any public facility, or utilities in the area of the sidewalk dining
area. Applicant shall, upon reasonable verbal, or written notification from the
city of Momence, Illinois, remove any and all property of applicant designated
by the city of Momence, Illinois, whenever the city of Momence, Illinois,
desires to use the subject sidewalk for any purpose whatsoever. If applicant
shall fail or neglect to remove the property of applicant within the time
specified, the city of Momence, Illinois, shall have the right to remove the
property at the expense of the applicant and the city of Momence, Illinois,
shall not be liable to the applicant for any loss or damage to property of
applicant, including, but not limited to, any property within the sidewalk
dining area, caused by the removal.
   (R)   Revocation Of Permit: The permit issued herein may be immediately
suspended or revoked for cause, including violations of any provision of this
chapter. The permit herein may also be permanently revoked upon thirty (30)
days' prior notice to applicant if, and when, the city of Momence, Illinois,
requires use of its public right of way for any purpose inconsistent with the
present use of the right of way, and said sidewalk dining.
   (S)   Penalty: Any applicant or any person found guilty of violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation of
this chapter; and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each
date in which a violation occurs or continues.
   (T)   Appeal: In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of this
chapter, the liquor control commissioner may suspend, or revoke any permit for
any violation of this chapter after affording the applicant due notice and
opportunity to be heard in its own defense. (Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Building Codes Adopted
4-1-2: Building Permit And Inspection Fees
4-1-3: Certificate Of Use And Occupancy
4-1-4: Registration Of Contractors
4-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, and Building Codes, the
following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future; words in the plural include the singular; words in
the singular include the plural; and the word "shall" is mandatory while the
word "may" is permissive.
    OCCUPANT: Also known as lessee, renter, inhabitant, tenant, landlord,
owner, and/or responsible party for any premises in the City.
   (B)   Scope: The purpose of this section is to provide rules and regulations
for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, repair and maintenance, of buildings and structures within
the City.
   (C)   Building Codes: The technical codes listed below are hereby adopted as
the Building Codes for the City of Momence and are incorporated herein as fully
as if set out at length. Three (3) copies are on file at Momence City Hall:
      1.   2012 International Building Code.
      2.   2012 International Residential Code.
      3.   2012 International Property Maintenance Code.
      4.   2012 International Fire Code unless there is a conflict with the
State's minimum edition requirement of the State Fire Code, or Life Safety Code
in which case, the State's minimum edition requirement of the State Fire Code,
or Life Safety Code, will supersede.
      5.   Most recent edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code. (Ord. 755, 1-7-
2013)
Violations of all adopted Building Codes can be enforced through issuance of
citation(s) by the Momence police or the Momence building inspector. The
minimum fine for each cited violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
The maximum fine shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) each day that a
violation of an adopted Building Code exists. Each day shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
   (D)   International Building Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions, or changes shall be made and supersede any of the regulations of the
2012 International Building Code:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of Momence.
Section 113.1.1 Delete in its entirety, and insert: Application For Appeal. Any
person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board
of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal and a $100.00 (one
hundred dollars) fee is paid and filed with the city collector within 20
(twenty) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section 113.2 Delete in its entirety.
Section 113.3 Delete in its entirety.
Section 1612.3 Insert: city of Momence.
Section 1612.3 Insert January 9, 1974.
Section 3412.2 Insert June 30, 2012.
   (E)   International Property Maintenance Code: The following insertions,
deletions, additions, or changes shall be made and supersede any of the
regulations of the 2012 Property Maintenance Code:
Section 101.1 Insert: city of Momence.
Section 103.5 Delete in its entirety. See title 4, chapter 1, section 2 of the
Momence city code.
Section 111.1 Delete in its entirety, and insert: Application For Appeal. Any
person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board
of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal and a $100.00 (one
hundred dollars) fee is paid and filed with the city collector within 20
(twenty) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section 111.2 Delete in its entirety.
Section 111.2.1 Delete in its entirety.
Section 111.2.2 Delete in its entirety.
Section 111.2.4 Delete in its entirety.
Section 111.2.5 Delete in its entirety.
Section 112.4 Insert: Fifty dollars ($50.00) minimum, five hundred dollars
($500.00) maximum.
Section 302.4 Insert: Eight (8) inches.
Section 303.2 Insert: Existing private residential swimming pools, hot tubs,
and spas, may continue without change as it relates to self latching and
locking gates and doors.
Section 304.13.2 Insert: Every openable window shall have either a tightly
fitting screen of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm.) or storm sash.
Section 304.14 Insert: January 1 and December 31.
Section 602.3 Insert: October 1 and April 1.
Section 602.4 Insert: October 1 and April 1.
   (F)   International Residential Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions, or changes shall be made and supersede any of the regulations of the
2012 international residential code:
Section R101.1 Insert: city of Momence.
Section R112.1.1 Delete in its entirety, and insert: Application For Appeal.
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the zoning board
of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal and a $100.00 (one
hundred dollars) fee is paid and filed with the city collector within 20
(twenty) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Section R112.2 Delete in its entirety.
Section R112.3 Delete in its entirety.
Table R301.2 (1) Insert: Ground snow load: 25#/sq.ft.
Wind design speed: 90 mph.
Wind design topographic effects: No.
Seismic design category: B.
Damage from weathering: Severe.
Frost line depth: 42 inches.
Termite: Moderate to severe.
Winter design temperature: 0 degrees.
Ice barrier underlayment required: Yes.
Flood hazards: January 9, 1974.
Air freezing index: 1500.
Mean annual temperature: 51 degrees F.
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: 18 inches and 30 inches.
   (G)   International Fire Code: The following insertions, deletions,
additions, or changes shall be made and supersede any of the regulations of the
2012 international fire code:
The minimum edition requirement of the state of Illinois fire code and life
safety code will supersede any of the regulations of the 2012 international
fire code.
Section 101.1 Insert: city of Momence.
Section 108 Board Of Appeals: Delete in its entirety.
Section 109.4 Delete in its entirety. See title 1, chapter 4, section 1 of the
Momence city code.
Section 111.4 Delete in its entirety. See title 1, chapter 4, section 1 of the
Momence city code.
(Ord. 755, 1-7-2013)
4-1-2: BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
   (A)   Issuance: No permit shall be issued or inspection shall be made until
the fee prescribed in this section shall have been paid.
   (B)   Fees: The fees for the issuance of permits and inspections shall be as
follows: (Ord. 652, 10-20-2008)
      1.   Building Permit Fees:
Residential - single-family:             
 New residential construction and       $0.17 per square foot for all areas,
  additions                               but not less than a $100.00 minimum
                                          $9.00 per thousand dollar value of
 Residential alterations or remodeling  the project, but not less than a
                                          $75.00 minimum
  Accessory structures, including, but    $0.16 per square foot for all areas,
 not limited to, decks, patios, sheds,  but not less than a $50.00 minimum,
  detached garages, gazebos, etc.         which includes plan review and 1
                                          inspection trip
 Swimming pools                         $75.00 plus $50.00 for electrical
                                          inspection
 Reroof, re-siding, driveway            $40.00
 Early start for footing/foundation     $150.00
Commercial, industrial, storage, business institutional, public and multi-
family:
 New construction, additions and        $0.19 per square foot for all areas,
  accessory structures                    but not less than $125.00 minimum
  Alterations, remodeling, change of      $10.00 per thousand dollar value of
 use, reroof and re-siding              the project, but not less than a
                                          $100.00 minimum
 Early start for footing/foundation     $150.00
Agriculture buildings:                   
 New construction, additions and        $0.08 per square foot for all areas,
  accessory structures                    but not less than $50.00 minimum
Electrical:                              
  New construction, additions and         $0.08 per square foot for all
 remodeling                             habitable areas, but not less than a
                                          $50.00 minimum
Plumbing:                                
  New construction, additions, and        $0.08 per square foot for all
 remodeling                             habitable areas, but not less than a
                                          $50.00 minimum
Heating and air conditioning:            
  New construction, additions and         $0.08 per square foot for all
 remodeling                             habitable areas, but not less than a
                                          $50.00 minimum
Miscellaneous:                           
  Moving, raising, shoring or
 underpinning of structure or           $100.00
  foundation
 Demolition                             $0.10 per square foot of floor area,
                                          but not less than a $50.00 minimum
 Signs and related structures           $0.65 per square foot for all areas,
                                          but not less than a $50.00 minimum
 Fences                                 $0.07 per linear foot for all areas,
                                          but not less than a $45.00 minimum
 Reinspection or extra inspections      $50.00
  needed or requested
                                          If construction is started before a
 Penalty                                 permit is issued, double fees may be
                                          charged
                                          50 percent of the original permit fee
 Permit renewal                          amount, but not less than the minimum
                                          fee
 
(Ord. 651, 10-20-2008; amd. Ord. 652, 10-20-2008)
         (a)   The applicant for a permit for the removal of a building or
structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall
also obtain a surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
prior to the issuance of said permit.
         (b)   Applicants seeking a permit for the demolition of a building or
structure shall also obtain a surety bond in the amount of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) and evidence of liability insurance wherein the City is a
named insured in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for personal injury or property damage, prior to the issuance of
said permit. The approved permit is good for sixty (60) days from date of
issue. (Ord. 651, 10-20-2008; amd. Ord. 652, 10-20-2008; Ord. 666, 11-2-2009)
      2.   Inspection Fees:
         (a)   The electrical inspector and plumbing inspector shall receive
fees as follows:
(1) Prepaid thirty five dollar ($35.00) inspection fee per trade for R-1.
(2) Prepaid thirty five dollar ($35.00) inspection fee per trade per unit per
inspection for R-2, R-3, E-1.
(3) For B-1, B-2, M-1, M-2, PUD, A-1, OS-1, and all commercial, thirty five
dollars ($35.00) minimum per inspection or forty percent (40%) of trade issue
fee, whichever is greater.
         (b)   Retest for each trade requires a prepaid fee of fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 673, 3-1-2010)
   (C)   Keys: Keys for all new construction shall be left at City Hall prior
to any inspection. No remodeling or new construction will be inspected if the
keys are not left at City Hall prior to the time the inspection is requested.
   (D)   Notice: No inspection shall take place unless the inspector is given
forty eight (48) hours' prior notice. (Ord. 652, 10-20-2008)
   (E)   Enforcement: Failure to obtain a building permit will be enforced
through the issuance of citation(s) by the Momence police or the Momence
building inspector. The minimum fine will be doubled the required permit fee in
force from time to time. In the event that compliance is not met within seventy
two (72) hours of an issued citation, each day thereafter for which a required
building permit is not issued shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 848,
8-19-2019)
4-1-3: CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   Definitions: The certificate issued by the building inspector which
permits the use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for
the use and occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any
special stipulations or conditions of the building permit shall be called
certificate of use and occupancy.
   (B)   New Buildings: A building or structure hereafter erected shall not be
used or occupied in whole or in part until the certificate of use and occupancy
shall have been issued by the building inspector.
   (C)   Buildings Hereafter Altered: A building or structure hereafter
enlarged, extended or altered to change from one use group to another or to a
different use within the same use group, in whole or in part, and a building or
structure hereafter altered for which a certificate of use and occupancy has
not been heretofore issued, shall not be occupied or used until the certificate
shall have been issued by the building inspector, certifying that the work has
been completed in accordance with the provisions of the approved permit. Any
use or occupancy, which was not discontinued during the work of alteration,
shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days after the completion of the
alteration unless the required certificate is secured from the building
inspector.
   (D)   Changes In Use And Occupancy: After a change of use has been made in a
building or structure, the reestablishment of a prior use that would not have
been legal in a new building of the same type of construction is prohibited
unless the building complies with all applicable provisions of this Code. A
change from one prohibited use, for which a permit has been granted, to another
prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of this Code.
   (E)   Contents Of Certificate: When a building or structure is entitled
thereto, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy
within ten (10) days after written application. The certificate shall certify
compliance with the provisions of this Code and the purpose for which the
building or structure will be used in its several parts. The certificate of use
and occupancy shall specify the use group; the type of construction; and any
special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. (Ord. 403, 3-15-
1993)
4-1-4: REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS:
   (A)   All contractors, as that term is defined by ordinance in the County of
Kankakee, shall, prior to the commencement of any work in the City of Momence,
Illinois, submit to the City Collector, at the City Hall, of the City of
Momence, its license, duly issued, and in effect from the County of Kankakee.
The submission of such license, once a copy has been made, shall authorize the
contractor to perform work within the City of Momence, Illinois.
   (B)   Any contractor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the general penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-1(A) of this Code. (Ord. 763, 7-15-2013)
CHAPTER 2
NUMBERING BUILDINGS 1
SECTION:
4-2-1: Title And Purpose
4-2-2: Numbering Plan
4-2-3: Assigning Of House Numbers
4-2-4: Fees
4-2-5: Numbers On Houses
4-2-6: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1-1, "Street Numbering", of this code.
4-2-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as HOUSE NUMBERING
ORDINANCE, for the following purposes:
   (A)   To set up a systematic numbering of all lots, buildings and structures
in the city;
   (B)   To provide for the orderly assignment of house numbers;
   (C)   To establish an agency for carrying out the provisions of this
chapter;
   (D)   To provide for the maintenance of proper records of house numbers
assigned and to provide records to be made available to any interested person.
(Ord., 4-1-1963)
4-2-2: NUMBERING PLAN:
House numbering required on lots, buildings or structures in the city shall be
numbered in accordance with the following plan:
   (A)   The dividing line for east and west numbers shall be the Dixie
Highway, also known as Range Street. The first block running east or west shall
be the 100 block, the second block the 200 block, etc.
   (B)   The dividing line for north and south numbers shall be Washington
Street. The first block running north or south shall be the 100 block, the
second block the 200 block, etc.
   (C)   Odd numbers shall be on the west and south sides of the streets; even
numbers shall be on the east and north sides of the streets.
   (D)   There shall be not more than one hundred (100) numbers to each block;
one number to every thirty feet (30') of frontage.
   (E)   Streets running diagonally or not generally north and south or east
and west shall be assigned numbers conforming as nearly as possible with the
blocks intersected.
   (F)   Lots, buildings and structures on streets not otherwise provided for
shall be assigned arbitrary numbers which shall be as consistent as possible
with the general plan.
   (G)   Two-family houses having multiple entrances on a street shall be
assigned separate numbers for each entrance.
   (H)   Two-family and multiple-family houses not having separate entrances
for each apartment shall be treated as apartment houses, and such building
shall be assigned one number, and individual families or apartments designated
as "Apartment 1", "Apartment 2", etc.
   (I)   Business and office buildings shall be assigned a number corresponding
to the main entrance of said building, with the separate and individual places
of business designated as "Room No. 1", "Room No. 2", etc. (Ord., 4-1-1963)
4-2-3: ASSIGNING OF HOUSE NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector of the city to assign house
numbers under the provisions of this chapter. Such house numbers shall be
designated on any building permit issued by said building inspector in addition
to the legal description of the property.
The building inspector shall cooperate with any individual requesting the
numbering of lots, buildings and structures in subdivisions or elsewhere within
and adjacent to the City limits.
The building inspector shall keep a record showing the proper street number
assigned to any lot, building or structure designated under the provisions of
this chapter, and such record shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.
Appeal from the decision of the building inspector may be taken to the Zoning
Board of Appeals 1  of the City by any interested person. It shall not be
necessary for said Zoning Board of Appeals to publish any form of notice in
connection with hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
In the absence of or inability to act by the building inspector, the alternate
building inspector shall perform the duties required by this chapter, and the
Zoning Board of Appeals may assume the duties provided under this chapter to
the exclusion of the building inspector or alternate building inspector should
they deem it necessary.
Numbers designated under the provisions of this chapter shall be changed only
by action of the building inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the City
Council. (Ord., 4-1-1963)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this Code.
4-2-4: FEES:
There shall be no fee required for the assigning of a number under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord., 4-1-1963)
4-2-5: NUMBERS ON HOUSES:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupants of every house, building or
structure in the City to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the
street, figures at least two and one-half inches (21/2") high, showing the
number of such building or structure; and no owner or occupant shall use any
number other than the number officially assigned under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord., 4-1-1963)
4-2-6: PENALTIES:
Any person failing to number any building or other structure occupied by him
after receiving written notice to do so from the City of Momence Code enforcer
and who shall continue in his failure to so number such building or structure
shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each week during which a failure to
so number continues.
Any person using a number for any building or structure other than the one
assigned as provided in this chapter, after receiving notice from the City of
Momence Code enforcer, shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each week
during which a failure to conform to the correct number continues. (Ord. 837,
11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Nuisance Declared
4-3-2: Report Dangerous Buildings
4-3-3: Failure To Remedy Nuisance, Council Action
4-3-4: Notice To Be Posted
4-3-5: Liability Of Owner
4-3-6: Action To Prevent Accident
4-3-7: Closure Of Premises, Revocation Of License
4-3-8: Unsanitary Premises, Human Habitation Prohibited
4-3-9: Repair By City
4-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any building or part thereof or any structure of like nature in a condition
dangerous to the occupants, or those passing, or to any adjacent buildings, by
reason of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective heating
apparatus, violations from machinery, defective flues, confined or cramped
stairways, insufficient exits, narrow or dark passageways, or which is unsafe
or dangerous for the purpose for which it is used or intended to be used, or is
in danger of being set on fire from any defect in its construction or is
especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of its dilapidated condition or
defective construction, or from other causes, or which may be prejudicial to
the public health or the health of the inhabitants of the neighborhood, shall
be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 205, 1-16-1978)
4-3-2: REPORT DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the building commissioner, fire
chief, health officer or complaint shall be made to them or any of them in
writing by any two (2) reputable citizens that any building, walls or structure
within the city is in such dangerous condition as described in the preceding
section, said building commissioner, fire chief or health officer, as the case
may be, shall forthwith report the same to the city council. (Ord. 205, 1-16-
1978)
4-3-3: FAILURE TO REMEDY NUISANCE, COUNCIL ACTION:
If it shall appear to the city council after due investigation of such report
that such building, walls or structure is in such dangerous condition as
aforesaid and the owner or his agent, or the lessee or occupant thereof, if
within his power or duty so to do, shall fail within a reasonable time to be
fixed by the city council, and after notice thereof in writing served on such
owner or his agent, or upon such lessee or occupant, by such officer of the
city as the city council shall direct, specifying wherein such building is
unsafe, defective or unlawful, to make the same safe in such a way as the city
council may direct, said building, wall or structure shall, upon the order of
said city council, be torn down and removed by the building commissioner or
made safe as said city council may order. (Ord. 205, 1-16-1978)
4-3-4: NOTICE TO BE POSTED:
Every building which shall appear to the building commissioner, health officer
or fire chief to be especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of bad
conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay or other
causes, shall be held to be an unsafe building and the building commissioner or
health officer as the case may be, in addition to proceedings as provided in
this section shall also affix a notice of the dangerous character of the
building in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall thereof, and any person
removing, defacing or disturbing such notice so affixed shall be liable to the
penalties as provided in this code. (Ord. 205, 1-16-1978)
4-3-5: LIABILITY OF OWNER:
An itemized account of the expenses of tearing down and removing such structure
or of putting the same into safe condition shall be kept by the building
commissioner and shall be presented to the owner of said structure or his agent
or to such lessee or occupant for payment, and in case such owner, lessee or
occupant, as the case may be shall fail or refuse, upon demand, to pay the
same, then the same may be recovered from such owner, lessee or occupant in an
action of debt in the name of the city. (Ord. 205, 1-16-1978)
4-3-6: ACTION TO PREVENT ACCIDENT:
In case the building commissioner or health officer finds any building or part
of a building in such condition as to endanger life where said condition may be
averted by the immediate application of precautionary measures, said officers
or either of them shall have and exercise the power (without the preliminary
direction of the city council), to take such precautionary measures as in his
opinion may be necessary to render any building or part thereof safe; provided,
the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of said building refuses or neglects to
take such precautionary measure after being notified so to do by said officers
or any of them. The decision and order of the said officers or any of them, as
the case may be, shall be absolute and final. (Ord. 205, 1-16-1978)
4-3-7: CLOSURE OF PREMISES, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   The building commissioner, health officer or fire chief may order that
no person shall be permitted to enter, occupy or use a dangerous building or
any portion thereof until the same shall have been made safe; and may post such
order in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall of such building. No person
shall enter, occupy or use (except for the purpose of repairing and making
safe) any building or portion thereof after the posting of such notice until
such building or portion thereof shall have been made safe.
   (B)   If the building or portion thereof found dangerous shall be devoted to
any purpose requiring a license, the mayor may suspend the license pending the
period of making repairs, and he may revoke the license in case of failure on
the part of the owner or party having an interest in such unsafe building or
portion thereof to make such without delay and at his expense. (Ord. 205, 1-16-
1978)
4-3-8: UNSANITARY PREMISES, HUMAN HABITATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to occupy for human habitation any building which is
declared by the health officer to be unfit for such habitation by reason of
defective sanitary conditions until such conditions have been remedied and the
premises approved by said health officer as fit for occupancy. (Ord. 205, 1-16-
1978)
4-3-9: REPAIR BY CITY:
If work has been done and expense incurred by the city in connection with
dangerous buildings a bill of cost shall be rendered by the city to the owner,
lessee, occupant or agent of the property. The city may refuse to issue a
permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of any building or portion
thereof on the property involved until the expenditure incurred by the city on
account of the work and material supplied has been repaid. (Ord. 205, 1-16-
1978)
CHAPTER 4
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Compliance Required
4-4-2: Definitions
4-4-3: Building Permit Required
4-4-4: Conform To Approved Plans
4-4-5: Pool Construction And Location
4-4-6: Authority To Inspect And Close
4-4-7: Effect Of Compliance
4-4-8: Penalty
4-4-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Every swimming pool hereafter constructed, installed, altered, maintained,
removed or demolished within the City, shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. In the event that compliance is not met within
seventy two (72) hours of an issued citation, each day thereafter shall
constitute a separate offense. Existing private residential swimming pools may
be continued without change, provided the requirements of this chapter are
observed. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011; amd. Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural include the singular; words in the singular include the plural; and the
word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector of the City of Momence or his
representative, duly appointed by the Mayor.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land with or without
building development.
PERMANENT POOL: Any constructed pool that cannot be disassembled, moved or
relocated in its entirety or in parts.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
POOL DEPTH: The distance between the floor of the pool and the maximum
operating level of water when such pool is in use.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool, whether permanent or
temporary, which is intended for and maintained by an individual primarily for
the sole use of his household and guest and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit.
SWIMMING POOL: An accessory structure, whether indoors or outdoors, which is a
receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any
point of more than twenty four inches (24") or with a capacity of more than one
thousand (1,000) gallons, which is used or intended for the purpose of
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all
appurtenant equipment constructed, installed and maintained in or above the
ground.
TEMPORARY POOL: Any manufactured pool designed, either in its entirety or by
sections, for seasonal assembly and dismantling. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011)
4-4-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall construct, erect or alter a swimming pool without
first having obtained a building permit, issued and signed by the building
inspector.
   (B)   Application for a permit shall be in writing on such form as shall be
made available by the City. Such application shall briefly describe the
proposed work or structure and shall contain such information, drawings, plans
and specifications as are prescribed herein. Application shall be made by the
owner or lessee or agent of either, or the architect, engineer or builder
employed in connection therewith. Such application shall contain the full names
and addresses of the applicant and of the owner or lessee or agent of either,
and, if the applicant is a corporate body, its responsible officers.
   (C)   Such building permit shall be deemed an initial permit only and shall
not apply to permanent or temporary private residential swimming pools if an
alteration or change is made to the pool for which the initial permit was
issued. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011)
4-4-4: CONFORM TO APPROVED PLANS:
All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and
drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with approved plans. If
deviation from such plans is desired, a supplementary plan conforming to
provisions of this chapter shall be filed. All work shall stop until approval
of the supplementary plan has been granted by the building inspector. (Ord.
720, 8-15-2011)
4-4-5: POOL CONSTRUCTION AND LOCATION:
   (A)   At least one means of egress shall be provided from private pools.
   (B)   Outdoor temporary or permanent swimming pools shall be provided with a
barrier which shall comply with the following:
      1.   The top of the barrier shall be at least forty eight inches (48")
above finished ground level. Where the tip of the pool structure is above
finished ground level, such as an aboveground pool, the barrier shall be at
finished ground level, such as the pool structure, or shall be mounted on top
of the pool structure.
      2.   When an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the
barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is a
fixed or removable ladder or steps, the ladder or steps shall have a barrier
which blocks admittance, unless the removable ladder is pulled out of the pool
when not in use.
   (C)   No portion of any private swimming pool or appurtenant equipment
(including pumps, filters, and heaters), except the walkway, shall be located
at a distance not less than one foot (1') from any side or rear property line
and may not be placed in any front yard. No appurtenant equipment serving the
swimming pool shall be permitted in the side yard between dwellings. Corner
lots will be considered as having two (2) front yards.
   (D)   All electrical devices used in conjunction with or connected to all
pools must be grounded and protected by approved ground fault interrupt
circuits.
   (E)   An approved pool cover shall be installed during those periods when
use of the pool is discontinued. Unused pools on residential premises not
occupied or dwelt in for a period of thirty (30) days or more shall be
completely drained or equipped with an approved pool cover. Abandoned pools, as
determined by the police department, shall be removed or filled to the grade of
adjacent land.
   (F)   Temporary private residential swimming pools shall be engineered and
designed to withstand all anticipated forces to which it will be subjected.
Wood shall not be used at, above or below grade as an integral part of the
structure.
   (G)   No temporary or permanent private residential swimming pool shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping,
maintaining or operation shall be the occasion of any nuisance, danger to life
or detrimental to health.
   (H)   The owners of all swimming pools existing on the date of the
publication of this chapter shall, within thirty (30) days from the date
thereof, comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter, and such owners
shall thereafter be subject to the penalties of this chapter. (Ord. 720, 8-15-
2011)
4-4-6: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT AND CLOSE:
If the city finds that the operation of the pool does not meet applicable
requirements of this chapter, or that such violations endanger the city water
distribution system, the pool will be closed until such time as the
requirements of this chapter are met. It shall be a violation of this chapter
to deny access to the pool to the aforementioned authorities between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011)
4-4-7: EFFECT OF COMPLIANCE:
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter does not alter or limit the
common law or statutory liability of any person. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011)
4-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalty as provided in this code and as established in the list of fines and
fees. (Ord. 720, 8-15-2011)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Duties Of The Building Inspector
4-5-4: Base Flood Elevation
4-5-5: Development Permit
4-5-6: Preventing Increased Damages
4-5-7: Protecting Buildings
4-5-8: Other Development Requirements
4-5-9: Variances
4-5-10: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-5-11: Penalty
4-5-12: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-5-13: Separability
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer from flood control, repairs to
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blighted areas; and
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available. (Ord. 450, 11-
4-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood. The "base flood elevation" at any location is as
defined in section
4-5-4 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof, including manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings. The term
also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   (A)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building, or any
addition to a building, exceeding seventy (70) square feet in floor area;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks; and
   (H)   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve a change in the ground surface elevation.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION OR FPE: The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN: "Floodplain" and "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" are synonymous.
Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation
by the base flood. The floodplains of the city are generally identified as such
on the flood insurance rate map of the city prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated November 20, 1996. The floodplains of those parts
of unincorporated Kankakee County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city are generally
identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for Kankakee County
by the federal emergency management agency and dated September 6, 1996.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Kankakee River shall be as
delineated on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA and dated
September 6, 1996. The floodway for each of the remaining floodplains of the
city shall be according to the best data available from federal, state, or
other sources.
IDOT/DWR: Illinois department of transportation/division of water resources.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
build on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is
started, or b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: a) any improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places. (Ord. 450, 11-
4-1996)
4-5-3: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the building inspector shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
4-5-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-5-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-5-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-5-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (F)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined
in section
4-5-11 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (G)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state and federal permits;
   (H)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (I)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
and
   (J)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state or federal permits and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-4: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
The best available base flood elevation data are listed below. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party may finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit
it to the federal emergency management agency for approval.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Kankakee River shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
the city prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated November
20, 1996.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood
insurance rate map of the city.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the flood insurance rate map of the city shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study should be done to determine
base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Kankakee County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
Kankakee County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
September 6, 1996. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to have been
higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification is not in the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building inspector shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site
and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first flood insurance rate map identification. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-6: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
Within the floodway identified on the flood boundary and floodway map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
statewide permit no. 3;
      2.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
statewide permit no. 4;
      3.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR statewide permit
no. 5;
      4.   Minor nonobstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
statewide permit no. 6;
      5.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDOT/DWR statewide permit no. 7;
      6.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDOT/DWR statewide permit no. 8;
      7.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR
statewide permit no. 9;
      8.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDOT/DWR statewide permit no. 10;
      9.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDOT/DWR statewide permit no. 11; and
      10.   Any development determined by IDOT/DWR to be located entirely in a
flood fringe area.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by IDOT/DWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDOT/DWR permit is not required); and
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary to approve
a revision of the regulatory map and base flood elevation. (Ord. 450, 11-4-
1996)
4-5-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
4-5-6 of this chapter, all buildings to be located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
      2.   Substantial improvements made to an existing building;
      3.   Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%);
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage); and
      5.   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1')
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties; or
      2.   The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters;
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         (c)   If walls are used, all fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor must be used solely for parking or building access and shall be designed
to allow entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or have a minimum of two (2)
permanent openings no more than one foot (1') above grade and providing a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris;
         (e)   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
         (f)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and
         (g)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials.
      3.   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be:
         (a)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
         (b)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code
870.
      4.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a registered professional engineer certifies that:
         (a)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
         (b)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impacts from debris and ice; and
         (c)   Floodproofing measures will be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing
for the purpose of this subsection. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-8: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments (PUDs), and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
4-5-6 and
4-5-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation);
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when available; and
      3.   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
   (B)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-5-6 and
4-5-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter.
      2.   New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal
systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation are watertight.
   (C)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 450, 11-4-
1996)
4-5-9: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board for a
variance. The zoning board shall review the applicant's request for a variance
and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city council may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other required local, state and federal permits have been
obtained.
   (B)   The zoning board shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protection standards of section
4-5-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair
or alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted
using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections (A)1
through (A)5 of this section. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-10: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development, either inside or outside of the floodplain, will be
free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-11: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit for a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the building inspector may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
building inspector shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00); and
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   The building inspector shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
4-5-12: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council
to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program, including:
Ordinance 402 passed February 1, 1993. However, this chapter does not repeal
the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the
program, nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. (Ord. 450, 11-
4-1996)
4-5-13: SEPARABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 450, 11-4-1996)
CHAPTER 6
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
4-6-1: Intent Of Storm Water Management Concepts And Standards
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Storm Water Runoff Management
4-6-4: General Principles And Permit Requirements
4-6-5: Permit Required
4-6-6: Application For Permit
4-6-7: Building Permit
4-6-8: Appeals
4-6-9: Responsibility
4-6-10: Retention Of Plans
4-6-11: Inspections
4-6-12: Record Drawings
4-6-13: Neighborhood Drainage Planning/Subdivision Plats
4-6-14: Operation Standards And Requirements
4-6-15: Fees And Bonds
4-6-16: Appeals And Variations
4-6-17: Revocation Of Permit
4-6-18: Violations And Penalties
4-6-1: INTENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS AND STANDARDS:
The intent of this chapter shall not be to preclude development but to ensure
that development enhances rather than detracts from or ignores the natural
topography, resources and amenities of the area. The intent of this chapter is
to set forth the parameters within which development may take place by
specifying storm water management concepts and standards for drainage system
construction; requiring erosion and sedimentation control; regulating the
alteration of land and topography; regulating the removal of vegetation;
assuring the continued, efficient operation of the drainage system; and
protection of the natural stream system from alteration of its natural
function. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: The specific inspections and tests where required
have been performed, and that such tests comply with the applicable
requirements of this chapter.
CHANNEL: A depression formed in the topography of the earth's surface to carry
storm water runoff through a specific area.
CITY: City of Momence, Illinois.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the storm water runoff
release rate.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of average end areas.
DEVELOPER: Any person or persons engaged in development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DRY BOTTOM STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: A facility that is designed to be normally
dry and contains water only when excess storm water runoff occurs.
ENGINEER: A registered professional engineer of Illinois.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of storm water runoff which exceeds the
transportation capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROUND WATER RECHARGE: Replenishment of existing natural underground water
supplies.
LAND SURVEYOR: A registered surveyor of the state of Illinois.
LOW FLOW: The transport of flow of a minor or common volume of storm water as
opposed to a high or peak volume of storm water which would utilize overflow
facilities.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed by the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: A term used to describe the drainage of an area by
means of natural gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to a point
below the existing grade or invert of storm drains within the area.
RECOGNIZED AGENCY: An agency or governmental unit that has statistically and
consistently examined local climatic and geologic conditions and maintained
records as they apply to storm water runoff.
   (A)   Technical release no. 55, "Urban Hydrology For Small Watersheds,
Engineering Division, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department Of
Agriculture", latest edition, shall be the methodological standard to be
applied hereunder. Alternate generally acceptable methods may be approved on a
case by case basis.
   (B)   Rational method using bulletin 70, or the latest available data, for
areas less than twenty (20) acres total may be used.
SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The quantity of storm water runoff that can be
transported within a channel, passage, conduit, tube, duct, or combination
thereof in such a manner that the elevation of the water does not rise
sufficiently above the level of the adjacent ground surface so as to cause
damage to structures or facilities located thereon.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways
and parking lots.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A written document from the city authorizing
improvement exhibited in the site development plan and subject to the
conditions and restrictions contained therein.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Plan documents showing any proposed manmade changes to
improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, construction
of or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures, the placement
of mobile homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Water that results from precipitation which is not absorbed
by the soil or plant material.
STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE: The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to subservient land.
STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: Areas designated to store excess storm water runoff.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the area that contributes storm water runoff to a
given point.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VEGETATION REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete
extraction, or killing by spraying.
WET BOTTOM STORM WATER STORAGE AREA: A facility that is designated to be
maintained as free water surface or pond and accumulates water only when excess
storm water runoff occurs. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-3: STORM WATER RUNOFF MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all commercial, industrial, institutional,
governmental, utility, or other developments and for residential developments
that contain an area in excess of two (2) acres.
   (B)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff from
all developments described above, shall not exceed the existing safe storm
drainage capacity of the natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer
system, or that amount of existing runoff from the parcel of land in a
vegetative condition, whichever is less. The final release rate shall not
exceed the existing rate for all recurrent storm events up to and including a
100-year storm event. The rate at which storm water runoff is delivered to an
existing city owned designated storm water storage area may be unrestricted,
but subject to prior city approval and agreement with city to purchase the
required storage.
   (C)   A storm sewer conveyance system shall be designed with adequate
capacity to convey through the development the storm water runoff from all
tributary upstream areas. The overland flow channel portion of this system
shall be designed to carry the peak rate of runoff from a 100-year storm
assuming all storm sewers are blocked and that the upstream areas are fully
developed and have been saturated with antecedent rainfall (AMC = 4). No
habitable structures shall be constructed within this channel; however, streets
and parking or playground areas and utility easements shall be considered
compatible uses. Design of this floodway system shall also take into
consideration control of storm water velocity to prevent erosion or other
damage to the facility which will restrict its primary use. Depths of flow
shall be kept to a minimum and retention of channel configurations shall be
totally under city control. In the event that the area within this channel is
reshaped or restricted for use as a floodway, the city may cause to have any
restrictions removed at the expense of the party or parties causing said
restrictions. Should the development contain an existing natural waterway this
land configuration shall be preserved as part of the channel system.
Construction of a low flow system of storm sewers to carry the minor storm
runoff and reshaping of the channel with a maximum of four horizontal to one
vertical (4:1) side slopes and bottom of a width adequate to facilitate
maintenance and carry the flood runoff without eroding velocities may be
required in the plans for land development.
   (D)   The required volume for storm water detention shall be calculated on
the basis of the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainfall for a twenty four
(24) hour duration as published by the recognized agency. This volume of
storage shall be provided for the duly developed watershed that is tributary to
the area designed for detention purposes. The storm water release rate shall be
considered when calculating the storm water storage capacity and the control
structure designed to maintain a relatively uniform flow rate regardless of the
depth of storm water in the storage area.
   (E)   Dry bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed to serve a
secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types of uses that will
not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent flooding. A method of
carrying the low flow through these areas shall be provided in addition to a
system of drains, and both shall be provided with a positive gravity outlet to
a natural channel or storm sewer with adequate capacity as described below. The
combination of storage of the water from a 100-year storm and the design
release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of seventy two
(72) hours. Maximum depth of planned storm water storage shall not exceed four
feet (4') unless the existing natural ground contours and other conditions lend
to greater storage depth, which shall be approved by the city. Minimum grades
for turf areas shall be one percent (1%) and maximum slopes shall be ten
percent (10%) (10 units horizontally to 1 unit vertically). Storage area side
slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical and a
ten percent (10%) slope or less shall be used wherever possible. If slopes
greater than ten percent (10%) are necessary to meet storage requirements or
area restrictions, approval shall be obtained from the city and suitable
erosion control provided in addition to the protection required to ensure
public health, safety and welfare. Outlet control structures shall be designed
as simply as possible and shall require little or no attention for proper
operation. Each storm water detention area shall be provided with a method of
emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year
frequency storm occurs. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without attention and shall become part of the natural or surface
channel system described below. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to
substantiate all design features. Both outlet control structures and emergency
overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed to fully protect the
public health, safety and welfare. Storm water runoff velocities shall be kept
at a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will not
be permitted without complete protection for the public safety. The use of
restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and used only as a last resort
when no other method is feasible.
   (F)   Wet bottom storm water storage areas shall be designed with all of the
items required for dry bottom storm water storage areas, except that a low flow
conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet shall be
eliminated. However, the following additional conditions shall be complied
with:
      1.   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from wave
action.
      2.   Minimum normal water depth shall be five feet (5'). If fish are to
be used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth (1/4) of the pond area
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') deep.
      3.   Facilities shall be available to allow the pond level to be lowered
by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance and public
safety. If a positive gravity outlet is not provided by the developer, the
developer may be required to provide a pumping system to be approved by the
city for the above purpose.
      4.   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface level.
Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features.
      5.   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided.
Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration
facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements for the
perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to
the satisfaction of the city.
      6.   In the event that the water surface of the pond is to be raised for
purposes of storing water for irrigation or in anticipation of the evapo-
transpiration demands of dry weather, the volume remaining for storage of
excess storm water runoff shall still be sufficient to contain the 100-year
storm runoff.
   (G)   Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage areas shall
have minimum grades of one-half percent (1/2%) for PCC concrete and one percent
(1%) for asphalt and shall be restricted to storage depths of one foot (1')
maximum. Rooftop storage shall be designed with permanent type control inlets
and parapet walls to contain runoff on the rooftop. Emergency overflow areas
shall be provided to ensure that the weight of water stored will not exceed the
structural capacity of the roof. Release rates and storage volume requirements
for paved storage areas remain the same as outlined above. If a portion of an
area within a storm water storage area is to be paved for parking or recreation
purposes, the paved surface shall be placed at the highest elevation within the
storage areas as possible. Maximum parking lot grades shall not exceed normal
design parameters of three to five percent (3–5%).
   (H)   Where developments form only a portion of a watershed or contain
portions of several watersheds, the requirement for providing storage shall be
based upon the proportion of the area being developed as compared to the total
watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be
acceptable only when approved by the city. As a watershed is developed with a
series of storm water storage facilities, due consideration will be given for
calculation of the allowable release rate and capacity of the natural or
surface channel system described above.
   (I)   Plans, specifications and all calculations for storm water runoff
control as required hereunder shall be submitted to the city for review and
approval prior to the approval of a final plat, in the case of subdivision,
mobile home parks and planned unit developments, or issuance of a building
permit, in the case of commercial or industrial construction.
   (J)   Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for storm water
runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earth moving or drainage
construction on the project site.
   (K)   The construction of the storm water control system shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide benefits to the city, negotiations for
public participation in the cost of development may be feasible.
   (L)   The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge capacity
of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the storm water runoff
shall give consideration to providing ground water recharge to compensate for
the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is paved
and roofed over. Specific design calculations and details shall be provided
with the final plans and specifications presented for city review. The use of
natural gravel deposits for the lower portions of storm runoff storage area,
the flattening of drainage slopes and the retention of existing topography are
examples of possible recharge methods.
   (M)   During the construction phases of land development, facilities shall
be provided to prevent the erosion and washing away of the earth. Silting of
downstream areas can be prevented through the strategic use of silting basins,
sodding of runoff channels, and by limiting the period of time during which the
earth is stripped of vegetation.
   (N)   Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all of the
items covered in this chapter and shall be submitted for review and approved by
the city council prior to the start of construction. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-4: GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth and any
sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit for the
execution of said plan as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
   (B)   Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of
time as is practical.
   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land
undergoing development.
   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
   (F)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with developing the site. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   Before land is cleared, graded, transported, or otherwise disturbed by
the movement of earth for purposes, including, but not limited to, the
construction of buildings, site development for commercial, industrial and
residential purposes, the mining of minerals, including sand and gravel, the
development of golf courses, mobile home parks and the construction of roads
and streets by any person, partnership or corporation within the city, a site
development permit or building permit embodying the proposed earth movement
shall be obtained from the building inspector where development comes under any
one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted
therefrom by subsection (B) of this section:
      1.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof, will exceed five
hundred (500) cubic yards.
      2.   Fill will exceed three feet (3') in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface.
      3.   Excavation will exceed four feet (4') in vertical depth at its
deepest point.
      4.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof will exceed an area of
five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      5.   Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
   (B)   A site development permit shall not be required in the following
cases:
      1.   Basements or excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and
drain fields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools,
cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit
shall have been issued by the city, unless part of a development which would
otherwise require such a permit.
      2.   Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by
public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities,
except when or where trench width disturbance is greater than four feet (4') in
width.
      3.   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes.
      4.   Engaging in the following, if, but only if, in connection with a
farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise:
         (a)   The construction of sod waterways, or
         (b)   The construction of terraces, or
         (c)   The construction of surface water diversions, or
         (d)   The construction of grade stabilization structures, or
         (e)   The tilling of the soil. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   No site development or building permit shall be issued until said
developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions
required by this chapter, and certifies that any land clearing construction or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with such
plan and submissions.
   (B)   Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the
owner of the property or his authorized agent to the building inspector on a
form furnished for that purpose. When grading or plant cover removal is
proposed as a part of a building permit, application may be combined, and one
plot plan in the number of copies required by the building inspector may be
submitted showing building plans and site development plans. In such instances,
a land surveyor or engineer shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing
and proposed contour lines. Each application shall be accompanied by the
following, unless the building inspector finds any item unnecessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter:
      1.   Site Developments: With respect to site developments, a vicinity
sketch, showing acreage of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed
sewer and water facilities, location of existing utilities, buildings and
drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site together with a legend
and scale. There shall be included on or with such a vicinity sketch:
         (a)   A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil
types on the site. For the purpose of this chapter, the soil map shall be the
soil survey of Kankakee County, Illinois, prepared by the soil conservation
service of the USDA.
         (b)   Enough information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the
site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may
affect, or be affected by the development of the site.
         (c)   The name and address of the developer or owner.
         (d)   The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such
firm.
         (e)   Limits of the 100-year floodplain(s) as adopted by the federal
insurance administration for the flood insurance program.
         (f)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved.
         (g)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
         (h)   Areas to be left undisturbed.
      2.   Site Grading: With respect to site grading, existing topography of
the site and a one hundred foot (100') adjacent peripheral strip, proposed
contours and final grades, and street profiles; and indicate what measures will
be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff.
      3.   Storm Drainage: Storm drainage by means of a plan based upon a
competent storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations,
and indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets such
as:
         (a)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated.
         (b)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long term
or continuous flow.
         (c)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding.
         (d)   Whether there is evidence of high water table (permanent or
reasonable), as indicated by the soil survey of Kankakee County, Illinois, as
prepared by the soil conservation service. This information may be supplemented
by site soil borings that show ground water elevations.
         (e)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow.
         (f)   The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural
outlets.
         (g)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the
natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel.
         (h)   A cross section and profile and existing stream channels where
applicable.
         (i)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded, or bare
earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
      4.   Estimated Schedule And Phasing Of Development Of The Site:
 
Phase I   Stripping and/or clearing
Phase II  Rough grading and construction
Phase III Final grading and vegetative establishment
Phase IV  Maintenance
 
All site development plans submitted to the building inspector for approval
shall show all the erosion and sediment control measures needed to provide
protection throughout all the phases of construction listed above. These plans
shall also include any off site borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines, utility
lines, and haul and access roads, and further indicate:
         (a)   The start of clearing date.
         (b)   Duration of exposure of disturbed areas.
         (c)   Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative
and structural) by phase and date.
         (d)   Installation of storm drainage by phase and date.
         (e)   Paving on streets and parking areas, if any, by phase and date.
         (f)   Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show
what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as
soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of
sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application,
temporary seedings, if needed, mulching or similar stabilization procedures.
         (g)   Details of all structural sediment control measures.
         (h)   Computations for sediment basins, if any.
      5.   Standards And Requirements: The standards and requirements of
"Standards And Specifications For Soil Sediment Control In Northeastern
Illinois", as adopted by the Kankakee County soil and water conservation
district and the Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And
Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control", latest edition, are
hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by this reference,
for purposes of exemplifying the considerations and factors which should enter
into the preparation of a site development plan. All mandatory requirements of
the above listed standards shall be met. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-7: BUILDING PERMIT:
No building permit shall be issued for an intended building unless the proposed
drainage, earthwork and other improvements are in conformance with the site
development plan approved previously or as a part of the application for
building permit. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-8: APPEALS:
The applicant, as well as any person aggrieved, may appeal the decision of the
building inspector. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an appeal, the
zoning board of appeals shall schedule and hold a public hearing. The zoning
board of appeals shall render a decision within fifteen (15) days of the
hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but not be limited
to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and
domestic, runoff surface waters that produce erosion, and silting of
drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock that when disturbed by the
proposed grading may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped, and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-9: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the city officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or of the
zoning board of appeals to deny said permit, shall not relieve the permittee
from responsibility of the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall
not result in the city, its officers or agents being responsible for any
condition or damage resulting therefrom. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-10: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained
in original form or on microfilm by the building inspector. (Ord. 455, 4-21-
1997)
4-6-11: INSPECTIONS:
The building inspector shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall
either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the same fails to comply with the site development plan. Where it is
found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in
the said plan, the building inspector may stop further work until approval is
obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions.
Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the building
inspector, shall be maintained at the site during progress of the grading.
Until the final inspection is made, a sign issued by the city, indicating
permission to grade has been granted by the city, shall be prominently
displayed on the front property line of the property involved so as to be
visible from the street on which the property fronts. In order to obtain
inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall
notify the building inspector at least two (2) full working days before the
said inspection is to be made:
   (A)   Rough Grading: When all rough grading has been completed; and
   (B)   Final Inspection: When all work, including installation of all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord.
455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-12: RECORD DRAWINGS:
Upon completion of the improvements, the developer's engineer shall provide a
set of as built record plans to the building inspector along with a
certification that the completed improvements generally conform to the
previously approved plans, specifications and reports included in section
4-6-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-13: NEIGHBORHOOD DRAINAGE PLANNING/SUBDIVISION PLATS:
Before approval of the final plat, the developer shall submit to the city
planning commission for their approval, a neighborhood drainage plan showing,
but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Existing elevations prior to any improvement at all proposed lot
corners.
   (B)   Proposed elevations at all proposed lot corners indicating an adequate
front, rear and side yard surface drainage scheme, following improvements.
   (C)   Proposed garage floor elevation of all structures for residential
subdivisions and proposed first floor elevation for commercial and industrial
subdivisions.
   (D)   Proposed storm sewers with their sizes, slopes, number and type of
inlets, etc.
   (E)   Storm water storage facilities accompanied by design calculations and
design details for all of the above. Before occupancy permit can be granted,
all indicated floor elevations and lot surface elevations shall coincide with
approved proposed elevations previously submitted above. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-14: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability: All earth moving and grading operations not
specifically exempted by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the
applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section, in addition to
the other requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Handbooks Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications of
"Erosion And Sediment Control Handbook, Kankakee County, Illinois", latest
edition, as compiled by the Kankakee County soil and water conservation
district and approved by the Kankakee County regional planning commission and
the Illinois environmental protection agency's "Standards And Specifications
For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control", latest edition, are hereby incorporated
into this section and made a part hereof by this reference, for the purpose of
delineating procedures and methods of operation under development plans
approved in section
4-6-4 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of the said
handbooks and other provisions of this chapter, the more stringent requirements
shall govern.
   (C)   Special Precautions:
      1.   If at any stage of the grading the building inspector determines by
inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as
authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way,
watercourse or drainage structure, the building inspector may require, as a
condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety
precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such
peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying
a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for
erosion control, and reports of a registered engineer whose recommendations may
be made requirements for further work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is
not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take
such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property for the
public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail,
the building inspector may specify the time of starting grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages
so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the
advent of seasonal rains.
   (D)   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed
within two hundred forty (240) days from date of issue; except that the
building inspector may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within
the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the said permit. (Ord. 455,
4-21-1997)
4-6-15: FEES AND BONDS:
   (A)   Fees: Filing and permit fees shall be set forth in the applicable
sections of this code and amendments thereto, including the subdivision
ordinance and the building code.
   (B)   Bonds: Upon approval of a site development plan or building permit
within the purview of this chapter, the developer shall post a performance bond
payable to the city, cashier's check, negotiable securities or establish an
escrow account in the amount of the estimated total cost of the site
development hereunder, as approved by the city, to insure timely satisfactory
site development. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-16: APPEALS AND VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Review And Appeal: The building inspector is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. Upon review of property
subject to this chapter, such officer may require, by written thirty (30) day
notice, that such property be brought into compliance with this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by such determination may appeal such to the zoning board of
appeals of the city under the rules of that board.
   (B)   Variations: The zoning board of appeals may authorize variations to
any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
      1.   Application For Variation: Application for any variation shall be
made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the grounds of the
application and of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. For the variation
to be granted, it shall be necessary that the zoning board of appeals find all
of the following facts with respect thereto:
         (a)   The land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations or record that it
is impossible or impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of the
regulations of this chapter.
         (b)   The variation is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right of the petitioner.
         (c)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
      2.   Zoning Board Of Appeals: After public hearing thereon, the zoning
board of appeals, by resolution, may approve the site development permit
application with the variation and conditions it deems necessary or it may
disapprove such site development permit application and variation application,
or it may take such other action as is appropriate. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-17: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority: In the event any person holding a site development permit
pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or
carries on said site development in such a manner as to materially adversely
affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, or conducts or carries on
said site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the
building inspector shall revoke or suspend the site development permit.
   (B)   Procedure For Revoking Site Development Permit: No site development
permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the
board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the
permittee, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension, in clear and concise language.
      2.   The time when, and the place where, such hearing is to be held. Such
notice shall be served by mailing by certified mail or personal service on the
permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. At any such
hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may
call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such
hearing, the board of appeals shall determine whether or not the permit shall
be suspended or revoked.
      3.   The board of appeals shall hold the hearing to consider
recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been
temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of
appeals at which all conditions of subsection (B)2 of this section can be
fulfilled. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-6-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Compliance: All nonexempt developments, as set forth in this chapter,
shall comply with the standards and specifications set forth by provisions of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to initiate such site
development activities without a site development permit or building permit or
to carry on such site development activities other than as provided in an
approved site development plan. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
property improved, graded, or developed pursuant to this chapter to alter or
change such site in contravention of the site development plan or allow the
site to remain in a condition which does not conform to the site development
plan.
   (B)   Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. This penalty provision shall be in addition to all
other rights and remedies which the city may have, at law or equity, for an
injunction or other remedy and the city may pursue all remedies available to it
in a court or courts of law concurrently with proceeding to impose the
penalties contained herein. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 7
STREET LIGHTING
SECTION:
4-7-1: Specifications For Lighting
4-7-2: Specifications For Fiberglass Reinforced Plastic (FRP) Poles
4-7-3: Accessory Items For Street Lighting
4-7-1: SPECIFICATIONS FOR LIGHTING:
All street lighting shall be sodium vapor lamps and shall conform to the
following specifications:
   (A)   All wiring shall be buried.
   (B)   The luminaries shall be high pressure sodium type III with 250 watt
maximum wattage and a maximum of 240 volts.
   (C)   Streetlights will be controlled singularly with photoelectric cells.
   (D)   Light standards' (poles) finished height shall be twenty five feet
(25') minimum.
   (E)   A statement shall be submitted to the city engineer and city
electrical inspector prior to starting work stating that the streetlights will
be installed in accordance with the specifications set forth herein and in
accordance with Commonwealth Edison specifications.
   (F)   Street lighting shall be installed by the developer in accordance with
the city specifications set out hereinbelow.
   (G)   The number and precise location of streetlights as reviewed by the
city engineer, and approved by the plan commission and city council shall be
clearly shown on the infrastructure improvement plans that are to be submitted
with the subdivision plat for approval. As a minimum, streetlights will be
required at all intersections and in all cul-de- sacs. The spaces of the light
fixtures shall not exceed three hundred eighty feet (380').
   (H)   Streetlights shall conform in all aspects to the typical streetlight
installation detail, pole base wiring diagram and insulated terminal block
exhibits located at the end of this chapter. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-7-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR FIBERGLASS REINFORCED PLASTIC (FRP) POLES:
   (A)   Material Of Construction:
      1.   The shaft shall be constructed of a commercial grade of "E" glass or
better.
      2.   The surface of the shaft shall be smooth and consist of a saturated
polyester surfacing veil of 18–20 mils minimum thickness and a 60 mil resin
layer.
      3.   The resin shall be unsaturated polyester resin containing UV
inhibitor and pigment throughout.
      4.   The surfacing veil and structural fibers shall be saturated in a
singular process with the same resin, thereby ensuring molecular bonding
between structural layers and the protective layer.
   (B)   Construction Standards:
      1.   The shaft shall be centrifugally cast to ensure a dense void free
wall and a smooth surface.
      2.   The pole shall be designed for direct burial. Reference ANSI C136.20
for suggested burial depths.
      3.   Direct burial poles shall have two (2) 23/8-inch diameter wire entry
holes located twelve inches (12") below ground line one hundred eighty degrees
(180°) apart. Either of these holes shall be ninety degrees (90°) from the side
intended for mounting of the arm(s).
      4.   The pole surface shall be smooth and have a uniform taper of 0.216
inches per foot.
      5.   The pole shall be supplied with a hand hole four inches by twelve
inches (4" x 12") nominal size. The hand hole cover shall be constructed of
fiberglass and shall have the same glass configuration as the shaft. The covers
shall be equipped with a vandal resistant allen head brass bolt fastener.
      6.   The pole shall contain an integrally molded insulated terminal block
which shall have a nonconducting cover secured by a wing nut assembly with an
NEC approved sticker indicating the volts supplied to the luminaires (i.e., 120
volts, 208 volts or 240 volts).
      7.   Mast arm poles shall be drilled at the factory to accept applicable
arm.
      8.   Mast arms shall be made of 6061-T6-T4 aluminum with a two inch (2")
slip fitter. The arm shall be secured to the pole by two (2) five-eighths inch
by seven inch (5/8" x 7") stainless steel bolts complete with two (2) each
curved washers and nuts. The aluminum mast arm shall have an unpainted mill
finish.
      9.   Cast aluminum pole cap with stainless steel screws shall be supplied
with all poles.
   (C)   Performance:
      1.   The pole and arm(s) shall be able to withstand AASHTO standards of
twenty five (25) year mean recurrence interval wind velocities for the area
where the pole will be used.
      2.   Static deflection shall meet the following criteria:
         (a)   Not to exceed one percent (1%) of the aboveground pole length.
         (b)   The difference in deflection within any one foot (1') increment
shall not exceed 0.35 inches.
      3.   Under maximum wind conditions, the pole tip deflection should not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of aboveground pole length.
      4.   The pole shall be resistant to long term flexural fatigue failure.
There shall be no significant change in visual appearance or mechanical
properties after one million (1,000,000) cycles of alternating force
applications, which force produces a deflection amplitude equal to or greater
than the deflection produced by peak wind speed of forty six (46) miles per
hour.
      5.   The pole shall be certified as breakaway by the federal highway
administration (latest edition of AASHTO breakaway criteria).
      6.   The pole shall be as supplied by Sherman Industries or of equal
specifications with prior written approval of the city engineer.
   (D)   Shipping:
      1.   The pole shall be wrapped with cardboard and covered with a suitable
plastic wrapping envelope for shipping via commercial carriers. Poles shipped
by flatbed do not require cardboard wrapping. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
4-7-3: ACCESSORY ITEMS FOR STREET LIGHTING:
   (A)   Specifications:
      1.   Luminaire: Shall be an M-25OA2 (M2AR) with power door as supplied by
General Electric or of equal specifications with prior written approval of the
city engineer. It shall be high pressure sodium, with 150 watt luminaires
utilized in residential areas and 250 watt luminaires utilized in commercial
areas. All luminaires shall be controlled with a photo cell and have a
multivolt tap, although the 120 volt tap only shall be utilized without prior
written approval of the city engineer. The bottom of the housing shall be
marked with black on yellow decals three inches (3") in height with fifteen
(15) to indicate 150 watts and twenty five (25) to indicate 250 watt
luminaires.
      2.   In Residential Areas: The luminaires shall have a polycarbonate lens
with a gasket of charcoal with elastomer and a ballast with a high power
factor. The distribution shall be long, noncutoff, type III.
      3.   In Commercial Areas: The luminaire shall have an auto regulating
ballast and a glass lens with a gasket of charcoal with elastomer. The
distribution shall be medium, semi- cutoff, type III.
      4.   Photoelectric Cell Control: The outdoor lighting photoelectric
controls (OLC) shall be of a solid state crystal sensing type with the inverted
turn on and turn off design. The OLC shall be designed to turn on at 3.0 foot-
candles (FC) (± 20%). The OLC light sensor shall have a dedicated inverted
control circuit such that the turn off value will be sixty percent (60%) of the
turn on value (1.8FC ± 20%). The OLC shall be designed to operate properly over
the input voltage range of 105 to 285 volts with no change in the turn on and
turn off FC values. The OLC shall be designed such that the output control
relay shall have forty five (45) second (± 20%) time delay to prevent false
turnoff from momentary brightness. The preceding elements of the specification
shall be attested to in the form of an independent test report from a
nationally recognized accredited laboratory. This test report shall include an
actual thirty (30) day burn hour test of twelve (12) controls selected randomly
from a lot of one hundred (100). The OLC shall not drift by more than one
percent (1%) over ten (10) years. The OLC output relay shall be fully rated @
1800 VA, 15 amps for all HID lamps and shall be of the fail-safe (fail-on) type
design. The OLC shall have a built in MOV for lightning and transient/surge
protection. The control shall also have secondary zenier diodes and transient
filters. The printed circuit board shall be properly coated to prevent
corrosion. The OLC cover shall be made of blue (ANSI) color coding for 105–285
voltage range hi-impact Noryl plastic that is UL approved break resistant and
flame retarding material. The OLC window shall be made of acrylic with the
proper UV stabilizers to prevent discoloration. The OLC shall conform to all
IES street lighting standards and the ANSI C136.10 specs for twistlock
photocontrol devices. The OLC shall be Area Lighting Research model #SST-IES
6690B or of equal specifications with prior written approval of the city
engineer.
      5.   Fused Wire Connector Disconnecting Means: A fused breakaway wire
connector is approved as a disconnecting means and shall be supplied as
manufactured by Blackburn, or of equal specifications with prior written
approval of the city engineer, and be Hex style, type A-B, or of equal
specifications with prior written approval of the city engineer.
      6.   Lamps: Lamps shall be high pressure sodium of the wattage indicated
and shall be Sylvania Lumalux by GTE or of equal specifications with prior
written approval of the city engineer.
TYPICAL STREET LIGHT INSTALLATION DETAIL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e4667523910453af86a1fa5950ffeef3772da599/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1655.gif]
 
POLE BASEWIRING DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e4667523910453af86a1fa5950ffeef3772da599/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1657.gif]
 
INSULATED TERMINAL BLOCK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e4667523910453af86a1fa5950ffeef3772da599/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1659.gif]
 
(Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 8
FENCES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Compliance Required
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Fencing Restrictions
4-8-4: Barbed Wire And Razor Wire
4-8-5: Fencing Or Wall Maintenance
4-8-6: Penalty
4-8-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Every fence or wall hereafter constructed, installed, altered, maintained,
removed or demolished within the city, shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. Existing fences or walls may be continued without
change, provided the requirements concerning fences or walls in this code are
observed. (Ord. 747, 10-1-2012)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
plural include the singular; words in the singular include the plural; and the
word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
FENCES OR WALLS: A freestanding, upright structure, and shall be constructed of
wood, stone, brick, decorative concrete block, wrought iron, chainlink (with
option of slats or mesh affixed to the chainlink fence), products created to
resemble these materials, or a combination of any of these materials. (Ord.
747, 10-1-2012)
4-8-3: FENCING RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   All fencing shall be finished on the side facing a public right of way
or adjacent properties.
   (B)   All fencing shall conform to this chapter. No fencing or barriers
shall be constructed out of materials such as, but not limited to, plywood,
particleboard, sheet metal, concrete slabs, snow fencing, temporary
construction style fencing, livestock, or wire fencing/barriers. (Ord. 747, 10-
1-2012)
4-8-4: BARBED WIRE AND RAZOR WIRE:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city,
any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole of barbed wire.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city,
any fence constructed in whole or in part of razor wire.
   (C)   Barbed wire shall be permitted for security purposes for permitted
agricultural, temporary construction sites, commercial, or industrial uses;
provided, that the barbed wire is located six feet (6') or more above grade.
(Ord. 747, 10-1-2012)
4-8-5: FENCING OR WALL MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Every fence or wall will be maintained in a condition of reasonable
repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of
disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or
private. Any such fence or wall, which is, or has become, dangerous to the
public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper
maintenance or neglect is a public nuisance and the code enforcement officer
shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. Any wall, or a
portion of any wall, which is removed for any purpose or by any means
whatsoever, shall be restored to its original or upgraded condition relative to
construction, material and finish whenever exposed to any street or any
adjoining property. (Ord. 747, 10-1-2012)
4-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
general penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-1(A) of this code. (Ord. 747, 10-1-2012)
CHAPTER 9 GROUND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Defined; Prohibition Against Building
4-9-2: Violation
4-9-3: Penalty
4-9-1: DEFINED; PROHIBITION AGAINST BUILDING:
   (A)   A Ground Solar Energy System is defined as a manufactured system
placed upon the ground rather than upon the roof or other elevated portions of
occupied buildings which uses solar panels made of solar cells, heat-absorbing
plates or other elements to convert sunlight into electricity or for electrical
storage and use.
   (B)   No Ground Solar Energy System shall be permitted within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Momence. No building permit or permit for any Ground
System will be granted for construction within the corporate boundaries of the
City of Momence. (Ord. 875, 9-6-2022)
4-9-2: VIOLATION:
In the event that a Ground Solar Energy System, without permit or other City
permission, is constructed or construction has begun in violation of the
restrictions contained in Section 4-9-1 of this Chapter, the City shall seek an
injunction to prevent the commencement or continuation of such construction.
(Ord. 875, 9-6-2022)
4-9-3: PENALTY:
The construction or attempted construction of a Ground Solar Energy System
within the corporate boundaries of the City of Momence shall result, if such
violation is determined to exist, in a fine of five hundred dollars ($500) per
day. Each day that such a violation exists, shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 875, 9-6-2022)
 
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
CRIMES AND UNLAWFUL CONDUCT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Abandoned Refrigerators
5-1-2: Alcoholic Liquor
5-1-3: Assault
5-1-4: Battery
5-1-5: Noise Nuisance
5-1-6: Discharge Of Firearms
5-1-7: Fireworks
5-1-8: Resisting Or Obstructing Police Officers
5-1-9: Killing Squirrels, Birds
5-1-10: Underage Individuals, Unlawful Consumption On Private Premises
5-1-11: Prostitution, House Of
5-1-12: Weapons, Concealing
5-1-13: Person Under The Influence Of Intoxicating Liquor Or Narcotic Drugs
5-1-14: Prohibit Disorderly Conduct On Premises
5-1-15: Disturbing Religious Worship
5-1-16: Theft And Retail Theft
5-1-17: Keeping Of Undomesticated Animals
5-1-18: Destruction Or Defacing Of Property Generally
5-1-19: Parental Responsibility For Acts Of Minors
5-1-20: Graffiti; Nuisance Abatement
5-1-21: Drug Paraphernalia
5-1-22: Trespass To Land And Buildings
5-1-23: Smoking Cannabis In A Public Place
5-1-24: Use Of Drug Paraphernalia In A Public Place
5-1-25: Truancy
5-1-26: Fighting
5-1-27: Possession Of Smoking Materials By Minors
5-1-28: Loitering
5-1-29: Illegal Burning
5-1-30: Panhandling
5-1-31: Penalty
5-1-32: Unscheduled Omnibus Intercity Buses
5-1-1: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
No person shall abandon, discard, store or keep in any place accessible to
children or permit to remain under his control, whether as owner, lessee or
manager of any premises in the City, any refrigerator, icebox, freezer cabinet
or similar airtight container of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic
feet or more which is no longer used for refrigeration or other intended
purposes without removing the attached doors, hinges, lids and latches. (Ord.
257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-2: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
   (A)   No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic liquor on any street,
alley, public property, or in any automobile, or golf cart/utility vehicle (as
defined in section
8-4-20 of this Code) traveling upon, or parked on any street, alley, public
property, or on any unlicensed premises.
   (B)   No person shall consume or possess any alcoholic liquor on any
sidewalk unless a permit has been obtained to establish a sidewalk dining area.
Alcoholic liquor would be permissible in a sidewalk dining area as defined in
title 3, chapter 10 of this Code and all sections therein. Special City events
that the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council has approved,
may allow alcoholic liquor on sidewalks.
   (C)   No person shall possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle with the
original seal broken thereon. (Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
5-1-3: ASSAULT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault. A person commits an
assault when, without lawful authority he engages in conduct which places
another person in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (Ord. 257, 6-
2-1980)
5-1-4: BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery. A person commits a
battery when he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by
any means causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an
assaulting or provoking nature with an individual. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-5: NOISE NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others
within the City, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety.
   (A)   Enumeration Of Noises: The following are hereby declared to be
excessive, disturbing, loud and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, however, said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
radio, compact disc or tape player, television sets, musical instruments and
similar devices. The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used
or operated, any radio, compact disc, tape player, musical instrument,
phonograph, television or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than
is necessary for the convenient hearing of the persons who are in the room,
chamber, vehicle or outdoor area within the City in which or where such machine
or device is played, used or operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
The operation of any such radio, compact disc or tape player, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the location of such set, instrument or
device, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (B)   Permit For Outdoor Area: No band, group, disc jockey (DJ), orchestra
or other person using amplified sound equipment, in an outside area, may
operate in violation of subsection (A) of this section, without first obtaining
approval for the permit from the City Council. The City Clerk shall issue such
permits to such groups, organizations or charities that the City Council deems
to be in the best interest of all of the citizens. In no event shall any permit
allow for sound to be amplified past eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday through
Thursday and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. for Friday and Saturday nights. All Park
District property shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord.
502, 10-15-2001)
   (C)   Vehicle Sound Equipment And Noise Vibration: It shall be unlawful for
any person to be in possession or control of a parked or moving vehicle with a
stereo, disc player, cassette player, speakers, or other similar equipment that
is producing sound on a street, driveway, publicly patrolled parking lot or
public place at or with a level, volume, intensity, frequency, or other
attribute that is perceptible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more, either
by hearing the sound by the human ear or by feeling the sound in the form of
vibrations associated therewith. This subsection shall not be applicable to
sound emanating from emergency vehicles, vending vehicles, or publicly
sponsored or permitted concerts, sporting events, activities, or gatherings.
(Ord. 834, 11-20-2017)
5-1-6: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
No person shall discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, rifle, air gun or any other
firearms of any description or any item constructed or designed with the
ability to discharge or propel any metal device within the City limits of the
City. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-7: FIREWORKS:
No person shall within the City limits sell or give any firecracker, bomb, gun,
pistol, bombshells, batteries or any other device that when discharged creates
a loud noise, nor shall any person discharge the same within the City limits.
(Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-8: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct
the performance of one known to the person to be a peace officer of any
authorized act performed by such individual within his official capacity.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person upon command to refuse or
knowingly fail to reasonably aid a person known by him to be a peace officer in
the apprehension of a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend so
long as such person so commanded is not placed in a position to receive serious
physical injury in the aiding of such police officer. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-9: KILLING SQUIRRELS, BIRDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or
wound by any means whatever, any squirrel or bird within the City limits,
including thereby all portions of Island Park which lie within the corporate
limits of the City, or to shoot an arrow or stone, or throw a club or other
missile at any such bird or squirrel within any private or public grounds
within the City, or to enter upon any private or public grounds for the purpose
of doing any act prohibited in this section. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-10: UNDERAGE INDIVIDUALS, UNLAWFUL CONSUMPTION ON PRIVATE PREMISES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    LEGAL GUARDIAN: The person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a Circuit Court of the State but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the "Juvenile Court Act of the State
of Illinois" as now in effect.
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) but not yet nineteen
(19) years of age.
   UNDERAGE INDIVIDUAL: A person who has not yet attained the age of twenty one
(21) and includes all minors.
   (B)   Deliver Or Permit Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be
unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, owner or occupant to deliver or give
alcoholic beverages to any underage individual upon or in the residential
premises of said parent, legal guardian, owner or occupant or for said parent,
legal guardian, owner or occupant to knowingly suffer or permit the consumption
of alcoholic beverages by underage individuals upon or in the residential
premises of said parent, legal guardian, owner or occupant.
   (C)   Damage Resulting From Intoxication: In the event that any underage
individual causes damage to any other person or property as a direct and
proximate result of intoxication resulting from the consumption of alcoholic
beverages at the residence of any person, then said person so permitting or
suffering the unlicensed consumption of alcoholic beverages by said underage
individual shall be considered to be in violation of this section.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but no more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 689, 7-5-2010)
5-1-11: PROSTITUTION, HOUSE OF:
No person shall suffer or knowingly permit any place over which he exercises
control to be used for the practice of prostitution. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-12: WEAPONS, CONCEALING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, wear or carry concealed
about his person any pistol, revolver, metallic knuckles, bowie knife, dirk or
other dangerous or deadly weapon; or to display or flourish any such weapon in
a boisterous or threatening manner.
   (B)   No person shall carry, possess or sell, loan or give to any person,
any blackjack, slingshot, metal knuckles, bludgeon or knife which has a blade
which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other
device in the handle of the knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife,
or carry or possess, with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a
dagger, dirk, billy, any dangerous knife, razor, stiletto or other dangerous or
deadly weapon or instrument of like character. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-13: PERSON UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR NARCOTIC DRUGS:
   (A)   No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor may drive
or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle within the city.
   (B)   No person who is a habitual user of or under the influence of any
narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug to a degree which
renders him incapable of safely driving a vehicle may drive or be in actual
physical control of any vehicle in the city.
   (C)   Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of the acts
alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual
possession of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
evidence of the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time of the act
alleged as shown by the chemical analysis of his breath, blood, urine, saliva
or other bodily substance is admissible, as provided hereinafter in this
subsection (C) and the result of any such analysis shall give rise to the
following presumptions:
      1.   If there was at the time of such analysis five-hundredths percent
(0.05%) or less by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be
presumed that the person was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor;
      2.   If there was at the time of such analysis in excess of five-
hundredths percent (0.05%) but less than ten-hundredths percent (0.10%) by
weight of alcohol in the person's blood, such fact shall not give rise to any
presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, but such fact may be considered with the other competent evidence in
determining whether such person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor;
      3.   If there was at the time of such analysis ten-hundredths percent
(0.10%) or more by weight of alcohol in the person's blood, it shall be
presumed that the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
   (D)   Percent by weight of alcohol in the blood shall be based upon grams of
alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood. Evidence based upon a
chemical analysis of blood, urine, breath or other bodily substance shall not
be admitted unless such substance was procured and such analysis made with the
consent of the person as provided by this section, whose bodily substance was
so analyzed.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions of subsection (C) of this section shall not
be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent evidence
bearing upon the question whether or not the defendant was under the influence
of intoxicating liquor.
   (F)   Chemical analysis of the person's blood or breath to be considered
valid under this section must be performed according to uniform standards
adopted by the state department of public health in cooperation with the
superintendent of state police, and by an individual possessing a valid permit
issued by that department for this purpose. The state department of public
health is authorized to approve satisfactory techniques or methods to ascertain
the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct such analysis and
to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the
discretion of the state department of public health.
   (G)   When an unconscious person or person otherwise incapable of refusal is
given a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under the
provisions of this section, only a physician authorized to practice medicine in
all its branches, a registered nurse or other qualified person may withdraw
blood, in a manner prescribed by the department of public health for the
purpose of determining the alcoholic content therein.
   (H)   The person tested may have a physician authorized to practice medicine
in all its branches, a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse or other
qualified person of his own choosing to administer a chemical test or tests, at
his own expense, in addition to any administered at the direction of a law
enforcement officer. The failure or inability to obtain an additional test by a
person does not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or
tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (I)   Upon the request of the person who submitted to a chemical test or
tests at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning
the test or tests must be made available to him or his attorney.
   (J)   Evidence of a refusal to submit to a chemical test is inadmissible in
any civil action or proceeding, or criminal action brought against him for a
violation of a local ordinance prohibiting driving a motor vehicle while under
the influence of intoxicating liquor. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-14: PROHIBIT DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any assembly for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous, offensive or
disorderly conduct in or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or under
his control. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-15: DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP:
No person shall interrupt or disturb any congregation or assembly met for the
purpose of religious worship, or for any lawful purpose, by making any loud or
unusual noise, or by rude and indecent behavior, or by obscene or improper
discourse or disorderly conduct. (Ord. 257, 6-2-1980)
5-1-16: THEFT AND RETAIL THEFT:
   (A)   Theft Of Property:
      1.   A person commits theft of property belonging to another when he or
she knowingly:
         (a)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner;
         (b)   Obtains control over property of the owner by deception;
         (c)   Obtains control over property of the owner by threat;
         (d)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing it was stolen or if
a reasonable person would know it was stolen; or
         (e)   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of an
undercover law enforcement officer who explicitly represents the property as
stolen.
      2.   In addition to obtaining or exerting control over another person's
property, the person committing theft must also:
         (a)   Intend to permanently deprive the owner of the use or benefit of
the property;
         (b)   Knowingly use, conceal or abandon the property in such a way as
to permanently deprive the owner of its use or benefit; or
         (c)   Use, conceal, or abandon the property knowing that such use,
concealment or abandonment will probably permanently deprive the owner of its
use or benefit.
   (B)   Retail Theft:
      1.   A person commits retail theft when he or she knowingly:
         (a)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be
carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining
such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise. Taking possession shall include but not be
limited to placing or hiding merchandise in the pockets, clothing, purse,
backpack or container supplied by the mercantile establishment. Taking
possession shall also include hiding or placing merchandise indicated in a
privately owned container such as a bag or other similar container commonly
used to transport merchandise to a checkout and paying location and in that or
any other case to remove merchandise from the mercantile establishment without
paying in full for all merchandise so removed. (Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
5-1-17: KEEPING OF UNDOMESTICATED ANIMALS:
No person shall keep, own or possess any of the following animals on any
property zoned Residential: pigs, hogs, chickens, roosters, ducks, rabbits,
cows, horses, steers or any other animal considered livestock or fowl on or
within any property located within the City; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall prohibit the temporary keeping of horses within the City limits
when being used for parade purposes and other civic functions. Any violation of
this section shall be punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 289, 2-7-1983)
5-1-18: DESTRUCTION OR DEFACING OF PROPERTY GENERALLY:
No person shall break, deface, injure or destroy any public or private
property. This shall include, but is not limited to, marking, scratching,
cutting or otherwise defacing any part of any building or fence. (Ord. 413, 1-
18-1994)
5-1-19: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS OF MINORS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
    LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by
the Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705
Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1-1 et seq.
   MINOR: A person who has attained eleven (11) years of age, but who has not
yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
   (B)   Offense Of Parental Irresponsibility:
      1.   Offense: It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with that parent or legal guardian to fail to
exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting the minor to
commit any violation of any State Statute or City ordinance concerning
vandalism, battery, curfew, truancy, disorderly conduct, obscene conduct,
trespass or possession or use of alcoholic liquor, cannabis or controlled
substances, or any other offense or wilful or malicious acts to persons or
property within the City limits.
      2.   Presumption: A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have
allowed or permitted the minor to have committed a violation of a State Statute
or City ordinance under all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of a
State Statute or City ordinance or has been charged with any such violation
(except if found to be not guilty); or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions from
any peace officer or conservator of the peace resulting from an admission of
guilt to any such offenses; and (Ord. 628, 3-19-2007)
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in
substantially the following form:
LEGAL NOTICE
(Date)
TO: (Parents' Names)
FROM: City of Momence
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that (minor's name) has been involved in a violation of
state statute or city ordinance concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, truancy,
disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass or possession or use of alcoholic
liquor, cannabis or controlled substances, or any other offense or willful or
malicious acts to persons or property. If said minor is again involved in a
violation of one of the above-type state statutes or city ordinances, you may
be found guilty of the offense of parental irresponsibility. Conviction for
said offense can result in a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than
$500.00.
You are hereby further notified that you must exercise proper parental
responsibility over said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct.
(Signature)
(Title or Position)
(Ord. 681, 4-19-2010)
         (c)   Said minor, within two (2) years of the receipt of said notice
by the parent or legal guardian, has either adjudicated to have committed, has
been charged with the violation (except if found not to be guilty) of, or has
admitted to have committed any violation of any State Statute as described
above. (Ord. 628, 3-19-2007)
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of
Momence approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 677, 4-19-2010)
5-1-20: GRAFFITI; NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
   (A)   Graffiti is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The owner of
record, or the person in charge, possession or control of any building or
structure upon which graffiti is placed or affixed shall, upon the appearance
of the graffiti, cause such graffiti to be removed or concealed. Whenever any
nuisance in the form of graffiti shall be found on any building or other
structure, the City shall give notice in person or by mail to the owner or
taxpayer of record of the property, which shall state that, if the graffiti is
not removed or concealed within fourteen (14) days, the City may enter upon the
property and remove or conceal the graffiti in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any graffiti on any
building or other structure. (Ord. 563, 9-7-2004)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of Momence
approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. In the event that compliance is not met within seventy two
(72) hours of an issued citation, each day thereafter shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 677, 4-19-2010; amd. Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
   (D)   "Graffiti" means an inscription, drawing, mark or design that is
painted, sprayed or drawn directly upon the exterior of any building or other
structure and is visible from the public way; provided that, graffiti shall not
include any sign permitted by the Zoning Code or any decoration that is part of
the architectural design of the building or structure. (Ord. 563, 9-7-2004)
5-1-21: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
The Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/1 et
seq., is hereby adopted by and for the City of Momence, Illinois, including any
subsequent amendments to or revisions thereof. (Ord. 571, 3-7-2005)
5-1-22: TRESPASS TO LAND AND BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Trespasses Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to commit a trespass within this Municipality upon either public or
private property.
   (B)   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses: Without constituting any
limitation upon the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, any of the
following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included
among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said
subsection (A) of this section, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder
at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or
violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as
follows:
      1.   To enter upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry in
violation of any notice, warning or protest, given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
      2.   To pursue a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of
an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or
in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by
the owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   To fail or refuse to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof. (Ord. 595, 8-1-2005)
5-1-23: SMOKING CANNABIS IN A PUBLIC PLACE:
It shall be a violation of the city code for any person to smoke cannabis in a
public place. A public place is defined as land or a building owned by any
Illinois unit of local government, a school district or state, county or
federal buildings or land. Each violation of this section shall be punished by
a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 600, 12-6-2021)
5-1-24: USE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA IN A PUBLIC PLACE:
The use of drug paraphernalia as defined in 720 at ILCS, 600/1 et seq., is
hereby prohibited in a public place. A public place is defined as land or a
building owned by any Illinois unit of local government, a school district or
state, county or federal buildings or land. Each violation of this section
shall be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 571, 12-6-
2021)
5-1-25: TRUANCY:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
    RELIGION: For the purposes of this section, includes all aspects of
religious observance and practice, as well as belief.
   VALID CAUSE: Valid cause for absence shall be illness, observance of a
religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall
include such other situations beyond the control of the student as determined
by the Board of Education in each district, or such other circumstances which
cause reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student.
   (B)   Regulations: No child subject to compulsory school attendance shall be
absent without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion
thereof. (Ord. 629, 3-19-2007)
5-1-26: FIGHTING:
   (A)   No person shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions or
other sanctioned competition duly authorized and licensed under law. (Ord. 664,
10-5-2009)
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of Momence
approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 677, 4-19-2010)
5-1-27: POSSESSION OF SMOKING MATERIALS BY MINORS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
    MINOR: For the purpose of this section, a person under the age of twenty
one (21).
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint venture or any employee or agent thereof.
   SMOKING MATERIALS: Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of
all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items designed primarily for
the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any ordinance or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or exchange is
made unlawful under this section and any substance containing either smoking
herbs or tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, loose tobacco, snuff chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
   (B)   Prohibited Sales, Delivery:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give
away or deliver smoking materials to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years.
If any person contemplating the sale or furnishing of smoking materials
believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of smoking materials
is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall
before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in
the performance of his/her official duties.
   (C)   Warning Signs: Every person engaged in the business of selling smoking
materials shall at all times display signs informing the public of the age
restrictions provided for herein. The sign shall be posted by or near every
display of smoking materials and on or upon every vending machine that offers
smoking materials for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall
state:
THE SALE OF SMOKING MATERIALS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
This text of such sign shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
   (D)   Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase smoking materials, or to
misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing smoking materials. No person shall
transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification
card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain
an identification card by means of false information.
   (E)   Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to possess any smoking material(s) on
any street or highway, or in any public place, or any place open to the public;
possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years under direct
supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the
parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
   (F)   Certain Free Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising smoking materials, or any employee or agent of any such person, in
the course of such person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver
smoking materials free of charge to any person on any right- of-way, park,
playground, or other property owned by the City, any school district, any park
district, or any public library.
   (G)   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance to the City of
Momence approved fine list. If a fine is issued to a minor for possession, in
lieu of a monetary fine, the offender may perform community services as
approved through the City of Momence adjudication process. (Ord. 848, 8-19-
2019)
5-1-28: LOITERING:
Any person or persons who at any time stand, stroll or walk on any public
street, sidewalk, or in and at any public place in such a manner to impede,
hinder or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on
such public sidewalk, street or property, and who refuse to disperse and move
from the area from which such person or persons is impeding or interfering with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic when directed to do so by any member of the
Police Department, shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined as
authorized on the approved list of fines and fees. (Ord. 684, 5-3-2010)
5-1-29: ILLEGAL BURNING:
   (A)   Recreational Fires Permitted: Fire contained in outdoor fireplaces, or
portable cooking units for the express purpose of cooking food for human
consumption are permitted only if:
      1.   Fuel: The fuel for the fire is primarily charcoal, propane gas,
natural gas, dry seasoned firewood or other similar and commercially prepared
products for use as cooking fuel. No household or landscape materials may be
burned.
      2.   Location: The fire shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any
structure, property line or public roadway and twenty five feet (25') from any
combustible or flammable material. The portable cooking unit shall not be
placed on any combustible or flammable surface and must be elevated from ground
level.
      3.   Attendance: The fire shall be attended at all times by an adult, and
a means of extinguishing the fire (e.g., garden hose and fire extinguisher)
shall be present. Fires must be fully extinguished prior to leaving the fire
site unattended for any extended period of time. All cooking units shall be
used according to manufacturers' directions and/or City guidelines.
   (B)   Campfires/Manufactured Fireplaces: The use of such manufactured open
fireplaces, campfires or other similar devices shall be permitted in
residential areas provided the following clearances are observed: Fifteen feet
(15') from any combustible structure.
      1.   Only charcoal, propane gas, natural gas, or dry seasoned firewood,
may be used in manufactured fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other
similar devices.
      2.   A means of extinguishment must be present during the use of
manufactured fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices
such as a fire extinguisher or a garden hose connected to a reliable water
source.
      3.   Open fireplaces, campfires, fire containers or other similar devices
must be attended by an adult at all times when they are in use and must be
fully extinguished prior to leaving the fire site unattended for any extended
period of time.
      4.   A campfire shall be built on the ground in an area having a maximum
diameter of six feet (6') which contains no vegetation. Campfires shall contain
no more than three feet by three feet by three feet (3' x 3' x 3') of fuel
material.
   (C)   Suspended Burning: The City of Momence reserves the right to suspend
all permitted burning at such time that atmospheric conditions increase the
risk of fire spreading from campfires and recreational fires due to dry weather
patterns, or wind conditions are such that burning will cause smoke to create a
nuisance to nearby residences.
   (D)   Prohibited: Burning of leaves, grass and compost is prohibited. No
person shall burn any leaves, grass or compost within the city at any time.
   (E)   Nuisance Abatement: Any citizen of the City, when such a nuisance
exists may maintain a complaint in the name of the City, perpetually, to enjoin
all persons from maintaining or permitting such nuisance and to abate the same.
In addition, the City Police, or Fire Department, upon observing any violation
of this section, may enter upon private property and summarily abate any fire
or burning that is in violation hereof.
   (F)   Penalty: Any person who violates this section is guilty of a petty
offense as provided in this section and as established in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 710, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 721, 8-15-2011; Ord. 731, 1-
3-2012)
5-1-30: PANHANDLING:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
    AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: Means any automated teller machine as defined by
the Automated Teller Machine Security Act, 205 Illinois Compiled Statutes 695/
1 et seq., as amended.
   BANK: Means any bank or financial institution as defined by the Illinois
Banking Act, 205 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended.
   PANHANDLING: Means a verbal request made in person upon any street, public
place, or park in the City for an immediate donation of money or other thing of
value, including a request to purchase an item or service of little or no
monetary value in circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that
the purchase is in substance a donation. Panhandling does not include the act
of passively standing, sitting, or engaging in a musical performance or other
street performance with a sign or other indication that donations are being
sought, without any verbal request for a donation other than in response to an
inquiry by another person. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit
any loud and raucous noise currently prohibited by this Code.
Panhandling also means panhandling in a group of two (2) or more persons or
panhandling accompanied by any of the following actions:
      1.   Touching another person without that person's consent;
      2.   Blocking the path of the person solicited or blocking the entrance
to any building or vehicle;
      3.   Continuing to solicit or to request a donation from a person after
that person has refused an earlier request;
      4.   Following or remaining alongside a person who walks away from the
panhandler after being solicited;
      5.   Making any statement, gesture, or other communication that would
cause a reasonable person to feel threatened or to feel compelled to make a
donation; or
      6.   Using profane or abusive language during the solicitation or
following a refusal to make a donation.
   (B)   Prohibitions: No person shall engage in aggressive panhandling. No
person shall engage in panhandling when the person solicited is located:
      1.   Within twenty feet (20') of an automated teller machine (ATM) or
entrance to a bank, other financial institution, or check cashing business; or
      2.   On private property, if the owner, tenant, or occupant has asked the
person not to panhandle on the property or has posted a sign prohibiting
soliciting.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who commits an act prohibited by this section
shall be subject to a fine as provided in the minimum fine schedule for certain
violations found in section
1-4-1 of this Code adopted by the City Council by ordinance. The Circuit Court
may enjoin the person from committing further violations of this section. Each
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 835, 11-
20-2017)
5-1-31: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined (unless there is a specific different penalty
provided for within the pertinent section of this chapter relating to crimes
and unlawful conduct) in accordance with the City of Momence approved fine list
found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
5-1-32: UNSCHEDULED OMNIBUS INTERCITY BUSES:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words as used in this Section shall be
defined as follows:
 
                     Any omnibus driver which, for any reason other than a bona
                     fide vehicular emergency, stops within the City of
MOMENCE DESTINATION: Momence, Illinois, to discharge passengers, the majority
                     of whom are not permanent residents within the City of
                     Momence, Illinois, or within ten (10) miles of the
                     boundaries of the City of Momence, Illinois.
                     An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability
                     company, joint venture, or state and local government
OMNIBUS DRIVER:      which acts as a Hackman, drayman, omnibus driver, carter,
                     cabman, porter, expressmen, and all others pursuing like
                     occupations who drive, rent or own vehicles with a lawful
                     capacity of greater than twenty (20) passengers.
PASSENGER:           Any person receiving the services of transportation for
                     hire.
 
   (B)   License Fee: Any omnibus driver which intends to make a Momence
destination must previously have applied for and received a license to do so
from the City of Momence, Illinois. The license fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per calendar year.
   (C)   Notification Of Momence Destination: Any omnibus driver which intends
to make a Momence destination must for the reasons specified within the
preamble of this ordinance which is made a part of the ordinance herein, must
provide at least forty eight (48) hours prior written notice of the intention
for the Momence destination to the Momence City Collector. Because of the
important need for the City to be aware, the notice shall be in writing and
shall be sent by certified mail or delivered in person to the Momence City
Collector at City Hall, 105 West Washington Street, Momence, Illinois 60954.
That is the only lawful way notices will be accepted to avoid a violation of
the notice provision of this ordinance.
   (D)   Contents Of Notice: The notice required, referenced in Section C
(Notification of Momence Destination) of this section shall include the name of
the Omnibus driver, the day and time, within a two (2) hour window when the
Momence destination is planned. Momence destination shall only be allowed on
non-national or State holidays, and on Monday through Friday between the hours
of 10:00 A.M. and 1:00 P.M. These hours have been chosen to allow the City of
Momence to have a coordinated plan with the omnibus driver, relating to the
delivery, location, and number of passengers.
   (E)   Exemptions: Nothing in this Section shall apply to any transportation
for hire services which:
      1.   Is operated by the Federal government or any department or agency
thereof,
      2.   Is for the transportation of students for school purposes,
      3.   Is operated primarily on an on-demand door-to-door basis for the use
of disabled or local vehicle deficient passengers,
      4.   Is local transportation relating to local businesses or Momence
residents, or
      5.   Under the Constitution of the United States or State of Illinois may
not be made the subject of this regulation by the City.
   (F)   Penalties: Any Omnibus driver found to have violated any provision of
this Section, shall be liable for a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
passenger dropped off in the City of Momence, or within five (5) miles of its
borders. The City may also seek to enforce this Section through an application
in Circuit Court for an injunction or other relief. If this ordinance could be
administered through Administrative Adjudication or through a filing in the
Circuit Court, the City shall determine which method it shall utilize. (Ord.
884, 1-15-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Running At Large
5-2-3: Female Dogs And Cats In Heat
5-2-4: Right Of Entry; Inspections; Refusal To Deliver Dog Or Other Animal
5-2-5: Abandonment Of Animals
5-2-6: Nuisance
5-2-7: Nuisance; Exceptions
5-2-8: Inoculations
5-2-9: Vicious Dogs
5-2-10: Enforcement Officers Not Responsible For Accident Or Disease To Any Dog
Or Cat
5-2-11: Penalty
5-2-12: Dog License Required
5-2-13: Restraint Of Dogs
5-2-14: Unauthorized Transfer Of License
5-2-15: Apprehension And Impounding Of Dogs And Cats Not Wearing Evidence Of
Inoculation
5-2-16: Rabies Infected Animals
5-2-17: Inspections
5-2-18: Animals Disturbing The Peace Declared A Nuisance
5-2-19: Animals Prohibited From Running At Large
5-2-20: Defecation By Dogs On Private Property
5-2-21: Destruction Of Private Property By Dog Or Cat
5-2-22: Threatening Or Annoying Dog Or Cat
5-2-23: Cruelty To Animals
5-2-24: Offensive Odors
5-2-25: Use Of Animals For Indecent Purposes
5-2-26: Certain Animals Prohibited In City
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall mean as indicated below:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of
either the owner or a person the owner has designated to be in control.
However, if an animal under the control of a city official or veterinarian
escapes and runs loose, it shall not be considered "at large".
BITE OR BITING: To seize with the teeth or jaws, such that the person or animal
seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced, and further includes
contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day, including holidays, that the animal control facility is
open to the public for animal reclaims.
CAT: Felis catus.
CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his agent, to
an escapeproof building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals and
the public.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS: Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following:
   (A)   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, abusing,
tormenting, knowingly poisoning, knowingly attempting to poison, mutilating or
killing any animal or causing or knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   (B)   Working any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or
knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   (C)   Unnecessarily failing to provide an animal in one's charge or custody
as owner or otherwise with proper food, drink and proper sanitary shelter.
   (D)   Abandoning any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal by leaving
such animal on a highway, public way, or in a place where it may suffer injury,
hunger, exposure or become a public charge.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog, anywhere other than on the owners' property, unmuzzled,
unleashed, or unattended by its owner, that behaves in a manner that a
reasonable person believes poses a serious, unjustified imminent threat of
serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or a dog
that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical
injury.
DOG: Any and all animals of the canine species.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or
creating a cage suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable
to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may be taken
by the owner, such as tethering the vicious dog within the cage. The structure
shall be secure, locked and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. If
the cage is a room within a residence, it cannot have direct access to the
outdoors unless it leads to an enclosed pen whose door is locked. A vicious dog
may be allowed to move freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at
all times.
FERAL CAT: A cat that is born in the wild or the offspring of an owned or feral
cat and is not socialized, or is a formally owned cat that has been abandoned
and is no longer socialized, or lives on a farm.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the public pound in the county, city,
village or town where the animal is found.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine.
INTACT ANIMAL: An animal that has not been spayed or neutered.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or who knowingly permits a dog to
remain on any premises occupied by him/her. "Owner" does not include a feral
cat caretaker participating in a trap, spay/neuter, return or release program.
For purposes of this chapter, the person last issued a dog license shall be
presumed to be the owner of such dog.
PEACE OFFICER: The meaning ascribed to it in section 2-13 of the criminal code
of 1961 in the state of Illinois.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity, any public or private institution, the state of Illinois,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any other
business unit.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or
agency in the course of the department or agency's work.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: A dog that is unsupervised and found running at
large.
POUND OR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: May be used interchangeably and means any
facility approved by the city, county of Kankakee, or state of Illinois, and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs or
other animals.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A printed form for the purpose of recording pertinent
information as required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
RESTRAINT: An animal is under "restraint" when it is controlled by a leash; at
"heel" beside a responsible person, obedient to that person's commands; within
a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits
of its owner or keeper.
RUN LINE: A system of tying a dog in place with either a cable or chain having
a minimum tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300) pounds and not
exceeding ten feet (10') in length. The cable or chain must be securely
fastened to a permanent, nonmovable object and prevent the dog from climbing,
digging, jumping or otherwise escaping under its own volition.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk of
death, or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted impairment of
health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or plastic surgery.
VICIOUS DOG: Any individual dog that:
   (A)   When unprovoked, bites or attacks a human being or other animal either
on public or private property; or
   (B)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack without
provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
   (C)   Has a trait or characteristic, and a generally known reputation for
unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner or with special equipment; or
   (D)   Attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or
   (E)   Has been found to be a "dangerous dog" upon two (2) separate
occasions.
No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser
on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has tormented or
abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or
professionally trained guard dog. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a
manner that is specific to a breed. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   (A)   Every owner of a dog or cat shall contain such animal to the confines
of the owner's property, unless the animal is under restraint.
   (B)   Every owner of a dog or cat is prohibited from allowing said animal to
run at large.
   (C)   Any dog or cat found running at large shall be apprehended and
impounded in any existing or available public pound.
   (D)   The provisions of subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section shall
not apply to:
      1.   Dogs being used in hunting, or field trials;
      2.   Dog shows while on public lands set aside for those purposes;
      3.   While on private property of others with the actual, implied,
customary or constructive consent of the owner of such private premises;
      4.   While going to or coming from a hunting, field trial or dog show
site;
      5.   Bloodhounds or other dogs used for tracking in conjunction with
police activities;
      6.   Dogs of the canine corps of any police force, the state police, any
federal law enforcement agency, or the armed forces while being used to conduct
official business or being used for official purposes;
      7.   Dogs being used as service/assistance dogs for special needs people.
(Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-3: FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:
Every owner of a female dog or cat shall cause such dog or cat to be securely
confined in an enclosed place while in heat. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTIONS; REFUSAL TO DELIVER DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL:
Any officer of the law may enter upon private premises to apprehend a straying
dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal, or a dog or other animal
thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request, the owner of such dog or
other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the officer,
the owner shall be in violation of this section. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-5: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
The owner of any animal subject to rabies is prohibited from abandoning such
animal in the city. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-6: NUISANCE:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by
permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner
when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   (B)   No person owning, possessing or harboring any animal within the city
shall permit said animal to become a nuisance. An animal, other than a dog
trained for law enforcement in the performance of its duty, shall be considered
a nuisance if said animal:
      1.   Substantially damages property other than the owner's;
      2.   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or unreasonably offensive conditions;
      3.   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking, caterwauling or other
noisemaking;
      4.   Chases vehicles;
      5.   Chases, molests, attacks, bites, interferes with or physically
intimidates any person while on or off the premises of the owner; or
      6.   Chases, molests, attacks, bites or interferes with other animals
while off the premises of the owner. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-7: NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS:
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically
handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with
section
5-2-8 of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog
to notify the authorized official of changes of address. In the case of a
sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the authorized official advised of
the location where such dog will be stationed. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-8: INOCULATIONS:
   (A)   Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) or more months of age shall cause
such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian
annually or at such intervals as hereafter may be promulgated by the city of
Momence. Evidence of such inoculation shall be entered upon a certificate, and
the certificate shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the
vaccine.
   (B)   The type and brand of rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the U.S.
department of agriculture and approved by the department.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the city of Momence
approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day a person fails to comply constitutes a separate
offense. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-9: VICIOUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, own, or in any way possess
within the corporate limits of the city a vicious dog, subject to the following
exceptions and standards:
   (A)   Identification Of Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer employed by or
under contract with the city of Momence who suspects that a dog may be vicious
within the meaning of this chapter may conduct an investigation to determine
whether or not the dog has committed any act or displays any characteristics
which qualify it as a vicious dog. If upon the completion of such investigation
the officer concludes that the dog is a vicious dog, such officer shall issue a
written notice of determination which includes at least the following:
         (a)   A description of the dog;
         (b)   Information available concerning the ownership of the dog;
         (c)   A statement or conclusion that the dog is a "vicious dog" within
the meaning of this chapter;
         (d)   A description of the acts or characteristics which led the
officer to conclude that the dog is a vicious dog;
         (e)   Notice to the owner that the vicious dog must be licensed and
housed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
         (f)   Notice that the owner may appeal the determination of the
officer to the chief of police within seven (7) working days after the
determination is served upon the owner.
The officer shall serve the notice of determination on the owner by certified
mail or hand delivery to the last known address of the owner.
      2.   The owner may appeal any determination that the owner's dog is a
vicious dog. An appeal must be directed to the chief of police and must be
filed by the owner in the office of the police department or city hall within
seven (7) working days after receipt of the notice of determination which
identifies the dog as a vicious dog. Should the owner fail to appeal the
determination within seven (7) working days, the determination of the
investigating officer that the dog is a vicious dog shall become final. Upon
receipt of an appeal, the chief of police, or such person as the chief may
designate to act on the chief's behalf, shall convene a hearing for the purpose
of determining whether the dog in question is a vicious dog.
      3.   The hearing shall be held within no less than five (5) nor more than
ten (10) working days after the chief of police or his designee serves a notice
of the time, date and location of the hearing upon the owner of the allegedly
vicious dog. The hearing shall be conducted informally and shall remain open to
the public. At the hearing, the owner shall have the opportunity to present
evidence to explain why the dog should not be declared a vicious dog. The owner
shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the owner's expense.
The officer who made the initial determination that the dog is vicious, and any
other persons having knowledge of the facts and circumstances, may be heard by
the chief of police or his designee and shall be subject to cross examination
by the owner or the owner's attorney. The chief or his designee shall decide
all issues for or against the owner of the dog regardless of whether the owner
appears at the hearing.
      4.   Within five (5) working days after the conclusion of the hearing,
the chief of police or his designee shall determine whether or not the dog is a
"vicious dog" within the meaning of this chapter. The chief or his designee
shall notify the owner in writing of its determination. The decision of the
chief or his designee shall be final.
      5.   If any officer of the city of Momence determines that the public
safety requires the immediate impoundment of a dog as authorized by this
chapter, the officer shall within a reasonable time notify the owner of the
facts and circumstances relating to the impoundment. Upon receipt of such
notification, the owner may appeal the determination of the officer to the
chief of police or his designee in accordance with the procedures established
hereinabove for the identification of vicious dogs.
   (B)   Confinement Of Vicious Dogs: No person shall possess any vicious dog
unless the vicious dog is confined in accordance with this section.
      1.   Confinement Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or
in any part of a house or structure that would allow the vicious dog to exit
the structure on its own volition. No vicious dog shall be kept in a house or
structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are
the only obstacles preventing the vicious dog from exiting the structure.
      2.   Confinement In An Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a vicious
dog in an exterior area unless such vicious dog is confined in an enclosure
constructed and maintained in accordance with section
5-2-1 of this chapter, except that a vicious dog may be confined outside of an
enclosure in a manner set forth in subsection (B)3 of this section.
      3.   Confinement On Leash And Run Line: No person shall permit a vicious
dog to go outside an enclosure, house or other structure unless the vicious dog
is securely restrained with a leash no longer than three feet (3') in length,
fitted with a muzzle or securely restrained on a run line no longer than ten
feet (10') in length and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious
dog to be kept on a leash unless a person is in actual physical control of the
leash. The run line should be in the back yard and is not allowed in a front
yard.
The only time that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure or off the
run line are:
         (a)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary
care for the vicious dog, or
         (b)   To sell or give away the vicious dog, or
         (c)   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
or
         (d)   To allow the owner or keeper to walk the vicious dog, provided
that said vicious dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash having a
minimum tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds and not
exceeding three feet (3') in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
   (C)   Impoundment Of Vicious Dogs:
      1.   Any vicious dog which is not properly confined in an enclosure, on a
run line, or properly secured by a leash under the owner's or keeper's control
shall be impounded by the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such
area; provided, however, that if the city animal control officer or any city
police officer reasonably believes that such dog poses an immediate threat of
severe injury to any person, such officials are authorized to kill such dog.
Any vicious dog found to be running at large by any member of the police
department of a municipality shall be presumed to be in violation of this
section and shall be subject to impoundment.
      2.   If the incident giving rise to the impoundment has resulted in an
injury to a person, upon impoundment by the police department, the chief of
police or his designee shall notify the Kankakee County animal control of the
county pursuant to 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12, as amended, and shall
transfer control of the vicious dog to the Kankakee County animal control in
accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13, as amended. Any animal
which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so as to cause an
abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and kept separated
from other animals for fourteen (14) days. If, during that period, such animal
develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall be called to diagnose its
condition.
If the symptoms disclosed are such as to indicate the presence of rabies, such
animal shall be destroyed in such manner, to detach and preserve intact the
head, which shall immediately be sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the
department of agriculture. In cases where such animal(s) cannot be safely taken
up and impounded, it may be terminated, care being taken to preserve the head
intact, and sent to the diagnostic laboratory of the department of agriculture.
      3.   Any dog which attacks a human being or other domestic animal may be
ordered destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner, when in the court's
judgment, such dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human
beings or other domestic animals. However, prior to the destruction of the dog,
control of the dog must be transferred to the Kankakee County animal control
pursuant to subsection (C)2 of this section.
      4.   Any vicious dog which has previously been impounded for not properly
being confined or for running at large in violation of subsection (C)1, (C)2 or
(C)3 of this section, or which has previously bitten or attacked a human being
or other domestic animal without provocation, shall be ordered destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner upon any subsequent violations of those
subsections or upon any subsequent unprovoked attack or bite.
      5.   Any dog which attacks a human being, except for dogs listed as
exceptions to the definition of "vicious dog" in section
5-2-1 of this chapter, which results in severe injury shall automatically be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
   (D)   Redemption Of Impounded Vicious Dog: An owner of a vicious dog holding
a license pursuant to subsection (A) of this section may redeem an impounded
vicious dog if the vicious dog has been impounded pursuant to subsection (C) of
this section and the vicious dog has not caused severe injury to a person,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Proof of a valid license issued by Kankakee County animal control or
certified Illinois veterinarian;
      2.   Payment of the cost of keeping the vicious dog during the period of
impoundment and charges specified by this chapter; and
      3.   No symptoms of rabies have developed after the specified amount of
days of impoundment.
   (E)   Sale Or Transfer Of Ownership Prohibited: No person shall sell,
barter, offer to breed or in any other way dispose of a vicious dog to any
person within the city unless the recipient person resides permanently in the
same household and on the same premises as the registered owner of such vicious
dog; the registered owner of a vicious dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a
vicious dog or the offspring of such vicious dog to persons who do not reside
within the city, provided they give written notice to the person who will be
receiving the vicious dog that such dog has been deemed a vicious dog under
this section.
   (F)   Animals Born Of Vicious Dogs: All offspring born of vicious dogs
within the city must be removed from the city within eight (8) weeks of the
birth of such animal.
   (G)   Sign Required: All persons possessing a vicious dog shall display in a
prominent place on the premises where a vicious dog is to be kept, a sign which
is readable by the public from a distance of not less than fifty feet (50')
using the words "Beware Of Dog". A similar sign shall be posted on any
enclosure.
   (H)   Fighting Prohibited: No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight
or bait, or keep, train, or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting,
any dog. No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dogfighting,
or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or
encouraging said dog to attack human beings or domestic animals without
provocation.
   (I)   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any K-9 patrol dogs or
police dogs while on duty.
   (J)   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the city of
Momence approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. Additionally, any person found guilty of violating this
section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses,
and other expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog for the protection of
the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of
any such dog.
   (K)   Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or
harborer of a vicious dog within the city of Momence to fail to comply with the
requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any vicious dog found to
be the subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to immediate
seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply may result in the
immediate removal of the animal from the city. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-10: ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ACCIDENT OR DISEASE TO ANY DOG
OR CAT:
Anyone enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall not be held responsible
for any accident or disease that may happen to any dog or cat. (Ord. 725, 9-19-
2011)
5-2-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating or aiding the violation of this chapter, or resisting,
obstructing or impeding any authorized officer in enforcing the act, or
refusing to produce for inoculation any dog in his possession not confined at
all times to an enclosed area, or who removes a tag from a dog for purposes of
destroying or concealing its identity, shall be guilty of a petty offense and
shall be fined in accordance with the city of Momence approved fine list found
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-12: DOG LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog within
the city of Momence without first securing an annual dog license therefor and
tagging the dog therewith, as prescribed by the county of Kankakee. (Ord. 725,
9-19-2011)
5-2-13: RESTRAINT OF DOGS:
The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all times
and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the property
of the owner or keeper. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-14: UNAUTHORIZED TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any license tag on any dog other
than the dog for which such tag was issued. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-15: APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDING OF DOGS AND CATS NOT WEARING EVIDENCE OF
INOCULATION:
Any dog found not wearing a current registration tag, and for which no current
registration certificate can be produced; and any cat found not wearing a
current inoculation tag, may be apprehended and impounded by the Momence police
department or their authorized agent provided the Momence police department or
their authorized agent have reason to believe such animal is four (4) months or
more of age.
When a dog or cat is apprehended and impounded by the Momence police department
pursuant to this section, he shall give notice of not less than seven (7) days
to the owner, if known. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address
of the owner. An affidavit or testimony of the Momence police, or their
authorized agent, who mails such notice shall be prima facie evidence of the
receipt of such notice by the owner of such animal. In case the owner of any
impounded animal desires to make redemption thereof, he may do so on the
following conditions:
   (A)   He must present proof of current rabies inoculation and registration,
if applicable, or
   (B)   He must pay for the rabies inoculation of the animal and registration,
if applicable, and
   (C)   He must pay the pound for the board of the animal for the period it
was impounded, and pay any charges specified in this chapter.
Any animal not redeemed by the owner which has been impounded for failure to be
inoculated or registered in accordance with this section shall be humanely
dispatched, offered for adoption, or otherwise disposed of by the pound as a
stray animal in accordance with the laws that exist or may hereafter exist. Any
person purchasing or adopting such animal with or without charge or donation
must pay for the rabies inoculation, and registration, if applicable of such
animal. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-16: RABIES INFECTED ANIMALS:
The owner of any animal which exhibits clinical signs of rabies, whether or not
the animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall immediately notify the
police department and shall promptly confine the animal, or have it confined
under suitable observation, for a period of at least fourteen (14) days. Any
animal that has had direct contact with the animal and that has not been
inoculated against rabies, shall be confined, as recommended by a licensed
veterinarian. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-17: INSPECTIONS:
For the purpose of making inspections, the chief of police, or his/her
authorized representative, or any law enforcement officer may enter upon
private premises, provided that entry shall not be made into any building that
is a person's residence, to apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a
dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, or an animal thought to be infected
with rabies. If, after request, the owner of the dog or other animal shall
refuse to deliver the dog or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-18: ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of day or night
or any person residing in a neighborhood whose quietness has been disturbed by
any animal owned or possessed within the neighborhood is hereby declared to be
a nuisance, the person being disturbed may make a sworn complaint with the
Momence police department and the animal may be impounded by the Momence police
department or designated agent, and may be redeemed at the Kankakee County
animal control shelter. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-19: ANIMALS PROHIBITED FROM RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, whether properly tagged and
certified by vaccination, to permit or allow such animal to run at large off
the property of the owner. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-20: DEFECATION BY DOGS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor to permit a dog to walk upon
private property without the consent of the occupant thereof. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or possessor to permit a dog to defecate upon public or
private property without removing the feces created by the dog. (Ord. 725, 9-
19-2011)
5-2-21: DESTRUCTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY BY DOG OR CAT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog or cat to permit
such dog or cat to damage or destroy any personal property of another person.
(Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-22: THREATENING OR ANNOYING DOG OR CAT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog or cat to permit
such dog or cat to cause reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by
attacking or threatening to attack such person, or to permit such dog or cat to
jump upon any person to the annoyance of said person. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-23: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause, procure or
encourage any fight between animals, either in private or in public.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or attempt to kill by any
means any animals in the city including all portions of Island Park which lie
within the corporate limits of the city, or to shoot an arrow or stone, or
throw a club or other projectile at any such animal within any private or
public grounds within the city.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to treat any animal within the
city in any cruel manner whatsoever. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-24: OFFENSIVE ODORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit offensive odors to
emanate from the premises where he keeps any animal. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-25: USE OF ANIMALS FOR INDECENT PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner instigate, cause, procure,
participate in or assist in any indecent, lewd or immoral show or act, use or
exhibition of an animal. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
5-2-26: CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CITY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be at large within
the city or to use, or keep within the city any of the following animals: bees,
pigeons, horses, cattle, sheep, ponies, goats, mules, pigs, swine, hogs, ducks,
roosters, chickens, geese, minks, foxes, or any other livestock or poultry or
any wild or vicious animal dangerous to mankind, except the temporary keeping
of animals within the city when being used for parade purposes and other civic
functions. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any animal named above, found at large within the city, shall be
impounded if possible; however, whenever any police officer believes such
animal endangers any person, such animal may be killed by said officer.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties imposed upon any person violating
this section, such person shall also be liable for the costs of impounding or
killing such animal, if necessary. (Ord. 725, 9-19-2011)
CHAPTER 3
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew Hours
5-3-1: CURFEW HOURS:
   (A)   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17)
years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place,
street or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a
parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18)
years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a
business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., Saturday;
Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., Sunday;
Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (B)   Violation: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person
to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection
(A) of this section.
   (C)   Exemption: No child shall be guilty of this offense if involved in,
going to or coming from an activity involving the exercise of the child's
rights protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article 1, sections 2, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or
both.
   (D)   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection (C) of this section is present. (Ord. 636, 8-6-2007)
   (E)   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the city of
Momence approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 678, 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS; BARBERRY BUSHES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Nuisance Declared; Weeds
5-4-2: Barberry Bushes
5-4-3: Tall Grass/Weeds
5-4-4: Removal; Notice; Abatement
5-4-5: Special Assessment For Payment Of Costs
5-4-1: NUISANCE DECLARED; WEEDS:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds
of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land in the City are
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such
weeds to grow or remain in any such place. (Ord., 8-2-1965)
5-4-2: BARBERRY BUSHES:
   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to plant or permit the
growth of, upon any premises, the bush of the species of tall, common or
European barberry, further known as Berberis vulgaris, and its horticultural
varieties within the corporate limits of the City.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the Chief of Police to serve a notice in
writing upon the owners, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or
control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which this said bush may be
found, requiring them, or either of them, to remove, destroy and carry the same
away and off such premises within two (2) days.
   (C)   If the person so notified shall refuse or neglect to comply with such
order within the time and in the manner specified, the Chief of Police shall
cause the abatement of such nuisance at the expense of the party or parties
responsible for or permitting the same. (Ord. 540, 7-7-2003)
5-4-3: TALL GRASS/WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the City; any such plants or weeds
exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. In the event that
compliance is not met within seventy two (72) hours of an issued citation, each
day thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 540, 7-7-2003; amd.
Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
5-4-4: REMOVAL; NOTICE; ABATEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or his designee, to serve or cause
to be served, a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises, or post
notice on such premises on which weeds, grass, or plants are permitted to grow
in violation of the provisions of this chapter. This shall also apply to the
removal of garbage and debris, and the abatement of rodents and vermin. If the
person in possession of the real estate so served has not cut the weeds, grass,
plants, removed garbage and debris, or rodent and vermin abatement, within
seventy two (72) hours, from the date of service, the City shall then proceed
to abate such nuisance by cutting the weeds, grass, or plants, removing garbage
and debris, and move forward with procedures to abate rodent and vermin. Upon
the City's completion of the removal of the weeds, grass, plants, garbage,
debris, or rodent and vermin abatement, the City shall determine the number of
hours, with a minimum of one hour, spent in abating said nuisance, and the
owner and occupant of the premises shall become and remain jointly and
severally liable for repayment of the City's costs and expenses. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a petty offense as provided in this section
and as established in the list of fines and fees in subsection
1-4-1(B) of this Code. (Ord. 743, 9-17-2012)
5-4-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR PAYMENT OF COSTS:
The City of Momence is adopting Municipal Code section 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/9-2-4.5, which states:
Sec. 9-2-4.5.
Special assessment for payment of costs associated with certain ordinance
violations.
(A) For purposes of this Section, "Code" means any municipal ordinance that
requires, after notice, the cutting of grass and weeds, the removal of garbage
and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, and rodent and vermin
abatement.
(B) In addition to any other method authorized by law, if (i) a property owner
is cited with a Code violation, (ii) non-compliance is found upon reinspection
of the property after seventy two (72) hours for compliance with an order to
correct the Code violation or with an order for abatement, (iii) costs for
services rendered by the municipality to correct the Code violation remain
unpaid at the point in time that they would become a debt due and owing the
municipality, as provided in Division 31.1 of Article 11 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, and (iv) a lien has been filed of record by the municipality in
the office of the recorder in the county in which the property is located, then
those costs may be collected as a special assessment on the property under this
Division. Upon payment of the costs by the owner of record or persons
interested in the property, the lien shall be released by the municipality, and
the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as the filing of notice
of the lien.
(Ord. 743, 9-17-2012)
CHAPTER 5
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Inoperable Vehicles Declared Nuisance
5-5-2: Penalty
5-5-3: Removal
5-5-4: Posting Of Notice
5-5-5: Definition
5-5-6: Repair Of Vehicles On City Property And Residential Areas Prohibited
5-5-1: INOPERABLE VEHICLES DECLARED NUISANCE:
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, and in
view of the general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 407, 7-
19-1993)
5-5-2: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined in accordance with the city of Momence approved fine
list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 678, 4-19-2010)
5-5-3: REMOVAL:
The police department of the city may remove any inoperable motor vehicle or
parts thereof after three (3) days from the issuance of the municipal notice to
the owner and/or party in possession or control. (Ord. 407, 7-19-1993)
5-5-4: POSTING OF NOTICE:
In the event that the identity and/or whereabouts of the owner or party in
possession or control cannot be determined upon due diligence, the city may
effectuate aforesaid notice by posting same upon the motor vehicle or parts
thereof in question. (Ord. 407, 7-19-1993)
5-5-5: DEFINITION:
   (A)   "Inoperable motor vehicles" means:
      1.   Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least three (3)
days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power.
      2.   Any motor vehicle which has an expired state motor vehicle license
or is unlicensed.
   (B)   "Inoperable motor vehicles" shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty
five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. (Ord. 638, 8-20-
2007)
5-5-6: REPAIR OF VEHICLES ON CITY PROPERTY AND RESIDENTIAL AREAS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No individual shall bring any motor vehicle onto city property and
cause the repairing or overhauling of said vehicle in any fashion while on city
property.
   (B)   No individual shall make any repairs of automotive vehicles as defined
in section
9-2-1 of this code in a residential district unless such vehicle is registered
to the address that the repairs are being made.
   (C)   Any automotive major or minor repairs (as defined in section
9-2-1 of this code) not completed in a twenty four (24) hour time period must
be stored or repaired in a garage or similar shelter away from public view.
   (D)   This section shall apply to any vehicle or conveyance not defined in
section
9-2-1 of this code. No individual shall conduct repairs for a business in a
residential district.
   (E)   Any individual violating any subsection of this section, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in this code and as established in the general
penalty (subsection
1-4-1(A) of this code). (Ord. 764, 7-15-2013)
CHAPTER 6
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Violation
5-6-3: Remedy
5-6-4: Abatement Of Nuisance
5-6-5: Procedure
5-6-6: Commencement Of Action; Burden Of Proof
5-6-7: Emergency Closing Procedures
5-6-8: Severability
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which three (3) or more of the
behaviors listed below have occurred during any sixty (60) day period, as a
result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency:
   (A)   Disorderly Conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-
1.
   (B)   Unlawful Use of Weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-1 et seq.
   (C)   Mob Action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
   (D)   Discharge of a Firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2 and 5/24-1.5.
   (E)   Gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.
   (F)   Possession, Manufacture or Delivery of Controlled Substance as defined
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
   (G)   Assault or Battery or Any Related Offense as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.
   (H)   Sexual Abuse or Related Offense as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/12-15 et seq.
   (I)   Public Indecency as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.
   (J)   Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et
seq.
   (K)   Criminal Damage to Property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
   (L)   Possession, Cultivation, Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
   (M)   Illegal Consumption or Possession of Alcohol as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited to: a) a mortgagee
in possession in whom is vested: 1) all or part of the legal title to the
property; or 2) all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises; or b) an occupant who can control
what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly ascent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of
owning or using property in the city of Momence.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land in that which is affixed incidental
or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room, house,
building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof, whether
permitted or not. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-2: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any certain property within the city which becomes a chronic nuisance
property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its remedies.
   (B)   Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership
or control to be a public nuisance property shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-3: REMEDY:
   (A)   In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the court may employ any other
remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (A) of this section,
the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the
amount of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, payable to the city, for
each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a public nuisance
property and permitted the property to remain a public nuisance property.
   (C)   In determining what remedy or remedies shall employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The city attorney or the state's attorney of Kankakee County may commence an
action to abate public nuisance as described above. Upon being satisfied by
affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists, the
court may without notice or bond enter a temporary restraining order or a
preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such a nuisance
and may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing or interfering
with all property used in connection with the public nuisance. (Ord. 470, 11-
16-1998)
5-6-5: PROCEDURE:
When the chief of police of the city receives two (2) or more police reports
documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a property, the
chief of police shall independently review such reports to determine whether
they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the chief may:
   (A)   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the chief of police has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise
to the violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police
within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   (B)   After complying with the notification procedures described herein when
the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a
third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the
property has become a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall:
      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been
determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
         (b)   A statement that the chief of police has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance activities leading to his/her findings.
         (c)   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to
the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
         (d)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at
the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the chief of police.
         (e)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the township in which the property is
located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons
are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or
by first class mail, postage prepaid.
         (f)   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the
person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the chief of
police.
         (g)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property
may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
      2.   If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the city pursuant to this chapter, a person in charge stipulates
with the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a course of
action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a
period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, except in the
case of a nuisance activity under section 3(b)(7) where a search warrant was
result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning
abatement is reached within thirty (30) days, the chief of police shall request
authorization for the corporation counsel to commence a legal proceeding to
abate the nuisance.
      3.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
chief of police shall send copies of the notice, as well as, any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings to the corporation counsel.
   (C)   When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as
required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance
activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the
exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any
other purpose. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION; BURDEN OF PROOF:
   (A)   In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the city
shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the evidence that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (B)   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance
property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in
the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had
become a public nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (C)   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court
may consider any of the following factors if they need be found appropriate,
and shall cite those found applicable:
      1.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      2.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      4.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the city.
      5.   The cost of the city investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-7: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the city may apply to the court for
such interim relief, as is deemed by the chief of police to be appropriate. In
such an event, the notification provision set forth in section
5-6-5 of this chapter need not be complied with, however, the city shall make a
diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court hearing.
   (B)   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a "chronic
nuisance property" as defined in this chapter, the court may order the remedy
set out above. In addition, in the event that it also finds the person in
charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting
or violating this chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court may
assess a civil fine as provided above.
   (C)   The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the
property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to effect a closure shall
be made and assessed as a lien against the property. If used herein, "costs"
mean those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the
property, as well as, tenant relocation costs.
   (D)   The city effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of cost and
the city shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If
no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the court,
a lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.
   (E)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof by the city.
   (F)   A tenant is entitled to their reasonable relocation costs, as those
are determined by the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into
the property, after either:
      1.   The owner or tenant received notice as described herein of the
police chief's determination as described above.
      2.   Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought
pursuant to this section.
      3.   Any person who is assessed with costs of closure and/or civil
penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
city. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
5-6-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application, or any person or
circumstances held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
application of its provisions to the other persons or circumstances shall not
be in any way affected. (Ord. 470, 11-16-1998)
CHAPTER 7
ILLEGAL USE OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Illegal Activities Resulting In Vehicle Seizure And Impoundment
5-7-1: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES RESULTING IN VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
    CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any substance as defined and included in the schedule
contained in article II of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, as amended
from time to time, and cannabis as defined in section 1 of the Cannabis Control
Act, as amended from time to time.
   DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: Any violation as defined in section 11-501 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time.
   DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A MOTOR VEHICLE IS
SUSPENDED OR REVOKED: Any violation as defined in section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Any equipment, product, and/or materials as defined in
section 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act, as amended from time to time.
   FINAL HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who is not an officer or employee
of the City.
   HEARING OFFICER: A licensed attorney who is not an officer or employee of
the City.
   OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT A VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE: A violation
of section 6-101 and/or section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended
from time to time, where the driver's license or driving privileges have been
suspended, revoked, canceled, never obtained, or previously had been obtained
and have been expired for not less than six (6) months.
   OWNER OF RECORD: The record titleholder to a motor vehicle.
   PRELIMINARY HEARING OFFICER: The Chief of Police or his designee.
   UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS: A violation of section 24-1 of the Criminal Code of
1961, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Vehicles Subject To Seizure And Impoundment: A motor vehicle shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment under this section where such motor vehicle
is used in any of the following:
      1.   The possession or delivery of a controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia;
      2.   Driving under the influence;
      3.   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is suspended or revoked;
      4.   Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid driver's license;
      5.   The unlawful use of weapons;
      6.   Any other felony or misdemeanor as defined by the Illinois Criminal
Code; (Ord. 694, 8-16-2010)
      7.   Any misdemeanor or felony found in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.;
      8.   Driving with license plates that are suspended or more than thirty
(30) days expired;
      9.   The unlawful possession of a weapon. (Ord. 836, 11-20-2017)
   (C)   Seizure And Impounding Of Vehicles: Whenever a police officer has
probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to this section, the police officer shall cause the motor vehicle to
be towed to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle
is towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself or
herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control
of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person,
of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a
preliminary hearing as provided in this section.
   (D)   Posting Of Bond: If a bond in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) is posted with the city, the impounded vehicle will be released to
the owner of record, upon the payment by the owner of record of the towing and
storage costs. If a penalty is imposed for a violation of this section, the
bond will be forfeited to the city; provided, in the event that a violation of
this section is not proven, the bond will be returned to the person posting the
bond. All bond money posted pursuant to this section will be held by the city
until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review,
until the court issues its final decision.
   (E)   Preliminary Hearing: Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under
the provisions of this section requests a preliminary hearing within twelve
(12) hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, a preliminary hearing
officer of the city must conduct a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24)
hours after the request for preliminary hearing is received by the city;
provided that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. For purposes of this section,
the following shall apply:
      1.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the preliminary hearing
officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was
used as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the preliminary hearing
officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner
of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the city in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), plus the towing and storage costs.
      4.   If the preliminary hearing officer determines that there is not
probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as provided in subsection
(B) of this section, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record
of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs.
   (F)   Final Hearing:
      1.   Notice Of Hearing: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized
and impounded pursuant to this section, the owner of such vehicle may request a
final hearing by the hearing officer of the adjudication process used.
      2.   Hearing: For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
the owner's hearing:
         (a)   Unless continued by order of the final hearing officer, the
hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the motor vehicle was
seized.
         (b)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the final hearing.
         (c)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the final hearing
officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used
as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the hearing officer shall order
the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to
the city a penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the
adjudication costs, towing and storage costs. The penalty and costs shall be a
debt due to the city.
         (d)   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the final
hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the city, which
order shall require the payment to the city of an administrative penalty of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus adjudication costs.
         (e)   If the final hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not
used as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the motor vehicle will be
returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other
costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall be
returned.
   (G)   Unclaimed Vehicles:
      1.   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the action of the city under this section, or the time at which a
final judgment is rendered in favor of the city by a court, or the time at
which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record
who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as
otherwise provided by law.
      2.   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within
eighty (80) days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, the
vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless
a petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction.
Where a petition for judicial review of the hearing officer's determination is
filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be
deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If the petition for judicial
review is resolved in favor of the city, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned
and may be disposed of by the city if the penalty and towing and storage costs
are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the court's order.
   (H)   Liability For Penalty And Costs:
      1.   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded
shall be liable to the city for a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) (or
as approved on the list of fines and fees) in addition to any fees for the
towing and storage of the motor vehicle.
      2.   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company,
and not by the city, except where the motor vehicle is stored on city property,
in which case the storage cost will be established by the mayor, or the chief
of police.
      3.   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following occurs:
         (a)   The penalty is paid to the city, and all towing and storage
costs are paid to the towing company; and
         (b)   A bond in an amount equal to the liability of the owner as
provided in subsection (H)1 of this section is posted with the city and all
applicable towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; and
         (c)   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall
be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
or unclaimed vehicles.
      4.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner,
lienholder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of
a motor vehicle impounded under this section until the penalty and all towing
and storage costs applicable under this section have been paid in full. (Ord.
694, 8-16-2010)
CHAPTER 8
FALSE ALARMS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Purpose
5-8-2: Definitions
5-8-3: Permit Required; Application; Fee; Transferability; False Statements
5-8-4: Alarm Systems In Apartment Complexes; Contracted For By Individual
Tenant
5-8-5: Alarm Systems In Apartment Complexes; Furnished By The Apartment Complex
As An Amenity
5-8-6: Proper Alarm Systems Installation, Operation And Maintenance
5-8-7: Monitoring Procedures
5-8-8: Duties Of Alarm Business
5-8-9: Alarm System Operating Instructions
5-8-10: Alarm Dispatch Request Records
5-8-11: System Performance Reviews
5-8-12: Fines And Penalties
5-8-13: Revocation, Suspension Or Loss Of Alarm Permit
5-8-14: Reinstatement Of Permit
5-8-15: Violations
5-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to
maintain the operational reliability and properly use alarm systems and to
reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: The Momence police department or police department
representative who administers, controls and reviews alarm applications,
permits and alarm dispatch requests.
ALARM BUSINESS: A business which sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs,
alters, replaces, moves, installs or monitors an alarm system at an alarm site.
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST: A notification to the Momence police department by an
alarm business that an alarm has been activated at a particular alarm site.
ALARM SITE: A single premises or location served by an alarm system or systems.
Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant building
or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.
ALARM SYSTEM: A device or series of devices, including, but not limited to,
systems interconnected with radio signals, which are designed to discourage
crime or other emergencies, by emitting or transmitting a remote or local
audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition. Alarm
system does not include:
   (A)   An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site; or
   (B)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that
does not have a sounding device that can be heard on the exterior of the alarm
site.
ALARM USER: Any person that uses an alarm system at the person's alarm site.
FALSE ALARM DISPATCH: An alarm dispatch request to the Momence police
department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal
offense, attempted criminal offense, or fire hazard after having completed a
timely investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch request that is
canceled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to the time the
responding officer reaches the alarm site shall not be considered a false alarm
dispatch.
HOLDUP ALARM: A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
KEYPAD: A device that allows controls of an alarm system by the manual entering
of a coded sequence of numbers or letters.
MONITORING: The process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm
systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Momence police department
for the purpose of summoning a police department response to the alarm site.
ONE PLUS DURESS ALARM: The manual activation of a silent alarm signal by
entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/
disarm code (e.g., normal code equals 1234, one plus duress code equals 1235).
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or
similar entity.
TAKEOVER: The transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control
of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm
user.
VERIFY: An attempt, by the alarm business to contact the alarm site by
telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a
person is made, before requesting a police department dispatch, in an attempt
to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE STATEMENTS:
   (A)   Permit Required: No alarm user shall operate, cause to be operated, or
take over an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued
by the alarm administrator. A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
An alarm permit may not be transferred to another alarm user or alarm site.
   (B)   Denial Of Permit: Upon receipt of a completed application form and the
permit fee, the alarm administrator shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant
unless the applicant has:
      1.   Made a false statement of a material matter on the application;
      2.   Failed to pay a fine assessed under this chapter; or
      3.   Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the
violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected.
   (C)   Permit Application: Each permit application must include the following
information:
      1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation
of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this chapter;
      2.   The classification of the alarm site as either residential,
commercial or apartment;
      3.   For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the
alarm system (i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, or other);
      4.   Signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business
stating:
         (a)   The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm
system, whichever is applicable;
         (b)   The name, address and phone number of the alarm business
performing the alarm system installation, conversion, or alarm system takeover
and responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system;
         (c)   The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business
monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing alarm business;
         (d)   That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been
left with the applicant; and
         (e)   That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use
of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms.
      5.   And such other information as the Momence police department shall
require from time to time on the permit application.
   (D)   Grace Period: Upon issuance of a permit, each alarm user shall have a
thirty (30) day grace period during which the Momence police department shall
not cite nor fine the alarm user for a false alarm dispatch. However, the
Momence police department shall have the power to disconnect the alarm user for
an unreasonable number of false alarm dispatches within the thirty (30) day
period.
   (E)   Updating Information: An alarm user shall have a duty to inform the
alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the
permit application within fifteen (15) days. Updates shall be free of charge.
   (F)   Duration Of Permit: A permit will not expire, except for the following
reasons:
      1.   Alarm site occupancy has changed,
      2.   Alarm user has lost user's permit via operation of this chapter.
   (G)   Confidentiality: Information contained in permit applications shall be
held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access
to such information.
   (H)   No Further Duty Created For Momence Police: This chapter shall not be
construed to create any duty on the Momence police department beyond those
duties already imposed by law. No guarantees or warranties beyond those granted
to all citizens shall be implied by this chapter. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-4: ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES; CONTRACTED FOR BY INDIVIDUAL
TENANT:
   (A)   Name Of Representative: If an alarm system installed by an individual
tenant in an apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the
name of a representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can
grant access to the apartment and the alarm business that is providing the
monitoring service.
   (B)   Tenant Permit: A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm
permit from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation
of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The initial fee for this
permit shall be the same as a residential alarm site. The tenant is responsible
for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's
residential unit. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-5: ALARM SYSTEMS IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES; FURNISHED BY THE APARTMENT COMPLEX
AS AN AMENITY:
   (A)   Owner Or Manager Hold Permit: If the owner or property manager of an
apartment complex provides alarm systems in each residential unit as an
amenity, then the owner or property manager of the apartment complex shall
obtain a master alarm permit from the alarm administrator. The initial setup
fee for this permit shall be the residential alarm site fee times the number of
units. All units, whether occupied or not, shall be included in calculating the
required fee.
   (B)   Owner Or Manager Responsible: For purposes of assessing fines and
enforcing this chapter, the master alarm permit holder is responsible for
payment of fines for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm systems in
residential units.
   (C)   Common Area Permit: The owner or property manager of an apartment
complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a
nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to,
common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment areas. The initial setup
fee for such a permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential alarm
site. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-6: PROPER ALARM SYSTEMS INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Licensed Alarm Installation Required: Each installer of an alarm
system at an alarm site shall be licensed by the appropriate professional
certifying body of the state of Illinois, unless the installer is installing
his own personal alarm system. No alarm system permit shall be issued unless
the alarm system was installed or inspected by a licensed alarm installer.
   (B)   Operation And Maintenance: An alarm user shall:
      1.   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; and
      2.   Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to
respond to the alarm system's location within one hour when notified by the
Momence police department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises; and
      3.   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (C)   Time Limit For Audible Alarm: An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism
or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the
exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after
being activated. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-7: MONITORING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Procedural Duties Of Alarm Business: An alarm business performing
monitoring services shall:
      1.   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the
alarm administrator;
      2.   Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress or holdup
alarm activation before requesting a Momence police department response to an
alarm signal;
      3.   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Momence police department
in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator;
      4.   Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the
Momence police department in a manner and form determined by the alarm
administrator.
   (B)   Alarm Administrator Duties: The alarm administrator shall:
      1.   Designate a manner, form and telephone number(s) for the
communication of alarm dispatch requests;
      2.   Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm
dispatch request. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-8: DUTIES OF ALARM BUSINESS:
   (A)   One Plus Duress Alarms: After December 1, 2006, alarm businesses shall
not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress
alarms. Alarm businesses may continue to report one plus duress alarms received
from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to December 1, 2006.
However, after December 1, 2006, when performing a takeover or conversion an
alarm business must remove the one plus duress alarm capability from the alarm
system being taken over or converted.
   (B)   Holdup Alarms: After December 1, 2006, alarm businesses shall not
install devices for activation of a holdup alarm that is a single action
nonrecessed button. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-9: ALARM SYSTEM OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS:
   (A)   Copy Of Instructions: An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site,
a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. (Ord. 613, 11-6-
2006)
5-8-10: ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST RECORDS:
   (A)   Responding Officer's Report: The officer responding to an alarm
dispatch request shall record such information as necessary to permit the alarm
administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Identification of the permit number for the alarm site;
      2.   Identification of the alarm site;
      3.   Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time;
      4.   Date, and time;
      5.   Weather conditions;
      6.   Area and/or subarea of premises involved;
      7.   Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any;
      8.   Identification of the responsible alarm business; and/or
      9.   Inability to locate the address.
   (B)   Classification Of Dispatch: The responding Momence police department
officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the dispatch was caused
by a "criminal offense", an "attempted criminal offense", a "fire alarm", a
"false alarm dispatch - user error", or a "false alarm dispatch - equipment
malfunction".
   (C)   Notice Of False Alarm Dispatch: In the case of an assumed false alarm
dispatch, the responding Momence police department officer shall leave notice
at the alarm site that the Momence police department responded to a false alarm
dispatch. The notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The date and time of Momence police department response to the false
alarm dispatch;
      2.   The identification number of the responding Momence police
department officer; and
      3.   A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is
properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid fines.
   (D)   Alarm Business Records: Alarm businesses which perform monitoring
services must maintain for a period of at least one year following request for
Momence police department dispatch to an alarm site, records relating to the
dispatch. Records must include the name, address and phone number of the alarm
user, the alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of request for police
dispatch and evidence that an attempt to verify was made to the alarm site
prior to the request for Momence police dispatch. The alarm administrator may
request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. (Ord. 613,
11-6-2006)
5-8-11: SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REVIEWS:
   (A)   Performance Review Conference: If there is reason to believe that an
alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper
operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a
conference with an alarm user and the alarm business responsible for the repair
of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. (Ord. 613,
11-6-2006)
5-8-12: FINES AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Schedule Of Fines: An alarm user or the master permit holder for an
apartment complex shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension or
revocation of permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches emitted
from an alarm system within any three hundred sixty five (365) day period based
upon the following schedule:
      1.   Four False Alarm Dispatches Without Penalty: No fines shall be
assessed for the first four (4) false alarm dispatches. The Momence police
shall leave on site written notice to be followed up by a warning letter for
each of the first four (4) false alarm dispatches.
      2.   Subsequent False Alarm Dispatches: For the fifth and all subsequent
false alarm dispatches within any three hundred sixty five (365) day period, an
alarm user or the master permit holder for an apartment complex shall be
subject to the following penalties:
         (a)   For the fifth false alarm dispatch:
            (1) A fine not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), and
            (2) Warning letter, suspension of permit, or revocation of permit.
         (b)   For the sixth false alarm dispatch:
            (1) A fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), and
            (2) Warning letter, suspension of permit, or revocation of permit.
         (c)   For the seventh false alarm dispatch:
            (1) A fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and
            (2) Revocation of permit.
   (B)   Nonpermit Alarm Systems: In addition, any person, operating a
nonpermitted alarm system (whether revoked, suspended or never acquired) will
be subject to a citation and a fine for each false alarm dispatch, in addition
to any other fines, based upon the following schedule:
      1.   A fine of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first false alarm dispatch
from a nonpermitted alarm system.
      2.   A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second false alarm dispatch
from a nonpermitted alarm system.
      3.   A fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the third false dispatch
from a nonpermitted alarm system.
      4.   A fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for every subsequent false
alarm dispatch from a nonpermitted alarm system.
   (C)   True Alarm Dispatch Requests: Alarm dispatch requests, caused by an
actual criminal offense, with evidence of a criminal attempt or due to some
other bona fide emergency, shall not be counted as a false alarm dispatch.
   (D)   Reinstatement Of Permit: The alarm administrator may reinstate a
suspended permit upon receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause has been
addressed and appropriate corrective action has been taken. (Ord. 613, 11-6-
2006)
5-8-13: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR LOSS OF ALARM PERMIT:
   (A)   Further Cause For Revocation Or Suspension: In addition to suspension
or revocation, the alarm administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm permit if
it is determined that:
      1.   There is a false statement of a material matter in the application
for a permit;
      2.   The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a fee.
   (B)   Operation Under Suspension Or Revocation: A person commits an offense
if he/she operates an alarm system during the period in which his/her alarm
permit is suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Refusal To Respond: Unless there is separate indication that there is
a crime in progress, the Momence police may refuse to respond to an alarm
dispatch request at an alarm site for which the alarm permit is revoked or
suspended.
   (D)   False Alarm Dispatches At Reinstated Alarm Site: If the alarm permit
is reinstated, the alarm administrator may revoke the alarm permit if it is
determined that two (2) subsequent false alarm dispatches occur within sixty
(60) days after the reinstatement date. (Ord. 613, 11-6-2006)
5-8-14: REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Requirements: A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be
issued a new permit if the person:
      1.   Submits an updated application and pays the appropriate permit fee;
and
      2.   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all citations and fines; and
      3.   Submits a certification from an alarm business, that complies with
the requirements of this chapter, stating that the alarm system has been
inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm business. (Ord. 613, 11-6-
2006)
5-8-15: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Fines: A person commits an offense if he/she violates by commission or
omission any provision of this chapter that imposes upon him/her a duty or
responsibility and is subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 613, 11-6-
2006)
CHAPTER 9
UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-9-1: Property Processed By Police Department; Chief To Be Custodian
5-9-2: Disposition Of Unclaimed Property
5-9-1: PROPERTY PROCESSED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT; CHIEF TO BE CUSTODIAN:
The police chief shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered
stolen property in the city and all property seized or otherwise taken
possession of by the Momence police department. (Ord. 741, 9-4-2012)
5-9-2: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
If property seized or taken possession of by the police department, is not
claimed by the rightful owner within ninety (90) days from the date of the
final disposition of the court proceedings in connection with the property
seized or otherwise taken possession of, or in the case where there are no
court proceedings, then ninety (90) days after property so seized or possession
surrendered by such owner, the police chief shall cause the property to be sold
for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction and the proceeds to be
deposited with the city treasurer.
   (A)   The police chief shall cause to be published as needed on public
sources, i.e., website, local newspaper, public postings, a description of all
property to be sold including the time and place of sale or disposal, together
with the date of seizure or the taking possession, and shall give notice that
if such property is not claimed by the rightful owner or owners within ninety
(90) days from the date of such publication, the property will be sold at
auction or disposed of by the police department.
   (B)   In addition to the publication of notice provided for in this section,
the police chief shall make a record of the date when such publication and the
posting of notices were made. If, within ninety (90) days from the date of
publication and posting, no claim for the property described in the notices
have been made by the rightful owner, the police chief shall proceed to sell
such property at public auction, convert to city use, donate to charitable
organization, or dispose of, at the discretion of the police department.
   (C)   Person(s) turning in found property has the right to claim said
property if owner is not located and/or made claim within ninety (90) days of
the property being turned in. Any claim to such property by person other than
those who delivered the property to the police department shall be supported by
affidavit and other suitable evidence as may be required by the police chief to
establish the fact that the claimant is indeed the rightful owner. Neither the
police chief nor any other police officer shall be liable in any action in law
or equity for delivering the property to a person who has established his claim
to the property to the satisfaction of the police chief or his designee. (Ord.
741, 9-4-2012)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
CITY CODE OFFICER
SECTION:
6-1-1: City Code Officer
6-1-2: Duties Of City Code Officer
6-1-3: Police Assistance
6-1-1: CITY CODE OFFICER:
The mayor, in conjunction with the chief of police, and consent of the city
council, shall annually appoint a candidate to be the city code officer, who
shall hold his/her office during the municipal year in which he/she is
appointed. (Ord. 886, 5-6-2024)
6-1-2: DUTIES OF CITY CODE OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the city code officer to carry out all orders of the
mayor, police chief, and city council relating to the city code of the city.
The city code officer shall communicate electronically, once a month, a status
report concerning ongoing inquiries, to the mayor and city council. The city
code officer shall inspect the entire city at least once a year and report to
the city council as to the condition thereof. (Ord. 886, 5-6-2024)
6-1-3: POLICE ASSISTANCE:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to assist the city code officer in
the performance of the duties required of him/her, and to serve all necessary
notices upon persons found violating any city provisions. (Ord. 886, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Nuisances Enumerated
6-2-2: Abatement
6-2-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It shall be a public nuisance to be guilty of committing any of the following
acts:
   (A)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal, or any offal, filth,
nauseous or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or remain in any place
within the limits of the city.
   (B)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common
sewer, street, alley or public highway within the limits of the city.
   (C)   To keep or suffer to be kept in, about or upon any lot, house or
premises, or any appurtenances thereto, within the limits of the city, any
filthy material or anything offensive to the neighborhood, or of any unhealthy
character or which would be likely to contribute to disease, contagion or
infection of any kind.
   (D)   To erect, continue or use within the limits of the city any building
or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which
by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise is offensive
or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public.
   (E)   To place, erect or cause to be placed or erected on any public ground,
or any public street, lane, avenue or alley in the city any building or other
obstruction; provided, however, that materials for the construction of
buildings or fences, or for otherwise improving adjacent lots may be placed in
or upon any such street, lane, avenue, alley or public place, and remain
thereon a reasonable time.
   (F)   To obstruct or encroach upon any public highway, street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place within the limits of the city.
   (G)   For any person, other than transient shippers of livestock who use
stockyard pens located on the right of way of railroads in the city, who shall
own, keep or use any pigsty, yard, place or premises within the city or within
one-quarter (1/4) mile of the city limits, in or upon which swine shall be
confined or kept, to refuse to abate the same upon receiving ten (10) days'
notice from the health officer. (Ord. 228, 7-3-1978)
6-2-2: ABATEMENT:
   (A)   In case of existence of any of the nuisances enumerated in subsections
6-2-1(A) through (F) of this chapter, any citizen may complain thereof to the
mayor who shall examine the matter or thing complained of, or if, in his
opinion the same amounts to a nuisance and it is necessary that the same should
be abated or removed without delay, the mayor shall notify the person who has
caused, suffered, kept, erected, continued, placed, used, had or maintained
such nuisance, by certified or registered mail, directing that the person abate
the nuisance within ten (10) days of the date of the letter.
   (B)   In the event the person who has caused, suffered, kept, erected,
continued, placed, used, had or maintained such nuisance fails to take any
action to abate such nuisance, the mayor shall direct the city attorney to
cause a suit to be commenced against the person who has caused, suffered, kept,
erected, continued, placed, used, had or maintained such nuisance, and if such
person shall be found guilty, the proper city officer before whom the suit is
brought shall tax the cost of abating the said nuisance as costs in said cause,
said costs to be collected as in other cases. (Ord. 228, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Premises To Be Kept Clean
6-3-3: Authority For Occupants Or Lessees To Dispose Of Waste Produced On
Premises
6-3-4: Placement Of Receptacles For Collection
6-3-5: Containers To Be Provided
6-3-6: Number Of Receptacles Required
6-3-7: Duty To Clean Up Scattered Garbage, Rubbish
6-3-8: Duty To Prevent Scattering Of Material By Wind
6-3-9: Covering Of Garbage Containers
6-3-10: Regulation Of Collectors
6-3-11: Collection By Authorized Collector
6-3-12: Littering Prohibited
6-3-13: Sweeping From Commercial Establishments Or Sidewalks Into Gutter
Prohibited
6-3-14: Deposit Of Grass And Rubbish Prohibited In Public Streets
6-3-15: Deposits In Rivers, Streams Or Creeks Prohibited
6-3-16: Collection Of Offal
6-3-17: Notice To Provide Container
6-3-18: Penalty For Article; Separate Offense
6-3-19: Permissible Burning 1  (Rep. by Ord. 710, 4-4-2011)
6-3-20: Animal Carrying Vehicles
6-3-21: Possession Of Containers Near River Prohibited
6-3-22: Garbage Collection Fee
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-1-29 of this Code.
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ASHES: The residue from the combustion of fuel used for heating.
GARBAGE: All organic household kitchen wastes, such as rejected or unused food
and food residues, and paper necessarily used for wrapping.
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH: The inorganic, incombustible, household waste such as metal
cans, metalware, plastic, rubber and kindred product containers, bottles,
broken glass, crockery, stoneware and similar refuse resulting from the regular
operation of a household, not classed as garbage or miscellaneous rubbish.
MANURE: The excrement of all domestic animals and fowl, and stable bedding.
MISCELLANEOUS RUBBISH: The combustible rubbish such as papers, boxes, brush and
leaves, and any other rubbish or waste resulting from the operation of a
domestic or business establishment, such as grass cuttings, tree trimmings,
debris from building construction, repair or remodeling, discarded equipment
and similar waste. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-2: PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the City shall remove from
such premises or otherwise dispose of all ashes, metal cans, metalware, broken
glass, garbage, crockery, stoneware, manure and all refuse and rubbish, and
shall keep such premises free and clear of any accumulation of such rubbish. In
the event that compliance is not met within seventy two (72) hours of an issued
citation, each day thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. A violation
of this section shall be punished by a minimum fine of $250.00 and a maximum
fine of $750.00. Each day that a violation of this section shall occur shall be
treated as a separate offense. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980; amd. Ord. 848, 8-19-2019;
Ord. 855, 10-5-2020)
6-3-3: AUTHORITY FOR OCCUPANTS OR LESSEES TO DISPOSE OF WASTE PRODUCED ON
PREMISES:
Any owner or occupant or lessee of any premises in the City may dispose of any
garbage, ashes or household rubbish which may be produced on his own premises
when such disposal is accomplished in a manner which does not create a nuisance
or cause annoyance or discomfort to the inhabitants of the City. (Ord. 256, 6-
2-1980)
6-3-4: PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES FOR COLLECTION:
   (A)   Receptacles for garbage, ashes and household rubbish shall be placed
outside the residence or other building in an accessible place, at ground level
and near the street or alley line for collection. Garbage receptacles shall be
placed near the street on the evening before collection and shall be removed
from the street on the evening of collection.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 598, 1-16-2006)
6-3-5: CONTAINERS TO BE PROVIDED:
The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the City shall provide and
maintain, clean and in good repair, adequate approved garbage receptacles. No
such receptacle, container or drum shall be larger than forty (40) gallons'
capacity. (Ord. 514, 3-4-2002)
6-3-6: NUMBER OF RECEPTACLES REQUIRED:
Every owner or his agent, or the occupant of any house, building or apartment
in the City wherein persons reside, board or lodge shall provide for each such
house, building or apartment and at all times maintain containers for papers,
rubbish and other waste, in a number sufficient to store and handle for
disposal the accumulations from each such house, building or apartment
according to the specifications of this chapter. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-7: DUTY TO CLEAN UP SCATTERED GARBAGE, RUBBISH:
The scavenger or garbage collector is responsible for cleaning up only that
garbage and rubbish which is scattered in the process of conveying the material
to his truck. It is the sole responsibility of the customer to clean up any
garbage which is strewn about by wind, the ravages of animals such as dogs, or
by similar means. In the event that compliance is not met within seventy two
(72) hours of an issued citation, each day thereafter shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980; amd. Ord. 848, 8-19-2019)
6-3-8: DUTY TO PREVENT SCATTERING OF MATERIAL BY WIND:
Windblown material must be confined to a closed container and any failure to do
so shall be regarded as a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-9: COVERING OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS:
The use of open containers for food cans, cartons or any other material which
will draw flies or other insects is strictly unlawful. Such containers must be
tightly covered in metal, durable plastic cans, or other similar material
having the same general properties. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-10: REGULATION OF COLLECTORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of collecting and
disposing of garbage, ashes and household rubbish for hire, and of transporting
any or all of them over the streets of the City without a permit. Such business
shall not be carried on by any person except under the conditions prescribed by
this chapter. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-11: COLLECTION BY AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR:
The Department of Public Works of the City or any person authorized in its
behalf may collect and dispose of garbage, ashes and rubbish in accordance with
such rules and regulations as to service and rates of charge as may be approved
by the City Council from time to time. No owner, occupant or lessee of any
premises in the City shall be entitled to such services who has not fully
complied with all of the provisions of this chapter and with the rules and
regulations of the Department of Public Works as approved by the Council. (Ord.
256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-12: LITTERING PROHIBITED 1 :
   (A)   No person shall litter any streets, or any public or private property
with handbills, paper or debris. No person shall so distribute any advertising
matter or handbills that they may be blown about or result in the littering of
streets, or any public or private property. No person shall place any
advertising matter or handbills on or in any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall throw, place or leave or suffer to be thrown, placed
or left, any garbage, ashes, household rubbish, miscellaneous rubbish, manure
or any refuse in or upon any premises, public or private, including streets,
alleys, parkways, or other public places or upon any vacant or unimproved lots
or parcels of land in the City. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title for littering provisions.
6-3-13: SWEEPING FROM COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS OR SIDEWALKS INTO GUTTER
PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep waste from any commercial
establishment or the adjacent sidewalk into the gutter. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-14: DEPOSIT OF GRASS AND RUBBISH PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or
deposited any grass, leaves, branches, or any other things in a roadway or
gutter of any public street in the city. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
No person shall mow, dump, discharge or otherwise dispose of any lawn clippings
or other grass material onto a street, sidewalk or public walkway in the city.
The owner, occupant, or lessee as the case may be, of any premises in the city,
shall be responsible for maintaining the street immediately adjacent to or
contiguous with the property by said person occupied, between the side property
lines of said premises extended to the centerlines of said street and shall on
a regular basis clean up and dispose of all refuse and garbage found within
said street as above described. (Ord. 307, 1984)
6-3-15: DEPOSITS IN RIVERS, STREAMS OR CREEKS PROHIBITED 1 :
No person shall throw, discharge or deposit or cause to be thrown, or deposited
or discharged by any other person, any garbage, offal or refuse, or ashes, in
the waters of any river, stream or creek of any tributary of the Kankakee River
or on or along the banks of any of them. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  6-4-4(G) of this title for littering provisions.
6-3-16: COLLECTION OF OFFAL:
   (A)   The term "offal" is defined to be butcher offal, hotel and restaurant
bones, grease, glue, garbage, animal and vegetable refuse and wastes, butcher
shop wastes and bones, meat market scraps and other kindred refuse and wastes.
   (B)   All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of offal shall
be provided with watertight bodies of boxes and the sides thereof shall be
sufficiently high above the load of contents so that no part of the contents
may leak, fall or spill therefrom, and every such vehicle shall have a
waterproof and watertight cover which shall always be spread tightly over the
top of such vehicle except during the time of loading.
   (C)   In all cases where such offal is transported in packages, such
packages whether it be a box, barrel or can, shall be watertight and closely
covered with a watertight cover so as to prevent leaking, spilling or falling
of the contents thereof.
   (D)   All such vehicles and all implements and the boxes used in connection
therewith must be kept in an inoffensive and sanitary condition and thoroughly
washed and cleansed and disinfected daily.
   (E)   No vehicle containing such offal material shall be permitted to remain
or be stored in any public or private barn, building or premises, thoroughfare,
alley or street, or in any other place in the city, overnight, and the storing
of any such material in vehicles or boxes upon any premises within the city
shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 256, 6-2-
1980)
6-3-17: NOTICE TO PROVIDE CONTAINER:
The collector of garbage is authorized to serve a notice in writing upon the
owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge or control of any
premises upon which, or in the alley, or street adjacent to which premises,
garbage is accumulated or discharged, without suitable garbage can as required
by this chapter, requiring them or either of them to provide such garbage can
and to deposit all of such garbage in such can. The superintendent of the
department of public works is authorized to issue a ticket or citation for
failure to comply with such notice. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-18: PENALTY FOR ARTICLE; SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 256, 6-2-1980)
6-3-19: PERMISSIBLE BURNING 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 710, 4-4-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-1-29 of this code.
6-3-20: ANIMAL CARRYING VEHICLES:
No person driving a motor vehicle meant to carry the carcasses of animals or
which motor vehicle is carrying hogs, pigs or other farm animals shall park or
stop said truck at any place within the city that has not been previously
designated by the city council by ordinance as a proper stopping or parking
place for such animal carrying motor vehicle. (Ord. 288, 11-15-1982)
6-3-21: POSSESSION OF CONTAINERS NEAR RIVER PROHIBITED:
It is hereby illegal to possess containers made of glass or similar materials
on the Kankakee River or within fifty feet (50') of the Kankakee River on
public property within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 306, 8-6-1984)
6-3-22: GARBAGE COLLECTION FEE:
   (A)   For the collection of garbage, the owners of each and every lot,
parcel of real estate, or building that is connected with the city's sewer
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, water or other liquids, either
directly or indirectly, into the sewer of the city of Momence, shall pay a
fixed charge per month for garbage collection as follows:
Commencing Fee
Commencing                   Fee
June 1, 2016 to May 31, 2017 $15.97
June 1, 2017 to May 31, 2018 16.45
June 1, 2018 to May 31, 2019 16.94
June 1, 2019 to May 31, 2020 17.45
June 1, 2020 to May 31, 2021 17.97
June 1, 2021 to May 31, 2022 18.51
June 1, 2022 to May 31, 2023 19.07
June 1, 2023 to May 31, 2024 19.64
June 1, 2024 to May 31, 2025 20.23
June 1, 2025 to May 31, 2026 20.84
 
(Ord. 812, 3-7-2016)
   (B)   In addition to the above fees and due to the fluctuation of the cost
of fuel, the city of Momence will also be entitled to implement and collect
from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate, or building that
is connected with the city's sewer system or otherwise discharges sanitary
sewage, water, or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sewer
of the city of Momence, a fuel adjustment to their billing. The adjustment will
be tied to the DOE.gov webpage and it will adjust the rates (both up and down)
as the cost of fuel fluctuates. The basis of the adjustment will be three
fourths percent (3/4%) adjustment to every ten cent ($0.10) charge in the cost
of fuel. This adjustment will be made on January 1 and July 1 of every year.
   (C)   The garbage collection charge shall not apply to any business owner,
apartment building owner, or any individual who has contracted for garbage
collection. (Ord. 706, 2-22-2011)
CHAPTER 4
LITTER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Short Title
6-4-2: Conflict With Other Provisions
6-4-3: Definitions
6-4-4: Prohibited Acts; Use Of Receptacles Required
6-4-5: Notice To Remove Litter
6-4-6: Removal By City
6-4-7: Charge Of Removal To Owner
6-4-8: Failure To Pay, Lien On Premises
6-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ANTILITTER ORDINANCE of the city. (Ord. 232,
7-3-1978)
6-4-2: CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS:
This chapter is not meant to conflict with the provisions of chapter 3 of this
title regulating the disposal of garbage and other refuse heretofore passed by
the city council. (Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
6-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in
the plural number include the singular; and the word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Momence, Illinois.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK: A park, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the
city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or
used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes)
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
6-4-4: PROHIBITED ACTS; USE OF RECEPTACLES REQUIRED:
   (A)   Litter In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in
public receptacles, in private receptacles for collection or in official city
dumps.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
   (B)   Sweeping Litter Into Gutters: No person shall sweep into or deposit in
any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of
litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
   (C)   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter: No person owning or
occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalks
in front of their business premises free of litter.
   (D)   Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles: No person while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other
public place within the city or upon private property. (Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
   (E)   Truck Loads Causing Litter 1 : (Rep. by Ord. 625, 2-20-2007)
   (F)   Litter In Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park
within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere as provided herein.
   (G)   Litter In Bodies Of Water: No person shall throw or deposit litter in
any fountain, pond, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere
within the city.
   (H)   Litter On Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such
person or not, except the owner or person in control of private property may
maintain private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will
be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
   (I)   Owner To Maintain Premises Free Of Litter: The owner or person in
control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free
of litter provided, however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in private receptacles for collection.
   (J)   Litter On Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any
open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or
not. (Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-1-8 of this code.
6-4-5: NOTICE TO REMOVE LITTER:
The mayor or chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the
owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or the agent of
such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which
is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by
registered mail, addressed to said owner at the address listed on the city
records or by affixing same in a conspicuous position on said premises. (Ord.
232, 7-3-1978)
6-4-6: REMOVAL BY CITY:
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly
dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten
(10) days after receipt of written notice provided for in section
6-4-5 of this chapter, or within ten (10) days after the posting of the
premises as herein provided, the mayor or chief of police is hereby authorized
and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal
by the city. (Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
6-4-7: CHARGE OF REMOVAL TO OWNER:
When the city has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for
its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six
percent (6%) per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid
by said owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on
the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge
shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
(Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
6-4-8: FAILURE TO PAY, LIEN ON PREMISES:
Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within sixty (60)
days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in sections
6-4-5 and
6-4-6 of this chapter, then, and in that case, the chief of police shall cause
to be recorded in the office of the city clerk a sworn statement showing the
cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and
shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has
been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by
law for the collection of taxes and further shall be subject to a delinquent
penalty of six percent (6%) in the event the same is not paid in full on or
before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent.
Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and
that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full
notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus
interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
(Ord. 232, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 5
SEPTIC TANK, CESSPOOL CLEANING
SECTION:
6-5-1: License Required
6-5-2: Application
6-5-3: Vehicles And Regulations
6-5-4: Bond
6-5-5: Insurance Required
6-5-6: Fees
6-5-7: Term Of License
6-5-8: Revocation
6-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of cleaning waste
matter from any cesspool, private sewerage disposal plant, septic tank or
outhouse unless and until a license is secured from the city and the provisions
of this chapter are fully complied with. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-2: APPLICATION:
Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk and shall contain
the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles used in such
occupation or business, the name or names of persons who shall operate said
vehicle or vehicles, the capacity and make of such vehicles and equipment
thereon; all such applications for such license shall be referred by the city
clerk to the mayor and city council, and no such license shall be issued except
by the order of the mayor and city council. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-3: VEHICLES AND REGULATIONS:
Any vehicle used by such licensee in said business shall be watertight and
equipped with covers for such portions thereof as are used for the
transportation of said waste matter. No licensee shall use or permit the use of
such motor vehicle for the purpose of removing waste matter, as herein set
forth within the city, between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and shall not park or allow such vehicle to stand in the
city during said time or for more than one hour during the hours the use of
such vehicle is permitted. Provided, further, that no owner or operator of such
vehicle, whether licensed or not, shall allow any such vehicle to remain within
the corporate limits of the city between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and shall park or store such vehicle in excess of
one-half (1/2) mile from the corporate limits of the city during such times.
The owner or operator of any such vehicle used for the purposes herein set
forth shall in no event dispose of any waste or other debris removed from any
cesspool, private sewerage disposal plant, septic tank or outhouse within the
city limits or within one mile of the city limits, excepting with the
permission of the mayor and city council. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-4: BOND:
No license under this chapter shall be issued unless the applicant therefor
shall first file a performance bond with sureties to be approved by the mayor,
in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with the city as beneficiary,
conditioned upon the licensee continuing to properly operate said business for
the period covered by said license. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter unless the
applicant for such license has first submitted proof of insurance in the form
of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurer duly authorized to issue
such policies in the state. Such certificate shall show that the applicant for
a license has public liability insurance covering his operation within the
city, shall show the date of expiration of such insurance and shall certify
that the same shall not be cancelled without at least ten (10) days' notice to
the city clerk. Upon the cancellation or expiration without the renewal of such
insurance, the license or permit issued hereunder to the insured shall be void.
Such insurance shall be in the amount of not less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) per person insured, not less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) for all personal injuries in any one accident, and not less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage in any one accident.
(Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-6: FEES:
The fee for such license or permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year, per
truck. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license granted hereunder shall be for the term of one year, from July 1
until the following June 30. Any applicant for license must pay the annual fee
regardless of the time when the license is issued and no refunds will be made
and no fees will be prorated. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
6-5-8: REVOCATION:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
mayor for any violation of any regulation hereof, and such revocation shall be
in addition to any fine imposed. (Ord., 6-19-1961)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-6-1: General Provisions
6-6-1-1: Enactment
6-6-1-2: Purpose And Policy
6-6-1-3: Administration
6-6-1-4: Jurisdiction
6-6-1-5: Abbreviations
6-6-1-6: Definitions
6-6-2: Sewer Extension Requirements
6-6-2-1: Applicability
6-6-2-2: Sewer Extension Requirements
6-6-3: Sewer Connection Procedures
6-6-3-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
6-6-3-2: Private Sewage Disposal
6-6-3-3: Building Sewer And Connections
6-6-3-4: Fees
6-6-3-5: Use Of Public Sewers
6-6-3-6: Monitoring Facilities
6-6-3-7: Additional Structures Required For The Use Of The Public Sewers
6-6-3-8: Food Service Establishments
6-6-3-9: Sewer Line Maintenance/Replacement
6-6-3-10: Automobile Service, Repair And Fuel Dispensing Properties
6-6-3-11: Amalgam Management At Dental Offices
6-6-4: Information Required Of Non-Residential Users
6-6-4-1: Initial Survey (Questionnaire)
6-6-4-2: Affirmation To Initial Survey
6-6-4-3: Reports Of Changed Conditions
6-6-4-4: Additional Survey Information
6-6-5: General Discharge Requirements
6-6-5-1: Applicability
6-6-5-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
6-6-5-3: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
6-6-5-4: State Limits
6-6-5-5: Local Limits
6-6-5-6: Right Of Revision
6-6-5-7: Monitoring Facilities
6-6-5-8: Monitoring Requirements
6-6-5-9: Analytical Requirements
6-6-5-10: Protection Of City Sampling And Flow Metering Equipment From Damage
6-6-6: General Discharge Compliance
6-6-6-1: Applicability
6-6-6-2: Pretreatment Facilities
6-6-6-3: Additional Pretreatment Measures
6-6-6-4: Best Management Practices (BMP) Plan
6-6-6-5: Accidental Discharge And Slug Control Plan
6-6-6-6: Closure Plan
6-6-7: Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements And Application
6-6-7-1: Wastewater Information And Analysis
6-6-7-2: Wastewater Discharge Permit Authority And Requirements
6-6-7-3: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing
Connections
6-6-7-4: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New
Connections
6-6-7-5: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
Contents
6-6-7-6: Individual And General Application Signatories And Certification
6-6-7-7: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
6-6-7-8: Trucked Discharges
6-6-7-9: Intermittent Discharges And Clean-Ups
6-6-8: Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
6-6-8-1: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
6-6-8-2: Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
6-6-8-3: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
6-6-8-4: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
6-6-8-5: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
6-6-8-6: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
6-6-8-7: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Re-Issuance
6-6-8-8: Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
6-6-9: Reporting Requirements
6-6-9-1: Pretreatment Requirements For Non-Residential Users
6-6-9-2: Additional Pretreatment Requirements For Categorical Industrial Users
6-6-9-3: Periodic Compliance Reports/Self-Monitoring Reports
6-6-9-4: Reports From Non-Permitted Users
6-6-9-5: Authorized Representative Change Notification
6-6-9-6: Reports Of Changed Conditions
6-6-9-7: Reports Of Potential Problems
6-6-9-8: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
6-6-9-9: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
6-6-9-10: Report Submittal Due Dates
6-6-10: Compliance Monitoring
6-6-10-1: Right Of Entry: Inspection And Sampling
6-6-10-2: Record Keeping
6-6-10-3: Search Warrants
6-6-11: Confidential Information
6-6-12: Publication Of Users In Significant Non-Compliance
6-6-13: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
6-6-13-1: Notification Of Violation
6-6-13-2: Compliance Agreements
6-6-13-3: Show Cause Order
6-6-13-4: Compliance Orders
6-6-13-5: Cease And Desist Orders
6-6-13-6: Emergency Suspensions
6-6-13-7: Termination Of Discharge
6-6-14: Penalties And Judicial Enforcement Remedies
6-6-14-1: Recovery Of Costs Incurred
6-6-14-2: Administrative Fines
6-6-14-3: Injunctive Relief
6-6-14-4: Civil Penalties
6-6-14-5: Remedies Nonexclusive
6-6-15: Supplemental Enforcement Action
6-6-15-1: Failure To Report Or Notify
6-6-15-2: Performance Bonds
6-6-15-3: Liability Insurance
6-6-15-4: Payment For Outstanding Fees And Penalties
6-6-15-5: Water Supply Severance
6-6-15-6: Public Nuisances
6-6-15-7: Contractor Listing
6-6-16: Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
6-6-16-1: Upset
6-6-16-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
6-6-16-3: Bypass
6-6-17: Miscellaneous Fees
6-6-17-1: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
6-6-17-2: Additional Remedies
6-6-18: User And Surcharge Industrial Waste Cost Recovery
6-6-18-1: User And Surcharge Rates
6-6-18-2: Bills Generally
6-6-18-3: Delinquent Bills
6-6-18-4: Collection Agencies
6-6-18-5: Lien - Notice Of Delinquency
6-6-18-6: Sale - Foreclosure
6-6-18-7: Revenues
6-6-18-8: Accounts
6-6-18-9: Notice Of Rates
6-6-18-10: Access To Records
6-6-18-11: Responsibilities Of The City Clerk And City Treasurer
6-6-19: Miscellaneous Provisions
6-6-19-1: Severability
6-6-19-2: Conflict
6-6-19-3: Offenses Under Previous Ordinances
6-6-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
6-6-1-1: ENACTMENT:
Pursuant to the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and regulations
promulgated thereunder, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois Municipal Code, this chapter, hereby
known as Sewer Use and Pretreatment Ordinance, is enacted by the City Council
of the City of Momence. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-1-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Momence, hereafter referred to
interchangeably as the City, without regard to the stage of the POTW or
discharge process at which the wastewater of the user enters the POTW. This
chapter provides for the use of public and private sewers and drains, private
sewage disposal, and authorizes the installation and continuing of connections
into the sewage works of the City upon certain conditions, including permission
thereof; providing for the installation and maintenance of such connections and
enforcements thereto; regulating the use of municipal and private sewers and
drains; individual wastewater disposal, the installation, connection and
disconnection of building sewers, the discharge of water and waste in the
public sewer system providing for penalties for violation therefore; and
providing for penalties for violation thereof; and providing for termination of
permits issued by the City pursuant to the provisions hereof.
This chapter enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and
general pretreatment regulations of 40 CFR Part 403. Additional objectives of
this chapter are:
   (A)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   (B)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   (C)   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by air, wastewater
and bio-solids in the course of their employment and the general public;
   (D)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and bio-solids
from the POTW;
   (E)   To enable the City to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, bio-solids use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject;
   (F)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW;
   (G)   To provide uniform requirements for Food Service Establishments (FSE)
for the control of grease discharge to the sanitary sewer system; and
   (H)   To regulate private wastewater disposal systems.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW and provides for the
enforcement of general requirements for users. The ordinance authorizes the
issuance of wastewater connection and discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs
established herein. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater
discharge permits that do not allow the discharge of defined process waste
streams but continue to allow the discharge of domestic or sanitary wastewater.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-1-3: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment Coordinator and/or duly
authorized agent(s) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Pretreatment
Coordinator and/or duly authorized agent(s) may be delegated by the City or
Pretreatment Coordinator to other City personnel or other duly authorized agent
(s) of the City.
It shall be the duty of employees of the Police, Building, Engineering, Fire,
Street, and Water departments to give vigilant aid to the Department of Public
Works and the Sewer Department in the enforcement of this chapter and to this
end they shall report all violations thereof, which come to their knowledge, to
the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-1-4: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall apply to the City and to persons outside the City who are,
by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City POTW. Contract and
agreement provisions are provided in Section
6-6-8-8. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-1-5: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP    Best Management Practices
BMR    Baseline Monitoring Report
CE     City Engineer
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
CIU    Categorical Industrial User
COD    Chemical Oxygen Demand
DPW    Director of Public Works
FOG    Fats, Oils and Grease, interchangeable with Oil and Grease
FSE    Food Service Establishment
GI     Grease Interceptor
gpd    Gallons per day
IAC    Illinois Administrative Code
IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
IU     Industrial User
mg/l   Milligrams per liter
NCPS   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
NFSE   Non Food Service Establishment
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU  Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
NSRU   Non-Significant Regulated User
POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
PSES   Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources
PSNS   Pretreatment Standards for New Sources
ppm    Part per million
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SDWA   Safe Drinking Water Act
SIU    Significant Industrial User
SNC    Significant Non-Compliance
SSO    Sewer System Overflows
SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act
TSS    Total Suspended Solids
TTO    Total Toxic Organics
U.S.C. United States Code
USEPA  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT
or CLEAN WATER  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended,
ACT or FEDERAL  33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ACT:
AGENCY:         The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
AMALGAM PROCESS Any wastewater generated and discharged by a dental discharger through the practice of
WASTEWATER:     dentistry that may contain dental amalgam.
AMALGAM         A collection device designed to capture and remove dental amalgam from the amalgam
SEPARATOR:      process wastewater of a dental facility.
APPROVAL        The Regional Administrator of Region V of USEPA, until such time that the State of
AUTHORITY:      Illinois has a USEPA approved pretreatment program.
                (A)   If the user is a corporation:
                   1.   By a responsible corporate officer - the president, secretary, treasurer, or a
                vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
                other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
                corporation; or
                   2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
                provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
                operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of
                making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
                comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental
                laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions
                taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual Wastewater permit (or
AUTHORIZED      general permit) requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
REPRESENTATIVE  or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
OF THE USER:    (B)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
                proprietor, respectively.
                (C)   If the user is a limited liability company (LLC): any managing member of the
                company.
                (D)   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or
                highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
                the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
                (E)   The individuals described in paragraphs (A) through (D), above, may designate a
                Duly Authorized Representative, if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
                specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
                facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
                environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
                the City of Momence.
                Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
                management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section
BEST MANAGEMENT 6-6-5-2 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)] and/or prevent or reduce the pollution conveyed to
PRACTICE (BMP): the POTW. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
                control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, bio-solids or waste disposal, or drainage
                from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL     The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
OXYGEN DEMAND   standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136 for five (5) days at 20 degrees
(BOD) or        centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/1).
(BOD5):
BIO-SOLIDS:     The anaerobically digested and stabilized organic solids removed from the POTW and
                disposed of on agricultural land or at a landfill.
                That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
                waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
BUILDING DRAIN: building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning three feet outside the
                inner face of the building wall. Discharge of stormwater runoff to the building drain
                is prohibited.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS:         The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment or
                pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL     An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical
INDUSTRIAL USER standard. A CIU is considered to be a Significant Industrial User (SIU).
(CIU):
CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT    Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in accordance
STANDARD or     with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific
CATEGORICAL     category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
STANDARD:
CHEMICAL OXYGEN The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of all compounds, both
DEMAND (COD):   organic and inorganic in water, under standard laboratory procedures as described in 40
                CFR 136 usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/l).
CITY:           The City of Momence and any reference to "within the City” shall mean all territory
                within the perimeter of the City limits or wastewater service area.
                means a pipe or conduit that is designed and constructed to carry wastewater,
COMBINED SEWER: stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage. No new combined sewers are allowed
                to be constructed.
COMBINED WASTE  The formula set forth in 40 CFR Section 403.6(e).
STREAM FORMULA:
COMPOSITE       A sample of wastewater composed of two or more discrete samples collected, based on a
SAMPLE:         flow-proportional or time-proportional method.
CONTROL         USEPA until the City gets a federally approved pretreatment program.
AUTHORITY:
COOLING WATER:  The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration,
                to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM:  The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a
                calendar day.
                The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily
                maximum are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
DAILY MAXIMUM:  arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all
                measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum are expressed in units of mass, the
                daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
DENTAL AMALGAM: An alloy of elemental mercury and other metal(s) that is used in the practice of
                dentistry.
                A facility where the practice of dentistry is performed, including, but not limited to,
DENTAL          institutions, permanent or temporary offices, clinics, home offices, and facilities
DISCHARGER:     owned and operated by Federal, state or local governments, that discharges wastewater
                to a POTW.
DIRECTOR OF     The Director of Public Works of the City of Momence, or his authorized agent.
PUBLIC WORKS:
                Any person, firm, establishment or institution that discharges wastewater, excluding
DISCHARGER:     inflow and infiltration, into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under
                Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act and 35 Ill Adm. Code (IAC) 307.
DISCHARGE       An individual or general permit issued to a user, which specifies the requirements for
PERMIT:         discharge of wastewater or the requirements for zero discharge of wastewater as
                appropriate.
DULY AUTHORIZED The Mayor and City Council of Momence and designated employees and agents of the City.
AGENT:
                A unit designed for occupancy by one family. It may be a house designed for the
DWELLING:       exclusive use of one family or it may be a portion of a building designed and intended
                to be used by one family.
EASEMENT:       An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT        Those criteria defined in any applicable "NPDES” Permit.
CRITERIA:
ENVIRONMENTAL   means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
PROTECTION      Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly
AGENCY:         authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING DENTAL
DISCHARGER      A dental discharger that is not a new source.
SOURCE:
EXISTING        Any source of discharge that is not a "New Source.
SOURCE:
FATS, OIL, AND  Is used interchangeably with "Oils and Grease".
GREASE (FOG):
FECAL COLIFORM  Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals whose
BACTERIA:       presence in Sanitary Sewage is an indicator of pollution.
                The United States government participation in the financing of the construction of the
FEDERAL GRANT:  POTW as provided by Title II-Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and
                implementing regulations.
                Any user engaged in the activities of manufacturing, preparing, serving, or otherwise
                making available for consumption foodstuffs that use one or more of the following
                preparation activities: blending, cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all
FOOD SERVICE    methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
ESTABLISHMENT   blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and infrared heating, searing, barbecuing,
(FSE):          and any other food preparation or servicing activity that produces a consumable food
                product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused. A limited food
                preparation establishment is not considered to be a FSE when only engaged in reheating,
                hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no
                wastewater discharge containing significant amounts of FOG.
FLOATABLE OIL:  Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
                wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
FLOW:           Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
GARBAGE:        Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
                and from the commercial handling, storage, and sale of produce or food.
GRAB SAMPLE:    A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the
                Flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
                A fee charged to an owner/operator of a Food Service Establishment when there are
                physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and
GREASE          customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the FSE under consideration,
MITIGATION FEE: impossible or impracticable. The Grease Mitigation Fee is intended to cover the costs
                of the increased maintenance of the sewer system for inspection and cleaning of FOG and
                other viscous or solidifying agents that a properly employed grease control device
                would otherwise prevent from entering the sewer system.
HAULED WASTE:   Sanitary or process wastewater transported as a commercial venture. Hauled waste is
                prohibited to be discharged at the POTW.
HOT SPOTS:      Areas in the sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be
                cleaned and maintained frequently to avoid blockages of the sewer system.
INDIRECT        The introduction of pollutants into any part of the POTW from any non-domestic source
DISCHARGE or    under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
DISCHARGE:
INDUSTRIAL USER A source of indirect discharge from a non-residential source.
(IU) or USER:
INDUSTRIAL      A combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged, permitted to flow or
WASTE:          escape from any non-residential source, including the wastewater from pretreatment
                facilities and polluted cooling water.
                The person or persons duly authorized by the City through its City Council, to inspect
INSPECTOR:      and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
                sanitary sewer.
INSTANTANEOUS   The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time,
LIMIT:          determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected,
                independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
                A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges by other
                sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its
                bio-solids processes, use or disposal and therefore, is a cause of a violation of any
                requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
                duration of a violation) or of the prevention of wastewater or bio-solids use or
INTERFERENCE or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and
INTERFERE:      regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local
                regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
                (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
                Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State bio-solids
                management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA) the Clean Air Act, the
                Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
                A dental discharger that does not place dental amalgam, and does not remove dental
LIMITED DENTAL  amalgam except in limited emergency or unplanned, unanticipated circumstances. A New
DISCHARGER      Limited Dental Discharge Source means a limited dental discharger whose first discharge
SOURCE:         to a POTW occurs after July 14, 2017. An Existing Limited Dental Discharge Source means
                a limited dental discharger that is not a new source.
                Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City upon industrial or
LOCAL LIMIT:    commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions
                listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
                Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
MEDICAL WASTES: wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
                contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER  A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent representing 0.001 g of
LITER:          the constituent in one thousand (1,000) ml of water.
MOBILE UNIT:    A specialized mobile self-contained van, trailer, or equipment used in providing
                dentistry services at multiple locations.
MONTHLY         The sum of all "daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the
AVERAGE:        number of "daily discharges” measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE The highest allowable average of "daily discharges” for a calendar month, calculated as
LIMIT:          a sum of all the "daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the
                number of "daily discharges” measured during that month.
NATIONAL
CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT
STANDARD,       Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance
CATEGORICAL     with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific
PRETREATMENT    category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
STANDARD OR
CATEGORICAL
STANDARD:
NATIONAL
POLLUTANT       The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
DISCHARGE       monitoring and enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States, and
ELIMINATION     imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under sections 402 of the CWA.
SYSTEM OR
NPDES:
NATIONAL
POLLUTANT
DISCHARGE       A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the CWA. The City operates its POTW under
ELIMINATION     NPDES Permit No. IL0022179.
SYSTEM PERMIT
(NPDES PERMIT):
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
                water.
NEW DENTAL
DISCHARGER      A dental discharger whose first discharge to a POTW occurs after July 14, 2017.
SOURCE:
                (A)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may
                be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
                publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which
                will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
                accordance with that section, provided that one of the following is true:
                   1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site on
                which no other source is located;
                   2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process
                or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source;
                or
                   3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure,
                facility, or installations are substantially independent of an existing source at the
                same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as
                the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
                extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
                existing source, should be considered.
                (B)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
                modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
NEW SOURCE:     building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of Section (A)2. or
                3. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
                equipment.
                (C)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the
                owner or operator has done one of the following:
                   1.   Begun, or caused one of the following to begin as part of a continuous onsite
                construction program:
                      (a)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
                      (b)   Significant site preparation work including, clearing, excavation, or
                removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
                placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
                   2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
                equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
                Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
                substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
                constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
                (D)   New Sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall "start-up”
                all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards
                before beginning to discharge.
NON-CONTACT     Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
COOLING WATER:  intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
NON-RESIDENTIAL All users not defined "Residential Users".
USER:
NON-SIGNIFICANT A non-residential user that meets the criteria outlined in Section
REGULATED USER: 6-6-7-2.C.5.
OILS AND        Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and any other material that is
GREASE:         extracted by a solvent in a method approved in 40 CFR 136.
                A sewer that does not discharge to a public or private sewer main through the use of
OVERHEAD SEWER: gravity. Overhead sewers utilize a pump to lift the Sewage to an elevation where
                gravity can then carry away the wastewater. Non-residential wastes discharged from
                overhead sewers are subject to all the same limits and requirements of sanitary sewers.
                A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
PASS THROUGH:   concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with discharge or discharges from other
                sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit,
                including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
                Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
PERSON:         joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or
                their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
                State, and local governmental entities.
pH:             A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in standard units.
                A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or
POPULATION      stream. One population equivalent is 100 gallons (380 liters) of sewage per day,
EQUIVALENT:     containing 0.17 pounds (77 g) of BOD5 (five-day BOD) and 0.20 pounds (91 g) of TSS. The
                impact on a treatment works is evaluated or defined as the highest population
                equivalent of the three (four) parameters. (IEPA 301.345)
                Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage,
                wastewater bio-solids, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
POLLUTANT:      materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
                cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes and certain
                characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD,
                toxicity, or odor).
                Any discharge which alone or in combination with discharges from other sources inhibits
POTENTIAL       or disrupts the POTW or any of its processes or operations including plant emissions or
PROBLEM:        any conditions which create public nuisance, causing the POTW to expend additional
                resources or manpower or take additional steps to protect the POTW processes or
                receiving stream.
PPM:            Parts per million.
                The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
                alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of,
PRETREATMENT:   discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or
                alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process
                changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentrations of the pollutants
                unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT    The Superintendent of Water & Sewer of the City of Momence or their designee.
COORDINATOR:
PRETREATMENT    Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user,
REQUIREMENTS:   other than a pretreatment standard.
                That for any specified pollutant, City prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in
PRETREATMENT    Section
STANDARDS or    6-6-5-2, City specific limitations on discharge as set forth in Section
STANDARDS:      6-6-5-5, State of Illinois Pretreatment Standards in Ill. Adm. Code Section 307, or the
                National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE       Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
STANDARDS or    appear in Section
PROHIBITED      6-6-5-2.
DISCHARGES:
PROPERLY        The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded
SHREDDED        to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
GARBAGE:        normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
                centimeters) in any dimension.
                A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include
PUBLIC SEWER:   sewers within or outside the City limits that serve one or more persons and, ultimately
                discharge into the City sanitary sewer, or Combined Sewer system, even though those
                sewers may not have been constructed with City funds.
                A "Treatment Works", as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. section 1292)
                which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices and systems used in
PUBLICLY-OWNED  the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
TREATMENT WORKS industrial wastes, of a liquid nature that are connected to the City POTW regardless of
(POTW):         ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to
                the City POTW. Synonymous with POTW, Wastewater Treatment Works, Water Pollution
                Control Facility, and Wastewater Facilities.
RESIDENTIAL
SOURCE or       Any single family or multi-family dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of human
RESIDENTIAL     habitation which discharges only domestic wastewater to the City's system.
USER:
                A pipe of conduit designed and/or intended to carry wastewater from residences,
SANITARY SEWER: commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which stormwater,
                surface water, ground water and unpolluted non-contact cooling water are not
                intentionally admitted.
SEPTIC TANK     Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and
WASTE:          septic tanks.
SEWAGE:         Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWERAGE:       The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping
                of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL/MAY:      “Shall” is mandatory; "May” is permissive.
                A user of the POTW (except as provided by paragraphs (A) and (D)) who is:
                (A)   A user subject to any national categorical pretreatment standards; or
                (B)   A user that:
                   1.   Has an average process wastewater discharge flow of twenty-five thousand
                (25,000) gallons or more per work day (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
                boiler blow-down wastewater);or
                   2.   Has a discharge flow of process wastewater that makes up five percent (5%) or
                more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
                   3.   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable
                potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
                pretreatment standard or requirement.
                (C)   The City may determine that a user subject to categorical pretreatment standards
SIGNIFICANT     is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a SIU on a finding that
INDUSTRIAL USER the user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
(SIU):          wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater,
                unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions
                are met:
                   1.   The user, prior to the City's finding, has consistently complied with all
                applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
                   2.   The user annually submits the certification statement required in Section
                6-6-9-3.C. [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary
                to support the certification statement; and
                   3.   The user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
                (D)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (B) of this part
                has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
                violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its
                own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, determine that such
                user should not be considered a SIU in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6).
SLUDGE:         See "Bio-solids".
                Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature including but not limited to an
                accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge or any discharge of flow rate or
SLUG or SLUG    concentration, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through,
LOAD:           or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions
                or a non-customary batch discharge or any discharge of flow rate or concentration that
                could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section
                6-6-5-2.
STATE ACT:      The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
                The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of POTW as
STATE GRANT:    provided by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed
                with the Secretary of the State of Illinois.
STORM SEWER:    A sewer that carries rain water, snow melt and surface drainage but excludes sewage and
                industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER:     Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting
                from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
                Any electrical and/or mechanical device designed to raise water from a lower level to a
SUMP PUMP:      higher level and is designed to remove collected storm water from a pit to a storm
                sewer or other approved point of discharge.
SUPERINTENDENT: means the superintendent of the POTW of the City or their authorized deputy, agent or
                representative.
                The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is
SURCHARGE:      levied on those users whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration
                values established in Section
                7-6-2-4.
T:              As in Cyanide-T means total.
TOTAL SUSPENDED Total suspended matter, expressed in Milligrams Per Liter, that either floats on the
SOLIDS (TSS):   surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable
                by laboratory filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136.
TOTAL TOXIC     The summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for the
ORGANICS:       toxic organics specified in the applicable regulation.
                Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
UNPOLLUTED      would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be
WATER:          benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities
                provided.
                An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance
                with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
UPSET:          industrial user. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by
                operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
                facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
                Any person or source that contributes, causes or allows the source of indirect
                discharge into the POTW without regard to the stage of the POTW or discharge process at
USER:           which the wastewater from the user enters the POTW. It may also include such persons or
                sources that are prohibited from discharging specific pollutants or waste streams to
                the POTW.
                The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residential dwellings,
                commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
                whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER:     (A)   Sanitary wastewater means the combination of liquid and water carried wastes
                discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
                (B)   Industrial wastewater means a combination of liquid and water carried wastes
                discharged from any industrial user, including the wastewater from pretreatment
                facilities and polluted cooling water.
WASTEWATER      The document or documents issued to a user by the City pursuant to Section
DISCHARGE       6-6-8.
PERMIT:
WATER QUALITY   Those standards defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois, Title 35,
STANDARDS:      Subtitle C, Chapter I.
                All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs,
WATERS OF THE   reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or
STATE OF        accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
ILLINOIS:       private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois
                or any portion thereof.
WORK DAY:       A day on which work or service is performed by an industry.
YELLOW GREASE:  Inedible, unadulterated, animal and vegetable-based fats, oils, and grease produced and
                removed by a FSE. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
 
6-6-2: SEWER EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS:
6-6-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
The extension of a sanitary sewer by any entity that will serve or in the
future may serve more than one building and that will connect either directly
or indirectly to the POTW of the City shall be made only after an application
for a City permit has been made in writing on forms prescribed and furnished by
the City and an extension permit is issued by the City. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-2-2: SEWER EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Application. Persons desiring such extension of the sewer system shall
file with the City four (4) copies of the following documents:
      1.   Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Illinois.
      2.   IEPA permit application with such supporting documents required by
the IEPA, completely filled out and ready for City signature.
      3.   Detailed estimate of the cost of the extension.
The person or persons extending the sewer shall pay all costs of plan review by
the CE to the City prior to the City signing the IEPA permit application.
   (B)   Issuance. The City will issue an extension permit in accordance with
the following:
      1.   It has been demonstrated that the downstream POTW, including City
sewers and pump stations, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
      2.   A permit has been issued by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency (IEPA). The City permit shall expire on the expiration date of the IEPA
permit. Those portions of the work for which a City permit has been issued and
the work has been approved by the City shall be completed within the permit
time. Future construction on the project for which the original permit was
issued shall require a new permit that will be issued in compliance with the
ordinances of the City at the time of the application for the new permit. All
fees and charges assessed under the conditions of the City permit are forfeited
by the applicant/owner upon the expiration of the permit.
      3.   The City has received an agreement and bond executed by the
permittee wherein he agrees to make and install the improvements in accordance
with plans and specifications identifying a completion date not more than six
(6) months after the date of the agreement unless the City Council determines,
on the basis of the recommendation of the CE, that a longer time is necessary.
The guarantee for completion of the improvements by the permittee shall be in
the principal amount of one hundred and fifty percent (150%) of the estimated
cost as approved by the CE; and secured by either:
         (a)   A certificate of deposit with or an escrow account at a
federally insured bank or savings and loan association subject to draw by the
City to complete the improvements if it is not completed within the prescribed
time limit.
         (b)   A clean, non-declining, irrevocable letter of credit issued by a
federally insured bank or savings and loan association. The letter shall be
approved by the City and provide that funds may be drawn only by the City.
         (c)   A surety bond in a form and from an institution acceptable to
the City.
The bond shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year after acceptance
of the work by the CE as a guarantee of good faith of the permittee to correct
defects. At the discretion of the City Council, the bond may be reduced during
the maintenance period.
      4.   The City has received copies of all permits, insurance and bonds
required for street openings or stream crossings and any other permits required
by an agency having jurisdiction.
      5.   The City has received certificates of insurance protecting the City
from any liability or damage whatsoever from injury, including death, to any
Person or property. The amount of the insurance shall be as established by the
City Council.
      6.   The City has received payment for the cost of the permit and the
estimated cost of inspection. The cost of inspection shall include resident
supervision if deemed necessary by the CE. The estimated cost of inspection,
approved by the CE, shall be deposited with the City Treasurer prior to the
start of work and additional funds added during the work if required. The
permittee, however, shall pay only the actual costs of such services based on
standard engineering fees. At the completion of the work any unused portion of
the amount deposited shall be returned. No interest shall be paid on deposited
funds.
   (C)   Construction Requirements:
      1.   The rules, regulations, ordinances and policies listed hereafter and
issued by the authorities indicated are incorporated herein by reference and
shall govern the work as far as they apply to said work.
      2.   The City's rules, regulations, resolutions, policies, directives and
instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time by the City.
         (a)   "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction
in Illinois" latest edition.
         (b)   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency's rules,
regulations, technical releases and requirements.
         (c)   "The Illinois Recommended Standards for Sewage Works," IEPA,
latest edition.
         (d)   "The State of Illinois Plumbing Code" (latest edition).
         (e)   "Federal Manual of Practice No. 9", Water Pollution Control
Federation, latest edition.
      3.   The permittee agrees that they shall provide adequate inspection
during the entire construction period, which at the option of the City, may
require a full-time resident engineer. The City reserves the right to review
the construction.
      4.   Changes in the work to be done or materials to be used from those
shown on the plans or set forth in the specifications, as submitted to the
City, shall be approved by the City prior to the changed work being done or the
changed materials being installed.
      5.   The contractor or the contractor's representative constructing the
sewer extension shall notify the City twenty-four (24) hours prior to
commencing construction. When the construction of the sewer extension is
interrupted for a period of seven (7) calendar days or more, the City shall be
notified twenty-four (24) hours prior to continuing construction of the sewer
extension.
      6.   At the time a sewer extension is connected to an existing sewer, the
connection shall be made at an existing manhole or in a manhole constructed
over the existing sewer. If an existing manhole is the point of connection and
a suitable stub is not provided for the extension, the existing manhole shall
be core drilled and a suitable connection stub installed. The sewer extension
shall be plugged with a watertight concrete plug by the contractor at the time
the connection to the existing sewer is made. The plug shall be maintained in
place at all times until the sewer extension is approved in writing by the
City. If the plug is not maintained in place, the City shall install a concrete
plug and charge a fee to the contractor for each time a plug is installed by
the City. The fee for a plug established by the Department of Public Works is
published in Section
7-6-4. Mechanical plugs are also an acceptable means of plugging the sewer to
maintain it out of service. The charge for installation of a plug in the sewer
is published in Section
7-6-4 and will also include the cost of materials.
      7.   Upon completion of construction, the contractor shall notify the
City requesting final review of the work. The contractor shall televise the
completed extension in the presence of City staff who will take immediate
possession of the videotape prior to leaving the site. The City shall review
the work for conformance with the City's requirements and adherence to the
approved plans and specifications for which the City's sewer extension permit
was issued. If deficiencies are found in the work, the City shall furnish the
contractor with a listing of such deficiencies. When the contractor believes
that the deficiencies have been corrected, the contractor shall request a re-
review of the work. Should the re-review of the work show that the deficiencies
as set forth have not been corrected, the contractor shall make the necessary
corrections, and subsequent to that, shall notify the City and request another
review. The City shall charge a fee for each additional review and/or
inspection after the first inspection following the issuance of the list of
deficiencies. The fee for each additional review and/or inspection is published
as part of Section
7-6-4.
      8.   All sanitary sewers shall be constructed within public rights of way
or within easements dedicated for public utilities. No sanitary sewer mains
shall be installed in the rear or side yard of any property unless first
approved by the CE.
      9.   Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight-inch (8") diameter
for public sewer mains of sewer mains serving more than one building.
      10.   Manholes shall be pre-cast reinforced concrete sections meeting
ASTM C-478 and ASTM C-443 Standards. Manholes for sanitary sewers twenty-four
inches (24") or less in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of forty-
eight inches (48"). Manholes for sanitary sewers greater than twenty-four
inches (24") in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of sixty inches
(60") and be spaced at a maximum of four hundred feet (400'). Additionally,
manholes shall be installed under the following conditions: termination of
existing and future lines, changes in direction (horizontal or vertical),
changes in pipe shape or pipe size, or junctions with other sewers.
Drop manholes shall be provided for manholes with any pipe having a difference
in invert elevation more than twenty-four inches (24") above the invert of the
sewer leaving the manholes. All drop manholes shall be of the external type. No
internal drop manhole connections will be allowed.
   (D)   Project Completion:
No connection permits shall be issued or building permits released until such
time that final approval of the improvement has been made in writing by the
City. Final approval is contingent upon the following:
      1.   All punch-list work has been completed;
      2.   As-built plans prepared by a Registered Illinois Professional
Engineer are furnished to the City;
      3.   The sewer has been televised by the contractor or by the permittee
in the presence of City personnel per the City's requirements; and
      4.   A video record of the television inspection has been provided to the
City. In addition to a video record, air exfiltration testing as outlined in
Division III, Section 31-1.11 of the Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, will be completed prior to acceptance.
      5.    All additional charges levied by the City have been paid.
   (E)   Connections to Extension. No connection shall be made to the sanitary
sewer until sewer connection permits have been issued by the City under Section
6-6-3.
   (F)   Performance Bond Release. The performance bond will not be released
until the guarantee period has expired and the following documents are filed
with the City Clerk and approved by the City Council:
      1.   As-built drawings: One (1) reproducible set and two (2) sets of
prints;
      2.   Video record of television inspection;
      3.   Release of all permits,
      4.   Copies of all tests required by the City;
      5.   Bill of sale for all constructed public improvements; and
      6.   Such other documents as may be reasonably requested by the City.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3: SEWER CONNECTION PROCEDURES:
6-6-3-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or allow to be
deposited any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City without the expressed
approval from the City that all state and federal effluent limitations have
been met and there are no reasonable alternative methods of disposal and has
been permitted by the City.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby
required at his expense to install suitable facilities therein; including
toilets, urinals, lavatory sinks and kitchen sinks; and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) calendar days after the adoption
of and publication of the ordinance or upon installation or extension of such
public sanitary sewer and after date of official notice to connect, provided
that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line
and sufficient capacity is available in all downstream sewers, lift stations,
force mains and the POTW, including capacity for BOD and suspended solids. All
public sewer extensions shall be made in accordance with Section
6-6-2-2.
      1.   Application for a permit to make a connection to the public sanitary
sewer shall be made by the owner within ninety (90) calendar days of the
adoption of and publication of the ordinance, or upon installation or extension
of such public sanitary sewer and after date of official notice to connect, as
the case may be as provided by Section
6-6-3-3.
      2.   Failure to install such facilities and to connect same to the public
sanitary sewer within ninety (90) calendar days after the adoption of and
publication of the ordinance, or upon installation or extension of such public
sanitary sewer and after date of official notice to connect, shall be deemed,
held and construed as a violation of this provision, punishable as provided in
Sections
6-6-14 and
6-6-15.
      3.   In the event of failure upon the part of the owner to make the
described connection within ninety (90) calendar days of the adoption of and
publication of the ordinance, or upon installation or extension of such public
sanitary sewer and after date of official notice to connect, if it shall appear
that such delay is not willful upon the part of the owner, an official notice
in writing by the City shall be given to the owner to make such connection,
server personally or by certified mail. If the owner fails, neglects and
refuses to make the connection within thirty days of the date of this notice,
he shall be held and deemed to be in violation of this provision, and
punishable as provided in Sections
6-6-14 and
6-6-15.
   (E)    No user(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, stormwater sump
pumps, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (F)   Damages. The City shall not be held responsible for damages to
personal property caused by the construction or repair to the City sewers, by
water and sewage seepage, or for any other reason. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within the corporate
limits of the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City for the
purpose of treating wastewater and discharging same to a water course unless
the following provisions are met.
   (A)   For the purpose of treating non-residential source wastes, the
Kankakee County Health Department determines that the wastewater treatment
facilities have inadequate capacity, and issues a permit for the construction
and operation of a wastewater treatment facility. No City permit shall become
effective until:
      1.   The CE has approved the plans and specifications in writing,
      2.   Approval has been obtained from the Kankakee County Department of
Health, as appropriate,
      3.   An IEPA permit issued to construct the facility has been received,
      4.   An IEPA NPDES permit to operate the facility has been issued and
received,
      5.   The installation is completed to the satisfaction of the CE, and
      6.   The final inspection has been completed.
Persons operating a wastewater treatment facility shall file copies of all
operating reports sent to the USEPA and IEPA with the CE and such other reports
as the CE deems necessary.
   (B)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section
6-6-3-1 and the wastewater source to be treated is domestic in nature, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface absorption facilities.
No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility with
subsurface disposal without previous approval from the CE. If approval is given
the person must adhere to the following limitations.
      1.   Permit Requirements
         (a)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the City which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the City. A permit
and inspection fee as required by the Kankakee County Health Department shall
be paid to the County at the time the application is filed. The permit shall
not be issued until applicable State and County permits are obtained.
         (b)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all regulations and provisions of the State
of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, with the State of
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the Kankakee County Health
Department, latest revision. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than 160,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
         (c)   A permit for a private Sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The City shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
City when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the
receipt of written notice by the City, except that no inspections will be made
at any time other than regular City working hours.
   (C)   Where development is possible but gravity sewers and conventional
sewer systems are not practical.
Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to approve grinder pump systems on a
discretionary case-by-case basis. In order to implement a grinder pump system,
a developer or individual homeowner must prove to the City that a grinder pump
system is the only viable option other than a conventional Sanitary Sewer
system. A permit and inspection fee as published in Section
7-6-4 shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed. A permit
for a private Wastewater treatment facility employing a grinder pump system
shall not be issued until the design and installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the City.
      1.   Installation: The City shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of the construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Plumbing Inspector when the grinder pump system is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
      2.   Operation and Maintenance: The Plumbing Inspector or his designee
shall be entitled to inspect the grinder pump system if said Plumbing Inspector
has any reason to believe that the grinder pump system is not operating
properly or pursuant to a routine inspection protocol developed by the Plumbing
Inspector. Should the grinder pump system fall into disrepair or otherwise need
maintenance as determined by the City, and the owner refuses to repair, replace
or otherwise fix the grinder pump system to the specifications of the City, the
City may do so at its own expense and obtain reimbursement from the individual
owner. In that regard, and as a condition of obtaining a City permit for a
grinder pump system, the individual owner shall enter into a contractual
agreement indemnifying the City for any costs the City may incur with regards
to maintaining the grinder pump system, and further allow the City reasonable
access to the grinder pump system for inspection purposes.
   (D)   Other provisions.
      1.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the City.
      2.   As provided in Section
6-6-3-2.B, at such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer within upon request by City. Any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of bio-solids
and filled with suitable material such as clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
      3.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Kankakee
County Department of Health as appropriate. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-3: BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Permit Requirements. No Person shall construct a new wastewater source
and connect same to the POTW of the City without first making application for
the privilege of making said connection to the City.
      1.   No unauthorized Person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into; use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City, with sign-off by the
Superintendent and receipt of an IEPA permit when required under 35 IAC 309.
      2.   No addition to or alteration of any building sewer shall be made or
caused to be made by any person without a permit from the City and then only
through a sewer contractor. No permit shall authorize anything not explicitly
stated in the application.
      3.   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. Any violation of this
section after ordinance adoption shall subject the violator to fines of $100.00
per day per violation. Each successive day (24 hour period) shall be considered
a separate violation.
      4.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and regulations
promulgated thereto, and the City of Momence Municipal Code.
      5.   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits as
designated below:
         (a)   Residential and commercial service, and
         (b)   Service establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner and his agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented with
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the inspector. A permit and inspection fee as provided in Section
7-6-4 shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed or prior
to receiving City sign-off for an IEPA permit in the case on an industrial
user.
Upon review of permit application, the Superintendent will determine the
reserve capacity of the sewer line in question and approve or reject the
application in view of the available sewer's load carrying capacity.
      6.   Persons desiring to construct a new waste source and connect it to
the POTW of the City shall state the quantity, quality and rate of discharge
into the sewer. The non-residential user, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity per Section 7-6-4-1. In the case of any
fraudulent representation upon the part of the user, the permit fees will be
forfeited and the use of the sewer stopped.
      7.   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and POTW, have sufficient reserve
capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste
load based on the population equivalent.
      8.   The applicant will secure a building permit if the waste source is
new equipment to be installed in an existing building with an existing sewer.
      9.   Each excavation for any of the purposes set out in this subsection
shall require a separate permit.
Any person who makes any excavation or does any work without first securing the
permit required by this subsection, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, in addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter,
shall be liable for the penalties set forth in City Code.
      10.   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The person installing the
building sewer for said owner shall be a plumber or sewer contractor and he
shall indemnify the City from loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly
be occasioned by said installation. Before a building sewer is issued, the
plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the City Clerk an indemnity bond in
the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with corporate surety licensed
to do business in the State of Illinois, on bond forms supplied by the City. In
addition thereto, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the City
Clerk a certificate of insurance covering public liability insurance in the
amount of one hundred thousand to three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/
$300,000.00) for bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) covering
property damage.
      11.   The building permit will be issued for a period of 24 months
consistent with the IEPA permits.
   (B)   Building Sewer Connections:
      1.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer and may be done only with the explicit
approval of the City. In no case shall any Owner be permitted to maintain,
without the consent of the City, any connection of a Building Drain to a
Building Sewer located across or under the property of another.
      2.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test, to meet all requirements of
this chapter. A report shall be provided to the City by the applicant. All
costs for this examination shall be borne by the applicant.
      3.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
      4.   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within 3 feet of any
bearing wall. No building sewers shall be installed in any place where they may
be subject to freezing temperatures unless adequate provisions are made to
protect them from frost. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curbed pipe and fittings, or a manhole, as determined by the Superintendent.
      5.   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer. Where possible, all building sanitary services shall be
"overhead" installations. Buildings having basements will have a pump or
ejector provided to pump the wastewater to the sanitary sewer service for
gravity transport to the sewer main.
      6.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
at an existing stub and conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9,
and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
If no stub is available, then a wye or tee shall be installed on the public
sanitary sewer by the user, at his expense, subject to inspection and approval
by the City.
   (C)   Construction Requirements. Construction may not be started until fees
are paid consistent with Section
6-6-3-4 and a written permit is issued by the City after issuance and receipt
of an IEPA permit for the project when applicable. The following conditions are
also required:
      1.   The applicant shall secure a street opening permit from the
Superintendent and pay a refundable deposit fee per Section
7-6-4 when appropriate in conformance with the provisions of the Building Code.
      2.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. Failure to
properly barricade will be cause for the job site to be shut down and a fee as
provided in Section
7-6-4 must be paid before and proper barricades need to be provided and City
any further work can commence.
      3.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of any underground
piping installation and when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of a qualified Duly Authorized Agent of the City during regular
City working hours.
      4.   Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall be six-inch (6")
diameter. All cleanouts shall be installed on the owner's property and not in
City right-of-way. The maximum distance between cleanouts is 120 feet. The
building sewer shall be constructed of PVC. It is the property Owner's
responsibility to maintain the cleanout and cap in a manner to prevent
overflows.
      5.   Sewer services shall not be connected to manholes. All sanitary
sewer services serving single-family residences shall have "blind" connections
to the sewer main. Only exceptions are when homes are located in a cul-de-sac
and the connection to the sewer main would be impractical. This exception must
be approved by the Superintendent.
   (D)   Sanitary Sewer Uses Outside of the Corporate Limits of the City.
Sanitary sewer connections outside the City corporate limits to a City sewer
shall conform to all requirements in this chapter.
   (E)   Sewer Installation Acceptance
      1.   A one (1) year warranty will be submitted to the City by the
contractor doing the sewer installation against all defects including poor
workmanship, improper installation, or material failure. The warranty will
require the contractor to correct any problems with the installation discovered
during that one year period.
      2.   A video recording will be required of the entire length of the sewer
service from the building to the main sewer including the connection into the
main sewer. The video shall be in a format readily viewable by the City. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-4: FEES:
The following types of fees shall be charged for when permitting and
constructing a new wastewater source and connecting it the POTW of the City.
All review, inspection and connection fees shall be based upon current fees
identified in Section
7-6-4. An inspection fee shall be paid for any additional inspections. This
includes but is not limited to inspections of sampling manholes, common
interceptors, flow metering or sampling equipment, garbage grinders, grease,
oil and sand interceptors, and grease interceptors. A separate review fee may
be charged based on the cost and expense to review equalization and/or
pretreatment facilities required at a non-residential user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-3-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any
facility served by the City, without having first complied with the terms of
this chapter. At minimum, all users are subject to the prohibited discharge
standards in Section
6-6-5-2, change notification in Section
6-6-9-6 and hazardous waste notification in Section
6-6-9-9 if applicable. Spill/Slug control planning may also be necessary for
some non-residential users as identified in Section
6-6-6-5.
   (B)   No user(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-6: MONITORING FACILITIES:
   (A)   An inspection fee as provided in Section
7-6-4 shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the permit should it be
determined that the user is required to install any of the following
structures:
      1.   Sampling Manhole Requirements. All users located in areas zoned
industrial and/or business park and such other users as required by the
Superintendent, except residential users, are required to install a monitoring
manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the Superintendent. Each manhole shall
be situated on the user's premises in an easement dedicated to the City.
The sampling manhole shall be located on the sewer connection pipe at a point
where there are no changes in grade or alignment for at least 15 pipe diameters
upstream and downstream from the manhole. The grade (slope) of the pipe shall
not exceed 1% (1 foot per 100 feet) through the manhole and for a distance of
15 pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The manhole shall be
installed and maintained by the owner/user at his sole expense so as to be safe
and accessible to the City at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to
claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
         (a)   Where such a manhole location would be impractical or cause
extreme hardship on the user, the Superintendent may concur with the manhole
being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area providing that the
manhole is located so that it shall not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles. In those cases where a sampling manhole must be in a parking lot, a
permanent barricade, such as a vertical pipe shall be placed around the manhole
to prevent vehicles from driving or parking over the manhole cover.
         (b)   The Superintendent may postpone the installation of the sampling
manhole when specific circumstances prevent the installation of a manhole.
         (c)   A postponement for a sampling manhole will be handled on a case-
by-case basis by the Superintendent when it is determined that the discharge is
solely from a residential source and the site is not in a zoned business park/
industrial area.
         (d)   When a postponement for a sampling manhole installation is
granted by the City, an affidavit will be signed by the property owner to
install the manhole at a later date should business practices change at the
location where the manhole installation was postponed.
         (e)   The Superintendent may determine sub-classes of business that
need not install monitoring manholes. Monitoring manholes will always be
required in zoned business or industrial parks.
      2.   Liquid Quantity Measurements. All SIUs may be required to install an
open channel flow measuring device in said sampling manhole. When required, the
sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus or Parshall flume or equivalent,
unless a weir or similar device is approved by the City.
The City may, at its option, based on the water usage and/or waste loadings,
require the user to install a device with a recording and totalizing register
for measurement of the liquid quantity. The equipment required to indicate,
record and totalize the Flow shall be located in a warm dry location and be
accessible to the City for reading. This equipment shall be installed and
maintained by the user at his sole expense. Should the requirement be made, the
user shall complete installation of the flume and secondary flow measuring
device based on the installation schedule approved for such device by the City.
The user shall be required to calibrate and maintain the flow metering
equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedures and
frequencies. Users who operate flow measuring devices will submit the procedure
for operation and maintenance (O & M) to the City. The user shall further
document O & M in a log which shall be available for inspection by City
personnel. At minimum, the user shall submit a calibration report performed by
an outside representative by the deadline defined in the user's discharge
permit. The user may be required to submit flow records to the Pretreatment
Coordinator monthly.
      3.   Sampling Equipment. The City may, at its option, based on water
usage and/or waste loadings or when the waste loads cannot be accurately
evaluated by time composite samples, require the user to install sampling
equipment. This equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at his
sole expense.
Users shall submit the procedure for operation and maintenance to the City. The
user shall further document O & M in a log, which shall be available for
inspection by City personnel. At minimum, the user shall submit an annual
report confirming the accurate operation of the equipment performed by an
outside representative by the deadline defined in the discharge permit. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-7: ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRED FOR THE USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   An inspection fee as provided by Section
6-6-3-4 and found in Section
7-6-4 shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the permit should it be
determined that the user is required to install any of the following
structures:
      1.   Garbage Grinders. Garbage is required to be properly shredded in
order to be approved to be discharged to the public sewer. Wastes classified as
properly shredded garbage contain all particles being carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped, with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval
of the City. The discharge of grinders is prohibited to be connected to a
grease interceptor.
      2.   Grease, Oil, and Sand Interceptors. Interceptors shall be provided
in services connected to the City where it is determined that they are
necessary for the proper handling of the wastewater containing excessive
amounts of grease, oil, and sand except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interception units
shall be of type and capacity approved by the City and shall be so located to
be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Oil and sand interceptors
used for petroleum grease and oils may be located inside the building. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the owner at his expense.
      3.   Neutralizing Basin. Laboratory and facilities commonly using acid or
alkaline chemicals or compounds must install a neutralizing basin. All basins
shall be of type and capacity approved by the City and shall be so located to
be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Equipment and devices installed under this section shall not be considered to
provide pretreatment to wastewater. Any user operating devices installed in
this section shall submit operating data as may be required by the City.
   (B)   Equalization and Pretreatment Equipment.
      1.   Approval. If the City requires the equalization or pretreatment of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City, and, subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Said facilities
shall also be subject to approval by IEPA consistent with IEPA regulations.
      2.   O & M. Where flow-equalizing or pretreatment facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-8: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
   (A)   Grease and Interceptors - Food Service Establishments (FSE). Hydro-
mechanical grease interceptors and gravity grease interceptors (collectively
referred to as grease interceptors or GI) are required to be installed in all
new FSE. All GI shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City based on
an evaluation of the volume and characteristics of the discharge in conjunction
with the operating plan of the FSE. The City may require GI to be installed or
modified in an existing FSE where FSE that have caused or contributed to
overflows and/or blockages, or at existing FSE that that meet the remodeling
requirements identified in Section
6-6-3-8 or when streetscapes or street/sewer replacements are installed.
      1.   Installation Requirements.
         (a)    All newly constructed FSE's shall install an exterior GI prior
to operation of the facility.
         (b)   Common Interceptors are required to be installed when the
tenants or purchasers of sub-properties that are unknown by the complex owner
and zoning allows the build-out of an FSE in said properties. The owner of the
property on which the common interceptor is located shall be primarily
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the common interceptor.
         (c)   Existing FSE. All existing FSE's may be required to install a GI
at the request of the City. The City may require a GI to be installed or
modified in an existing FSE within ninety (90) calendar days of notification by
the City where:
            (1)   The FSE has caused or contributed to overflows and/or
blockages;
            (2)   When any reconstruction, rebuilding, or remodeling of fifty
percent (50%) or more of the building occurs; or
            (3)   When streetscapes or street/sewer replacements are installed.
The City may require a new GI to be installed when the existing facility has an
undersized, irreparable, or defective GI.
In the event that winter weather will impact the installation of a GI, the City
may grant an extension of the installation schedule to a maximum of one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days.
         (d)   Existing FSE where blockages typically occurred. GI's will be
required to be installed within ninety (90) calendar days of notification by
the City if blockages typically occur downstream of the FSE. GI's interior to
the building may be required as an interim measure to the installation of an
exterior GI. Interior GI will be required to be installed within from five (5)
to thirty (30) calendar days, as determined by the City based upon the nature
of the hot spot or blockage, after a notice by the City.
      2.   Location. All GI shall be located to be easily accessible for
cleaning, maintenance and inspection. All GI shall be provided exterior to the
building for all new construction and when feasible at existing FSE. The GI
shall not be located in drive-through lanes, paved over, covered with
landscaping, or have any other hindrances not allowing access.
      3.   An inspection fee found in Section
7-6-4 shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the permit should it be
determined that the user is required to install any GI.
      4.    Sign-off Inspection. Prior to the initial operation of any FSE, the
GI shall be inspected by the City and a sign-off will be issued by the City.
Notification will be made by the FSE to the City during normal business hours
of the City. Inspections will be made normally by the City within two (2) City
business days of the notice. The FSE will be required to make appropriate
changes prior to initial operation, in the event that the GI does not meet
requirements.
      5.   Modifications. The City may make determinations of GI adequacy,
need, design, appropriateness, application, location, modification(s), and
conditional usage based on review of all relevant information regarding GI
performance, facility site and building plan review by all regulatory reviewing
agencies and may require repairs to, or modification or replacement of the GI.
      6.   Best Management Practices (BMP) Plan. In addition to installing a
GI, all FSEs that discharge to the sanitary sewer system are required to
prepare and implement a BMP plan as outlined in Section 7-6-6-4 to minimize the
amount of FOG discharged to the sanitary sewer.
      7.   All FSE may be issued a general permit as provided by Sections 7-6-
7 and 7-6-8.
   (B)   Grease Interceptor Criteria. GI installed at new and existing FSE must
meet the following criteria:
      1.   Sizing. GIs shall be designed in accordance with the City's most
recently adopted plumbing code. To calculate the appropriate GI size, the FSE's
engineer, licensed plumber or contractor shall use a formula that considers all
kitchen plumbing fixture units, the discharge plumbing pipe diameter for each
fixture unit, storage capacity, type of facility, and an adequate retention
time. The City will review the GI sizing calculation and will make a decision
to approve or require additional GI volume. Where sufficient capacity cannot be
achieved with a single unit, installation of GI in series is required.
      2.   Twenty-five Percent Requirement. Provide for a minimum hydraulic
retention time to facilitate the separation of oils and grease between the
influent and effluent baffles and prevent pass through of oils and grease from
the GI, with twenty-five percent (25%) of the total volume of the GI being
allowed for any food derived solids to settle or accumulate and floatable
grease-derived materials to rise and accumulate, identified as a solids blanket
and grease cap respectively.
      3.   Access Manholes. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24
inches, shall be provided over each exterior GI chamber and each sanitary tee.
The access manholes shall extend one inch above finished grade to prevent storm
or surface water inflow or infiltration. One manhole shall be located above the
inlet tee and the other manhole shall be located above the outlet tee. The
manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection,
maintenance, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. The manholes
shall be accessible for inspection by the City.
      4.   Plumbing Connections. All GI shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements contained in all applicable local plumbing codes. The GI shall
be located in the FSE's lateral sewer line between all fixtures which may
introduce grease into the City's wastewater collection system. Wastewater from
domestic facilities and other non-grease laden waste streams shall not be
connected to the GI.
      5.   Prohibitions. Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be
connected to or discharged into any GI.
   (C)   Maintenance. Each FSE shall be solely responsible for the costs of
installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning, maintaining, repairing and replacing
its GI. For GIs that serve multiple FSEs, then the property owner is the
responsible party.
      1.   Introduction of enzymes, emulsifiers, surfactants, solvents, hot
water or other agents into a grease interceptor to dissolve or emulsify grease
or as a grease abatement method is prohibited. Introduction of bacteria,
caustics or acids as a grease degradation agent is permitted with prior written
approval by the City.
      2.   All GIs shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content
as required in order to maintain the design capability or effective volume. The
GI cleaning frequency shall be determined based on the Twenty-five Percent
Rule, which is when the sum of the grease layer and the solids layer is at 25%
of the tank depth volume. At no time shall the cleaning frequency exceed three
months. The entire contents of the GI must be cleaned annually and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. It shall be the
responsibility of the FSE to inspect its GI during the pumping procedure to
ensure the GI is properly cleaned out and that all fittings and fixtures inside
the GI are in working condition and functioning properly. The return of the
water pumped from the GI back into the GI or into the City's wastewater
collection system is prohibited.
      3.   In the event that actual operations of the GI fail to produce
results that consistently prevent prohibitive discharges as defined in Section
6-6-5-2, the owner of the FSE will be required by the City to have the GI
cleaned at a more frequent rate or install additional pretreatment as
necessary.
      4.   The FSE must have documentation consisting of inspection, cleaning,
and maintenance logs on site in accordance with and demonstrating compliance
with this regulation and must be able to produce the documentation immediately
upon request by the City.
      5.   The FSE shall notify the City by phone or email within one business
day (Monday-Friday) or any noted deficiencies encountered while performing GI
pumping, cleaning or maintenance.
      6.   Disposal. It is the responsibility of each FSE or property owner to
ensure that wastes removed from each GI are properly disposed of at a facility
permitted to receive such wastes.
   (D)   Private Sewer Line Cleaning. Any grease waste hauler, plumber or
contractor that cleans FOG from a FSE's private sewer line must insure that the
FOG and other debris cleaned from the private sewer line does not cause an
obstruction or blockage in the City's sanitary sewer system. Therefore, the FOG
or other debris cleaned from the private sewer line must be removed and hauled
off-site. The City shall be contacted immediately if FOG is pushed or jetted
into the City sanitary sewer system to make the City aware of the FOG and
debris at the specific location.
   (E)   All FSEs that produce yellow grease shall recycle it in an approved
grease recycling container, which has a tight-fitting lid and secondary
containment, and shall be handled by a licensed recycling company. Yellow
grease shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer line, GI, storm sewer or
into the environment whereas to be conveyed to a waterway. The lids to the
yellow grease container shall remain closed when stored outside. Spilled yellow
grease outside shall be cleaned up immediately and disposed of properly.
Washing of yellow grease to the storm sewer or waterway is prohibited.
   (F)   Inspections. The City may inspect FSEs at any time during normal
business hours in order to verify continued compliance with all applicable laws
and regulations. FSEs with GIs that are inaccessible to the City are
responsible for having staff readily available during any inspection to provide
access to and to open and close the GI.
   (G)   Waivers that are available to FSE are identified below. A request for
a waiver is required to be filed with the City on a form provided by the City
and a waiver review fee will be required at the time of the filing as defined
in Section
7-6-4. Waiver requests are not considered to be filed until the request has
been reviewed and determined complete. If the City fails to act on a completed
waiver request within 45 calendar days, a request for waiver shall be deemed to
be denied. While waivers may result in an alteration of the GI requirements, it
does not waive the requirement to prevent prohibitive discharges through
alternate technologies and best management plan practices.
      1.   Existing External FSE GI Installation Waiver. The requirement to
install and to properly operate and maintain a GI is conditionally stayed, that
is, delayed in its implementation by the City. Terms and conditions for
application of a stay to a FSE shall be set forth in a permit. The terms may
include the requirement to install GI(s) inside the facility, alternate
technology and/or the use of best management practices. The waiver will not
apply to any existing facility that has not operated as a FSE for the last 12
consecutive months prior to the adoption of this chapter. Such facilities will
be required to install a GI in order to operate as a FSE in the City sanitary
sewer service area.
      2.   Common GI Waiver. Common GI means one or more interceptors receiving
FOG laden wastewater from more than one FSE. Common interceptors may be used in
lieu of individual GI at each FSE provided a waiver has been granted by the
City. A common GI may be located at shopping centers, malls, entertainment
complexes, sporting arenas, hotels, multi-tenant "flex" spaces, mixed use
spaces, and other sites where multiple establishments are connected to a single
GI. The owner of the property on which the common GI is located shall be
responsible for operating and maintenance of the common GI including program
documentation, upkeep, and repair. In such cases, a permit will be issued to
the property owner for the GI and general permits will also be required at each
FSE for best management practices requirements.
      3.   Constraint Waivers at Existing FSE. Where the installation of a GI
is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a
waiver from the installation of the GI requirement may be granted. The City
determination to grant the waiver will be based upon, but not limited to,
evaluation of the following conditions:
         (a)   There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance
of a GI;
         (b)   There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between the kitchen
plumbing fixtures and the GI and/or between the GI and the private collection
lines or public sewer; or
         (c)   There is no alternative pretreatment technology that is, at
least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a GI.
If a Constraint Waiver is granted, the City will institute the Grease Disposal
Mitigation Fee as defined in Section
7-6-4.
      5.   Alternate Technology Waiver. The use of automatic grease removal
systems is permissible only upon the written approval of the City, the lead
plumbing inspector of the City, and the Kankakee County Health Department.
Approval of the device shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal
efficiencies and reliability of operation. The City may approve these types of
devices dependent on manufacturer's specifications on a case by case basis. Any
user operating an alternative technology may be subject to additional
operational requirements. Any user with this equipment shall operate the system
in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as
measured from the unit's outlet, is consistent achieved as required by the
Superintendent.
      6.   Cleaning Cycle Waiver. The property may petition the Pretreatment
Coordinator to reduce the cleaning and servicing of the GI from every three
months to a maximum of every six months upon demonstration that the amount
removed every three months is significantly less than twenty-five percent (25%)
rule for the basin capacity and the discharge does not exceed the oil and
grease local limit. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-9: SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE/REPLACEMENT:
   (A)   The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of
the private sewer line from their structure to the main sewer or public sewer
including the tap into the main/public sewer.
   (B)   In the event the property owner finds it necessary to excavate the
private sewer line for maintenance or replacement that shall be the property
owner's responsibility.
   (C)   In those instances when property owners have had to excavate and as a
result the sidewalk, curb and street have been dug out, the property owner will
be responsible for the restoration of the street (surface and sub-surface) curb
and sidewalk.
   (D)   In those instances where Subsection C above is involved, it is
recommended tunneling under the curb and sidewalk whenever practical. Sidewalk
and curb must be cut when removal is required.
   (E)   All work, as it is related to the replacement and/or repair of the
private sewer line, shall be in conformance with the City standard construction
specifications and will be inspected by a duly authorized agent of the City
during the repair and replacement. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-10: AUTOMOBILE SERVICE, REPAIR AND FUEL DISPENSING PROPERTIES:
   (A)   When property use involves automotive repair or handling, sale and
dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, all discharges shall
have installed a sampling manhole consistent with the requirements of Section
6-6-3-6. All sampling manholes of this type shall be monitored throughout the
year in a manner secured and coordinated by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
Additionally, any property involved in the repair or servicing of automobiles,
trucks, or engine-powered equipment shall install a triple basin oil separator
in the sanitary line (per State of Illinois Plumbing codes) servicing the
repair area of the building. This system shall be cleaned, serviced and
inspected at least four times per year by the owner at his expense. The
property may petition the Pretreatment Coordinator to reduce the cleaning and
servicing of the triple basin oil separator to two times per year upon
demonstration that the amount removed quarterly is significantly less than 25%
rule for the basin capacity and the discharge does not exceed the oil and
grease local limit. Conversely, the system may be required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to be cleaned at a more frequent rate if the property cannot meet
the requirements.
   (B)   When property use involves automotive repair or handling, sale and
dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, there shall be a
separate drainage system constructed to collect all fluids from the areas
associated with pump islands and under pump canopies. This separate drainage
system shall collect these fluids and hold them in a separate sealed tank for
testing and removal by approved special waste handling methods. All fuel
dispensing equipment, piping and venting shall be installed in accordance with
the standards listed below and be in accordance and in compliance with the
current adopted building, electrical and fire codes:
      1.   Guidance Manual for LUST Cleanups in Illinois, September 1989; and
Leaking Underground Storage Tank Manual, September 1991; both published by
IEPA, 2200 Churchill Road, P.O. Box 19276, Springfield, IL 62794-9276.
      2.   Recommended Practices for Installation of Underground Liquid Storage
Systems, PEI/RP 100, 1994; published by Petroleum Equipment Institute, P.O. Box
2380, Tulsa, OK 74101.
      3.   Flammable and Combustible Liquid Code, NFPA/30, 1993; Automotive and
Marine Services Station Code, NFPA/30A, 1993; National Electric Code, NFPA/70,
1993; and Underground Leakage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids, NFPA/329,
1992; all published by National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch
Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9904.
      4.   Underground Storage Tanks; Technical Requirements and State Program
Approval; Final Rules, 40 CFR Parts 280 and 281, Part II, Federal Register,
Friday, September 23, 1988; and Musts for UST's: A Summary of the New
Regulations for Underground Storage Tank Systems, and Hazardous Waste
Management Standards, Federal Register, July 14, 1986, both published by USEPA,
Office of Underground Storage Tanks, 401 M Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20460.
      5.   Rules of the Illinois State Fire Marshall, Parts 170 & 180, Title
41, Chapter 1, State of Illinois, Office of the Fire Marshall, 1035 Stevenson
Parkway, Springfield, IL 62703.
   (C)   Jurisdiction:
      1.   These requirements shall be met by any property use associated with
automotive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum products
and/or automotive fluids, where any water main, wastewater or stormwater
facility is under the jurisdiction of the City, regardless of whether or not
such property lies within the corporate limits of the City.
      2.   The requirements of this Section
6-6-3-10 shall not be applied to existing property uses except that whenever a
permit shall be required for new construction or reconstruction of a property
use associated with automotive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of
petroleum products and/or automotive fluids, involving placement, replacement,
reconfiguration, removal or modification of any fueling area, or a discharge
has occurred that does not meet the local limits, or a blockage has been caused
or contributed to, compliance with the provisions of Section
6-6-3-9 shall be required. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-3-11: AMALGAM MANAGEMENT AT DENTAL OFFICES:
   (A)   Applicability.
      1.   Except as provided in paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of this section, this
part applies to dental dischargers as defined in Section
6-6-1-6.
      2.   Dental dischargers subject to this part are not SIUs as defined in
40 CFR part 403, and are not CIUs or industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards as those terms and variations are used in 40 CFR part
403, as a result of applicability of 40 CFR 441.
      3.   This part does not apply to dental dischargers that exclusively
practice one or more of the following dental specialties: oral pathology, oral
and maxillofacial radiology, oral and maxillofacial surgery, orthodontics,
periodontics, or prosthodontics.
      4.   This part does not apply to wastewater discharges from mobile units
as defined in Section
6-6-1-6 operated by a dental discharger.
      5.   This part does not apply to dental dischargers that do not discharge
any amalgam process wastewater as defined in Section
6-6-1-6 to a POTW, such as dental dischargers that collect all dental amalgam
process wastewater for transfer to a centralized waste treatment facility as
defined in 40 CFR part 437.
      6.   Dental dischargers that do not place dental amalgam as defined in
Section
6-6-1-6, and do not remove amalgam except in limited emergency or unplanned,
unanticipated circumstances, and that certify such to the Control Authority and
City as required in 40 CFR 441.50 are exempt from any further requirements of
this part.
   (B)   Existing Dental Discharger Compliance. Within the shortest reasonable
time, but not later than July 14, 2020, any existing dental discharger as
defined in Section
6-6-1-6 subject to this section must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR
441.30(a) that defines removal of amalgam solids and (b) implementation of two
best management practices. Dental dischargers must file a One-Time Compliance
Report per 40 CFR 441.50(a) by October 12, 2020 to the USEPA Region V with a
copy sent to the City and maintain and make available for inspection defined
records per 40 CFR 441.50(b).
      1.   If a transfer of an existing source occurs after July 14, 2020, the
new owner must submit a new One-Time Compliance Report no later than 90 days
after the transfer.
   (C)   New Dental Discharger Compliance. As of July 14, 2017, any new dental
discharger source as defined in Section
6-6-1-6 subject to this section must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR
441.40 that states discharges must comply with the requirements of 441.30(a)
that defines removal of amalgam solids and (b) implementation of two best
management practices. Dental dischargers must file a One-Time Compliance Report
per 40 CFR 441.50(a) no later than 90 days following the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW and maintain and make available for inspection defined
records per 40 CFR 441.50(b).
      1.   If a transfer of a new source occurs after July 14, 2017, the new
owner must submit a new One-Time Compliance Report no later than 90 days after
the transfer.
   (D)   Limited Dental Dischargers. Limited dental dischargers must file a
One-Time Compliance Report with certification that they do not remove dental
amalgam except in limited emergency or unplanned, unanticipated circumstances
by October 12, 2020 for existing sources and within 90 days following the
introduction of wastewater for new sources.
   (E)   Signatory Requirements. The One-Time Compliance Report must be signed
and certified by a responsible corporate officer, a general partner or
proprietor if the dental discharger is a partnership or sole proprietorship, or
a duly authorized representative in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR
403.12(j) and Section
6-6-1-6 under Authorized Representative (5) and (6). (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-4: INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NON-RESIDENTIAL USERS:
6-6-4-1: INITIAL SURVEY (QUESTIONNAIRE):
   (A)   The initial survey shall be completed in order to ensure that said
non-residential users of the POTW of the City adhere to and comply with the
restrictions and prohibitions pertaining to pretreatment standards of wastes
discharged into the POTW of the City set forth in Section
6-6-5, spill control of raw materials, intermediates and waste as set forth in
Section
6-6-6-5, and to facilitate the City's investigation of apparent or suspected
violations thereof. The requirements are as follows:
      1.   All existing or new non-residential users, or in areas receiving
sewer service from the City, shall complete and submit an initial survey on a
form provided by the City when requested by the City.
      2.   All users defined in Section
6-6-4-1.A.1 seeking to establish a new account for sanitary sewer service from
the City or to establish a new connection to the POTW of the City shall file a
completed initial survey with the City as a condition to the establishment of
such new sanitary sewer service account or connection to the POTW of the City.
      3.   All users defined above that fail to complete and submit to the City
an initial survey shall be in violation of the provisions of this division
(Section
6-6-4-1) and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof,
including but expressly not limited to the revocation of all permits and
approvals previously granted to the commercial or industrial user in question
for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the City.
   (B)   Food Service Establishment (FSE) Survey. The initial FSE survey shall
ensure that FSEs using the POTW of the City adhere to and comply with the
restrictions and prohibitions pertaining to pretreatment standards of wastes
discharged into the POTW of the City set forth in Section
6-6-5-2 and to control spills of raw materials, intermediates and waste as set
forth in Section
6-6-6-5, and shall facilitate the City's investigation of apparent or suspected
violations thereof. The requirements for the initial FSE Survey are as follows:
      1.   All existing or new FSE's, including those is areas receiving sewer
service from the City, shall complete and submit an initial FSE survey on a
form provided by the City when requested by the City.
      2.   The initial FSE survey shall cover at a minimum information that
includes a description of processes, kitchen fixtures, water usage and
wastewater characteristics, plus grease usage and management for the facility.
This information will be required to be submitted and will be evaluated by the
City for determination of the requirement to issue a general FSE discharge
permit or FSEP per Section
6-6-8-2.D.
      3.   All new FSE's that establish a new account for sanitary sewer
service or those that transfer an existing FSE account in the City shall file a
completed initial FSE survey with the City as a condition to the establishment
of such new or transferred sanitary sewer service account or connection to the
POTW of the City.
      4.   The initial FSE survey shall contain a statement affirming the
truth, completeness and correctness of information submitted signed by an
authorized representative of the user as defined in Section
6-6-1-6. In the event that the City obtains the information through a site
inspection(s) but the initial FSE survey is not signed by an authorized
representative, the City may proceed to determine classification and permit as
appropriate based on the information obtained at the site.
      5.   All users defined above that fail to complete and submit to the City
an initial FSE survey within thirty (30) calendar days of notice by the City
shall be in violation of the provisions of this Division (Section
6-6-4-1.A) and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof,
including but expressly not limited to the revocation of all permits and
approvals previously granted to the user in question for the discharge of
sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the City. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-4-2: AFFIRMATION TO INITIAL SURVEY:
   (A)   The City shall determine based on building, zoning and occupant usage
whether the user shall be required to file an Affirmation of Survey. The user's
status will be defined by the City after review of the initial survey submitted
as required in Section
6-6-4-1.
   (B)   Any user, defined in Section
6-6-4-1, having filed an initial survey where the information remains true,
complete and correct in all respects may be required to submit a statement that
the information remains current as part of a discharge permit application
process.
      1.   The statement is required to be signed by an authorized
representative of the firm.
      2.   The statement will be due upon request by the City.
      3.   All users defined above that fail to file an affirmation with the
City shall be in violation of the provisions of this division (Section
6-6-4-1) and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof,
including but expressly not limited to the revocation of all permits and
approvals previously granted to the commercial or industrial user in question
for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the City. (Ord. 868,
2-1-2022)
6-6-4-3: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Any user, defined in Section
6-6-4-1, that makes any changes determined to be substantial as defined in
Section
6-6-9-6 shall report said changes as required in Section
6-6-9-6. Reports of changed conditions are required to be made prior to the
change. The user may be required to file an updated survey as a result of
changed conditions. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-4-4: ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION:
   (A)   After review of the initial survey completed per Section
6-6-4-1, all non-residential users that the City has defined to have the
potential to be defined a SIU or a Non-Significant Regulated User (NSRU) shall
be required to complete and file a more detailed wastewater survey on a form
provided by the City. At a minimum, a description of processes, water usage and
wastewater characteristics for the facility will be required to be submitted.
This information will be evaluated by the City for determination of the
requirement to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit per Sections
6-6-7 and
6-6-8 or a general wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Periodic Updates of Wastewater Survey Information. The information
provided in the wastewater survey may be required to be revised and/or updated
for the following conditions:
      1.   A report of changed conditions is filed as required in Section
6-6-9-6;
      2.   An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to be
filed per Sections
6-6-7 and
6-6-8; or
      3.   A re-issuance of a wastewater discharge permit occurs per Section
6-6-8-7.
   (C)   In addition to the wastewater survey defined in Section
6-6-4-4, CIUs may be required to complete a category specific survey that
identifies sub-processes and processes performed at the site in order to define
which sub-processes and processes are regulated by an USEPA effluent guideline
category. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5: GENERAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
6-6-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any
facility served by the City, without having first complied with the terms of
this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter fully apply to any user of the POTW
without regard to the stage of the POTW or discharge process at which the
wastewater of the user enters the POTW.
   (C)   Users must meet the most stringent applicable requirements and
limitations at all times either as set forth in this chapter, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, Federal pretreatment standards as established by
40 CFR Part 403, or State of Illinois Standards as codified in 35 IAC 307. Said
users shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment to achieve compliance
with all national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements within
the time limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment regulations, and
with any other pretreatment standards including local limits and requirements,
by applicable deadlines.
   (D)   Each FSE shall provide wastewater pretreatment and implement best
management practices as necessary to comply with this Chapter and shall achieve
compliance with all local limits and the prohibitions set out in Sections
6-6-5-2 and
6-6-5-5, respectively, within the time limitations specified by the
Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or any other National, State
or local pretreatment standard or requirements.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly to the City POTW, any pollutant or wastewater contaminant which will
pass through, cause interference with, inhibition of, or cause a potential
problem to the operation of the POTW;
   (B)   No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any
other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirements and in a wastewater discharge
permit. The Pretreatment Coordinator may impose mass limitations on users who
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements,
or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate; and
   (C)   No user shall introduce, or cause to be contributed, either directly
or indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or
wastewater into the POTW:
      1.   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated
non-contact cooling water, storm-water, surface and ground-waters, subsurface
drainage, roof run-off, spill contaminant area run-off, footing drains or
construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the Pretreatment
Coordinator;
      2.   Any pollutant which by reason of their nature or quantity, are or
may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause safety hazards,
fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or
personnel of the City, or to the operation of City POTW. Materials considered
in this regard are those with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140º F or
60º C using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      3.   Any solid, solid waste or viscous substance that will cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or the POTW, or other interference to the
operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to:
waste cooking oil, grease, grease interceptor wastes, garbage with particles
greater than one-half (1/2-inch) in any direction, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains or hops, paper, wood,
plastics, residues from gas, tar or asphalt, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or polishing
waste, fatty acids or esters of fatty acids, or any material which can be
disposed of as trash;
      4.   Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases, which either
singly or by their interaction are capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life, or to Interfere with, inhibit or cause a potential problem to
any operation of POTW, including but not limited to, prevention of entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair;
      5.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems or which necessitates the City taking special measures to
counteract and/or alleviate the impact of the pollutant(s);
      6.   Any wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to
interfere with the POTW;
      7.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction, to injure, interfere with or cause a potential
problem to any POTW treatment processes or facilities, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, or to exceed limitation as set forth in the existing Act, or
the Act as it may be amended;
      8.   Any wastewater having a temperature which shall inhibit biological
activity or cause interference in the City's POTW facilities, but in no case
heat in such a quantity that the influent temperature at the POTW will exceed
40º C. (104º F.);
      9.   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel in the POTW. The pH limits are instantaneous
limits that shall be met at all times, and are not subject to averaging;
      10.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration (including any slug
load), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which may cause
interference with, inhibit, or cause a potential problem at the POTW;
      11.   Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving waters of the POTW;
      12.   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, aqueous
firefighting foam or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
collection system or the treatment process that result in POTW interferences
and/or pass through and/or is shown to inhibit the nitrification process.
Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in such a
manner that they could be discharged to the POTW;
      13.   Additives for the purpose of emulsifying or biologically/chemically
treating FOG for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor
maintenance that have a content of enzymes, surfactants or solvents that is
greater than ten percent (10%) of the volume without the written consent of the
Pretreatment Coordinator;
      14.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
      15.   Any wastewater containing any organism, including viruses,
considered pathogenic and/or detrimental to POTW organisms other than by direct
excrement and any other wastes defined as medical wastes;
      16.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except in compliance with City, State and Federal rules governing such
discharges;
      17.   Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      18.   Any leachate, groundwater remediation wastewater or waste material,
originating within the POTW service area, which does not meet discharge
limitations as set forth in this Chapter or determined by this Chapter except
at discharge points designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator;
      19.   All trucked or hauled waste;
      20.   Any bio-solid, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment
of non-residential wastes;
      21.   Any solid, solid waste or viscous substances that have caused an
obstruction to the flow in a sewer that is eliminated by a professional service
or contractor;
      22.   Inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to fullers earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not
limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) that will cause a potential
problem or interfere with POTW operations;
      23.   Any substance with color which is not removed in the treatment
processes, such as, but not limited to: dye waste, ink waste and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      24.   Any substances that inhibit the use of UV for disinfection
purposes;
      25.   Wastewater or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the POTW treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet
the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
      26.   Any substance or combination of substances which shall cause the
POTW facilities to be in violation of its NPDES permit(s), or to cause the
City's POTW to violate receiving stream water quality and/or general effluent
discharge standards;
      27.   Any wastewater causing the POTW effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      28.   Any substance which may cause the City's POTW effluent or bio-
solids, to be unsuitable for reclamation and re-use, or interfere with the
reclamation processes. In no case shall a substance discharged to the City's
POTW cause the City to be in non-compliance with any bio-solids use or disposal
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; or any regulations
affecting bio-solids use or disposal developed pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, Solids Waste Disposal Act, Toxic Substance
Control Act, or any State; or local standards applicable to any bio-solids
management methods either being used, or considered by the City.
      29.   Any waste containing items that could clog or damage the City's
sanitary sewers, pump stations or POTW operation including but not limited to
the following items: disposable wipes, personal care wipes and products,
antibacterial wipes, feminine care products, diapers, baby wipes, wet/dry
cleaning cloths, rags, paper towels, napkins, string, zip ties, laundry dryer
sheets, and any plastic products.
   (D)   Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in
such manner that they could be discharged or introduced to the POTW. All users
with prohibited wastes described in this Section or those that have hazardous
wastes as defined in Section
6-6-9-9 shall develop and implement a spill prevention/slug control containment
and countermeasures plan consistent with the requirements in Section
6-6-6-5. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also determine spill prevention/slug
control is required of liquids and solids not previously described on either
list based on an evaluation of a site potential to cause spills or slug loads
to be introduced to the POTW. Notice Requirements shall be permanently posted
as provided in Sections
6-6-6-5 and
6-6-9-7.
   (E)   Requirements of Polluted Discharges - Discharge Locations:
      1.   Discharge of Polluting Substances From Fixtures into Storm Sewers
Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or user to connect or cause to
be connected, any drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement,
septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging
polluting substances, to any storm sewer or storm water drainage system within
the corporate limits of the City.
      2.   Discharge of Sanitary and Industrial Waste into Storm Drainage
Systems Prohibited, Nuisance Declared. For reasons of the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, is the declared
policy of the City to prohibit sanitary and industrial waste from entering into
the storm water drainage system, and any such connection to the storm water
drainage system is determined to be injurious to the public health and welfare
and is hereby declared a public nuisance.
      3.   Prohibited Discharges into Natural Outlets. It shall be unlawful to
discharge into any natural outlet within the City or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the required permits
have been obtained and is in compliance with the Clean Water Act.
   (F)   Requirements of Unpolluted Discharges
      1.   Discharge of Sump Pumps. A sump pump or sump pumps must discharge
into a storm sewer system; or with the prior written permission of the
Superintendent may discharge outside a building in an area first approved by
the Superintendent. A shut-off value or similar device which can divert the
unpolluted discharge from the sump pump into the sanitary sewer system, rather
than into the storm system, or vice versa, shall not be constructed or
installed, and any construction or installation of same shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this chapter if any person or user has on his premises or under his control a
sump pump, or any other pump, fixture, or gravity drain connected to the
sanitary sewer system which would allow the flow of unpolluted water into the
sanitary sewer system.
      2.   Discharge of Unpolluted Drainage into Storm Sewers or Natural
Outlets. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, upon approval by the Superintendent and the
IEPA if appropriate, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. Discharges are
required to be in compliance with the Clean Water Act.
      3.   Discharge of Unpolluted Discharges Upon Adjacent Property or Public
Streets or Ways Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or user to
discharge any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, or
subsurface drainage, including the use of a sump pump for such purpose in such
manner as to cause waters to overflow onto adjacent property or to be
discharged upon any public street or public way. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-3: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
These pretreatment requirements shall apply to all non-residential users
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, promulgated by the
USEPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, currently
discharging or scheduled to discharge to the City. The national categorical
pretreatment standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 -
471 are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the discharge from
the process regulated by the standard or as otherwise specified by the
standard. Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards is
mandatory.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with paragraphs B and F below and 40 CFR 403.6(c) unless
specifically restricted by the categorical pretreatment standard. These
equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with the following requirements
are deemed pretreatment standards. Users shall be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations instead of the promulgated categorical standards from
which the equivalent limitations were derived. An alternative pretreatment
limit shall not be used if the alternative limit is below the analytical
detection limit for any of the regulated Pollutants. [Optional Streamlining
provision.]
   (B)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit production, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either
as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes
of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual users.
The City calculating equivalent mass-per-day limitations shall calculate such
limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard by the user's average
rate of production. This average rate of production shall be based not upon the
designed production capacity, but rather upon a reasonable measure of the
user's actual long-term daily production during a representative year. For new
sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected production.
The City calculating equivalent concentration limitations shall calculate such
limitations by dividing the mass limitations by the average daily flow rate of
the user's regulated process wastewater. This average daily flow rate must be
based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term average flow
rate, such as the average daily flow rate during the representative year.
   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) provided that the regulation allows the wastewaters
to be mixed and the user can supply the information necessary to allow issuance
of an alternative limit.
   (D)   A user may request a variance from categorical pretreatment standards
from USEPA based on fundamentally different factors. The request must comply
with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
   (E)   A user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical
pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (F)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the City convert the limits
to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to
mass limits is within the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator. The City
may establish equivalent mass limits only if the user meets all the conditions
set forth in Sections 1(a) through 1(e) below.
      1.   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the user must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water during the term of its
individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user's request for
equivalent mass limits.
      2.   A user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than twenty (20) percent from its baseline production rates determined in
paragraph 1(c) of this Section. Upon notification of a revised production rate,
the Pretreatment Coordinator will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise
the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraph 1(a) of
this Section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      3.   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Pretreatment
Coordinator:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the user by the
concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the user's actual average daily
flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates
used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on
the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section
6-6-5-2.B. The user must be in compliance with Section
6-6-16-3 regarding the prohibition of bypass.
   (G)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Pretreatment
Coordinator.
   (H)   Once included in its wastewater discharge permit, the user must comply
with the equivalent limitations developed in this Section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived. Note: see 40 CFR Part 403.6(c)(7).
   (I)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or 4-day average, limitations. Where such
standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used
in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitations. Note:
see 40 CFR Part 403.6(c)(8).
   (J)   Any user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or
concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator with two (2) business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Pretreatment
Coordinator of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or
concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of
the long term average production rate. Note: see 40 CFR Part 403.6(c)(9).
All users that are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards are
required to file reports as required in this chapter, signed by an authorized
representative per Sections
6-6-9-2 and
6-6-9-3. These reports shall include all information that the City deems
necessary to make compliance determinations. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-4: STATE LIMITS:
   (A)   All users are subject to state standards and requirements as defined
in 35 Ill Adm. Code (IAC) 307. Specifically, the standard for discharge of
mercury is as follows:
      1.   Mercury (35 IAC 307.1102);
         (a)   Except as provided below, no person shall cause or allow the
concentration of mercury in any discharge to a publicly owned or publicly
regulated sewer system to exceed the following level, subject to the averaging
rule contained in 35 IAC 304.104(a):
 
CONSTITUENT STORET NUMBER CONCENTRATION mg/1
Mercury     71900         0.0005
 
         (b)   It shall be an exception to subsection a) if the discharge is to
a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which is required to meet a
limitation less stringent than the 0.0005 mg/l mercury concentration in which
case the discharge limitation shall be the same as that applicable to the
publicly owned or regulated sewer system to which it discharges.
         (c)   It shall be an exception to subsection a) if all the following
conditions are met:
            (1)   The discharger does not use mercury; or, the discharger uses
mercury and this use cannot be eliminated; or, the discharger uses mercury only
in chemical analysis or in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable
care to avoid contamination of wastewater; and,
            (2)   The discharge mercury concentration is less than 0.003 mg/l,
as determined by application of the averaging rules of 35 IAC 304.104(a); and
            (3)   The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment
consistent with technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound
engineering judgment. This may include no treatment for mercury; and,
            (4)   The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program
likely to reduce or to prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
         (d)   The discharge of wastes from medicinal or therapeutic use of
mercury, exclusive of laboratory use, shall be exempt from the limitations of
subsection (a) if all the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The total discharge is less than 227 g (one half pound) as
mercury (Hg) in any year;
            (2)   This discharge is to a public sewer system; and
            (3)   The discharge does not, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, causes the effluent from the sewer system or POTW to exceed 0.0005 mg/
l of mercury.
         (e)   No person shall cause or allow any discharge of mercury to a
publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which, alone or in
combination with other sources, causes a violation by the POTW discharge of the
water quality standard of 35 IAC 302 for mercury applicable in the receiving
stream.
         (f)   For purposes of permit issuance the IEPA may consider
application of the exception of subsection (b) or (c) to determine compliance
with this Section. The IEPA may impose permit conditions necessary or required
to assure continued application of the exception. When subsection (b) or (c)
applies, the IEPA may impose an effluent limitation in the permit which allows
the discharge of a concentration of mercury greater than 0.0005 mg/l but not
more than 0.003 mg/l. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-5: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through
and interference.
   (A)   Non-Toxic Pollutants:
 
POLLUTANT (total unless otherwise listed) CONCENTRATION (mg/l)
                                          Daily Maximum Instantaneous
Ammonia Nitrogen                          1.5
Oil and Grease                                          100
Total Suspended Solids                                  250
 
   (B)   Toxic Pollutants: No user shall discharge any wastewater containing
concentrations greater than the daily maximum local limits as set forth below
into any sewers that connect either directly or indirectly to the POTW.
POLLUTANT (total unless otherwise listed) CONCENTRATION (mg/l)
                                          Daily Maximum Instantaneous
POLLUTANT (total unless otherwise listed) CONCENTRATION (mg/l)
                                          Daily Maximum Instantaneous
Arsenic                                   1.0
Barium                                    5.0
Boron                                     1.0
Cadmium                                   0.05
Chloride                                  500
Chlorine                                  25
Chromium (hexavalent)                                   0.05
Chromium (trivalent)                      1.0
Copper                                    0.02
Cyanide                                                 0.025
Fluoride                                  1.4
Iron                                      1.0
Lead                                      0.1
Manganese                                 1.0
Mercury (see Section                      0.0005
6-6-5-4)
Nickel                                    1.0
Phenols                                                 0.1
Selenium                                  1.0
Silver                                    0.0005
Sulfate                                                 500
Zinc                                      1.0
 
   (C)   FSE Twenty-five Percent (25%) Requirement. The City reserves the right
to apply a Twenty-five Percent (25%) Requirement at the discharge side of the
external GI prior to mixing with any other wastewater from the contributing
FSE's property in lieu of the limits listed in Section
6-6-5-5.A above. The last section of an external GI at an FSE shall be measured
to determine that the total volume of the GI being used for any food-derived
solids to settle or accumulate plus the floatable grease-derived materials that
rise and accumulate, identified as a solids blanket and grease cap
respectively, is less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total design
hydraulic depth as measured from the effluent discharge pipe to the bottom
("Twenty-five Percent (25%) Requirement"). The City may also apply the Twenty-
five Percent (25%) Requirement for external GI that are used in non-FSE
locations such as an automobile service, repair and dispensing properties.
   (D)   The City will apply the local limits found in Sections
6-6-5-5.A and B above normally at the end-of-pipe point where the non-
residential waste is discharged to the municipal sewer system.
   (E)   The City reserves the right to establish requirements, by ordinance or
in a wastewater discharge permit or general permit, to require control over the
quantities and rates of discharge from any user.
   (F)   The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in a
wastewater discharge permit, mass limitations rather than concentration
limitations on discharges particularly if users are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   (G)   The City reserves the right to set specific limits for those
pollutants not identified in Sections
6-6-5-5.A or B on a case by case basis for impacts caused to the POTW including
but not limited to interference, potential problem, pass-through and prevention
of beneficial bio-solids re-use. Those limits shall be set forth in a
wastewater discharge permit per Section
6-6-8.
      1.   Local limits for additional pollutants not identified in Sections
6-6-5-5.A or B will be noticed to the permit holder a minimum of thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit. In the
event that the City receives written comment on said limit during the comment
period, the limit will take effect within sixty (60) days of the public notice
date to allow review and comment by the City.
   (H)   The City may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by ordinance or
in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement
local limits and the requirements of Section
6-6-5-2.
   (I)   Any user whose discharge may be pretreated and/or treated more
effectively by the City, and Discharges to the City's POTW that cause the City
to alter its method of wastewater treatment or bio-solids disposal to a more
costly method shall be assessed the differential cost between the more costly
method of treatment and the less costly method of treatment. Such costs shall
only be assessed upon approval of the City Council. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-6: RIGHT OF REVISION:
   (A)   The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits or general permits, more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this
chapter. The specific limitations on discharge listed in Section
6-6-5-5 are derived from the maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL)
calculation. The MAILs are allocated only to those IUs, at the City's
discretion, that contribute the regulated pollutant and all remaining IUs are
held to either the background concentration or slightly higher than background
but lower than the specific discharge limit. In no case shall the total of all
allocations exceed the MAIL.
   (B)   The City will maintain a reserve of the maximum allowable headworks
pollutant loading for each pollutant for new industries or increase with
existing industries. The City will recalculate the maximum concentrations from
time to time using site specific data taking into consideration revisions to
State and Federal regulations that may impact the calculations. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-5-7: MONITORING FACILITIES:
   (A)   Sampling Manhole Applicability.
      1.   All non-residential users are required to install a sampling manhole
for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with the plans
and specifications approved by the City and Section
6-6-3-6.
         a.   When required by the City, a SIU or NSRU, that does not have a
unique sampling chamber at end-of-pipe, shall install a monitoring manhole or
sampling chamber for use as the regulation location of local limits in the
building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
City.
         b.   When required by the /City, a CIU shall install a monitoring
manhole or sampling chamber for use as the regulation location of the
categorically regulated discharge in the building sewer in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the City. This sampling chamber may be
required to be installed within the building and may be in addition to an end-
of-pipe manhole.
      2.   The City reserves the right to apply said local limits in Section
6-6-5-5.A and B at an end-of process discharge location that connects to the
POTW sewer system in the event that:
         a.   A unique sampling manhole at end-of-pipe is not available;
         b.   A more representative sample can be taken of a process batch
discharge even though an end-of-pipe manhole exists;
         c.   A more representative sample can be taken at the end-of-process
location than the end-of-pipe location as a result of impacts from dilute
wastestreams;
         d.   An end-of process location is used because the IU is unable to
provide adequate flow documentation to use a combined wastestream formula.
      3.   In the event that a suitable sampling manhole does not exist as per
Section
6-6-5-7 and no end-of-process discharge sampling location exists, the "sampling
facility" shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (B)   Wastewater Monitoring and/or Flow Measurement Facility Operation and
Maintenance
      1.   Such facilities will be installed and maintained at all times at the
user's expense. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that the sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Installation will be consistent
with the requirements of Section
6-6-3-6.
      2.   The manhole or chamber located on a building sewer discharge located
in dedicated easements shall be easily accessible to representatives of the
City twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
      3.   The manhole or chamber at a discharge location within the building
shall be accessible to representatives of the City during normal user operating
hours.
      4.   Metered water supply may be used to determine wastewater flow if it
is substantiated to the City that the metered water supply and wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the
City is made in the metered water supply to determine wastewater flow which is
documented through the use of sub-meters and/or production records. In the
event that the wastewater flow cannot be substantiated at any regulated
location, the user will be required to install flow monitoring consistent with
Section
6-6-3-6.
      5.   The sampling chamber, flow metering device, sampling equipment and
documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analysis of
samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection by the City.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-8: MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Applicability: At minimum, all SIU including CIU as well as Non-
Significant Regulated Users (NSRU) are required to sample based on the City
monitoring frequency as stated in the wastewater discharge permit. Other users
are required to sample upon the request of the City. The users shall pay the
costs of sampling of its discharge and the costs of analyses of its samples,
whether or not the sampling and analyses are done by the user or by the POTW.
   (B)   Frequency:
      1.   All SIU including CIU with wastewater discharge permits must sample
their effluent consistent with the permit requirements and report the results
to the POTW at least twice yearly. The City may specify more frequent
reporting, quarterly or monthly, dependent of the frequency for those
parameters specified in the user's permit and the City monitoring frequency
defined in the City's Enforcement Response Plan. The SIU may have the City
conduct routine monitoring using an independent laboratory. Sampling visits of
this type will normally be unannounced.
      2.   Any NSRU with an individual or general wastewater discharge permit
shall sample their effluent and report the results to the POTW consistent with
the requirements of the wastewater discharge permit and the City Monitoring
Frequency.
      3.   The City shall have the right to perform its own sampling at any
time at any location. City data will be used for all surcharge evaluations.
      4.   The City may resample a FSE within thirty (30) calendar days when a
violation of the twenty-five percent (25%) requirement as defined in Section
6-6-5-5.D is identified.
      5.   The City may initiate sampling and analyses at a greater frequency
as a result of a violation of any discharge permit limit, including cases where
hot spot maintenance issues or blockage to the sanitary sewer system has
occurred.
      6.   The Pretreatment Coordinator will define sampling and analyses for
any batch discharges as appropriate.
      7.   Cost of City sampling and analyses for any monitoring will be
invoiced to the applicable user.
   (C)   Sample Collection:
      1.   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the entire sampling and reporting period as defined
in the wastewater discharge permit.
      2.   Except as indicated in Subsections C.3 and C.5 below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.
      3.   In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling at
minimum collecting samples every fifteen (15) minutes during a twenty-four
(24)-hour workday; or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. A proportional number of samples shall be collected for
wastewater discharges less than twenty-four (24) hours.
      4.   Single grab samples may be required in the event of an infrequent
batch discharge or to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      5.   Samples for fats, oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
hexavalent chromium, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Multiple
grab samples that are individually preserved as specified in 40 CFR 136 and
appropriate USEPA guidance that are collected during a twenty-four (24)-hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis, as follows:
         (a)   For, cyanide, hexavalent chromium, phenols, and sulfides:
multiple grab samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field;
         (b)   For volatile organics and oil and grease: multiple grab samples
may only be composited in the laboratory.
      6.   Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the
City, as appropriate. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-5-9: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part
of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the USEPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the Pretreatment Coordinator or other parties approved by USEPA. (Ord. 868,
2-1-2022)
6-6-5-10: PROTECTION OF CITY SAMPLING AND FLOW METERING EQUIPMENT FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is owned or contracted by the City. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 868,
2-1-2022)
6-6-6: GENERAL DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE:
6-6-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
Each user that discharges non-residential source waste shall provide wastewater
treatment and best management practices as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section
6-6-5 within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the State, or the
Pretreatment Coordinator, whichever is more stringent. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-6-2: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Any pretreatment facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Pretreatment
Coordinator for review, and shall be acceptable to the Pretreatment Coordinator
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the
City under the provisions of this chapter.
All users are required to comply with IEPA permitting requirements. Users shall
obtain all necessary construction-operating permits from the IEPA prior to the
City connection and/or discharge permit(s) being issued. IEPA will make the
determination of actual permitting requirements based on changes in the
wastewater volume or characteristics generated at the user site. The City will
track and parallel this IEPA permitting process. No sources of non-residential
wastewater will be allowed to discharge to City POTW until all permitting
requirements have been satisfied. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under
the control and direction of an IEPA-certified wastewater operator.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported to the City and IEPA prior to the user's initiation of the
changes. Users shall obtain all additional construction-operating permits from
IEPA and the City for the changes prior to discharge. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-6-3: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
At minimum, the City may require the additional pretreatment measures defined
below. The City reserves the right to make unannounced inspections of any
additional pretreatment measures during normal business hours whether the user
has been issued an individual or general wastewater discharge permit or not.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person or user
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. The City may issue an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (D)   Grease Interceptor (GI) maintenance. A GI located inside an FSE will
be inspected and cleaned weekly. A GI located outside an FSE on its property
shall be inspected and the grease cap and solids blanket minimally cleaned
every three months; the entire contents of the trap cleaned annually; and the
GI repaired regularly, as needed, by the Owner at his expense. Logs of
inspection and cleaning are to be posted in a readily accessible location of
the facility. It shall be the responsibility of the FSE to inspect its GI
during the pumping procedure to ensure the trap is properly cleaned out and
that all fittings and fixtures inside the trap are in working condition and
functioning properly. In the event that actual operations of the GI fail to
produce results that consistently prevent prohibitive discharges, as defined in
Section
6-6-5-2, or fail to meet local limits, as defined in Section
6-6-5-5, the owner of the FSE will be required by the Superintendent to have
the GI cleaned at a more frequent rate or install or modify pretreatment as
necessary. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-6-4: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) PLAN:
   (A)   FSE's may be required to develop, implement and maintain Best
Management Practices (BMP) plans that include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Proper storage of unused cooking oil;
      2.   Segregation, collection, and proper storage of waste cooking oil;
      3.   Disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage disposal;
      4.   Installation of drain screens for sinks and floors, to be emptied
into trash receptacles;
      5.   Sweep all floor debris for solid waste disposal prior to wash down;
      6.   Clean all mats and dispose of mop water through a utility sink that
is connected to the FOG control mechanism;
      7.   Wipe-up grease spills before using water;
      8.   Employee training within ninety (90) days of initiation and twice
each calendar year thereafter;
      9.   Grease interceptor maintenance;
      10.   Kitchen vent, hood and exhaust filter maintenance;
      11.   Record keeping requirements;
      12.   Notifications required for spills or slug loads changes; and
      13.   Notices and signage advising employees in the language used in the
kitchen.
All FSE's that meet the criteria defined in Section
6-6-6-1 are required to develop and implement a BMP plan regardless whether
such FSE are regulated by a wastewater discharge permit or not.
   (B)   Each FSE meeting the criteria in Section
6-6-6-1 is to provide ready documentation as follows that the provisions of the
BMP plan are being implemented:
      1.   Specifics of documentation:
         (a)   Site diagram showing location of all containers holding unused
or spent yellow grease;
         (b)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
discharge to storm or sanitary sewers. Such procedures include, but are not
limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training and building of containment structures or equipment;
         (c)   Location of notice/signs posted in conspicuous places advising
employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event
of a spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug discharge or a
bypass of any part of a pretreatment system; and
         (d)   Off-site emergency (24-hour) telephone number, and backup
telephone number.
      2.   Notification Procedure. The BMP plan shall contain procedures for
immediately notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or slug
discharge of any raw materials or recycled oil to either the sanitary or storm
sewer consistent with the requirements in Section
6-6-9-7.
   (C)   The City may require the submittal of BMP plans and documentation of
procedures required in this Section. Review of such plans and documentation of
procedures by the City shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to
modify the user's facility or BMP plan and procedures as necessary to meet all
requirements of this chapter. Review by the City does not constitute an
approval of a BMP plan and procedures, and the City and its designee(s) are not
to be construed as responsible for the actions of the user and any impacts the
user may cause as a result of a spill or slug discharge. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-6-5: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE AND SLUG CONTROL PLAN:
   (A)   All permitted non-residential users are required to develop, implement
and maintain BMPs in the form of an Accidental Discharge & Slug Control Plan
hereafter referred to as spill plan. All non-residential users that meet the
below criteria are required and implement a spill plan regardless whether the
user is regulated by a discharge permit or not.
      1.   Chemicals (raw materials, chemical intermediates, wastes to be
recycled, final products, or utility chemicals) that total or exceed 250
gallons at or on its site;
      2.   Prohibited discharge materials as defined in Section
6-6-5-2 at or on its site; or
      3.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section
6-6-9-9 at or on its site; or
      4.   Been defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to have a need to
control slug discharges.
   (B)   The spill plan which is required to be submitted to the City for
review if the user's discharge is regulated shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.   Specifics of Spill Plan:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals, including quantity of chemicals
and type and number of storage containers;
         (c)   Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than
or equal to two hundred and fifty (250) gallons or areas containing eight (8)
drums or more of raw materials, prohibited wastes, wastes to be recycled,
hazardous wastes or final product. Identification and location of all liquid
materials is mandatory;
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. Building containment structures or production equipment changes are
considered procedures to prevent adverse spills. If containment structures are
connected to the sanitary sewer, a valve normally left in a closed position is
required;
         (e)   Location of notice/signs posted in conspicuous places advising
employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event
of a spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug discharge or a
bypass of any part of a pretreatment system; and
         (f)   Emergency telephone number (24-hour) off-site and backup
telephone number. If the spill plan has been submitted, any change in the
telephone numbers should be submitted within five working days when revised.
      2.   Notification Procedure. The spill plan shall contain procedures for
immediately notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or slug
discharge, as required by Section
6-6-9-7;
      3.   Documentation. The spill plan shall contain a sample of the
documentation maintained at the site that:
         (a)   Ensures that all employees who are in a position to cause,
discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures; and
         (b)   Such logs to verify inspection and maintenance procedures to
prevent adverse impacts and confirm that said procedures are being performed on
a regular basis. At minimum, logs are required to verify valves in containment
structures, if present, are closed.
   (C)   Review of such plans and operating procedures by the City shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility or spill
plan as necessary to meet all requirements of this chapter. Review by the City
does not constitute an approval of a spill plan and the City and its designee
(s) are not to be construed as responsible for the actions of the user and any
impacts the user may cause as a result of a spill or slug load.
   (D)   At least once every two (2) years the Pretreatment Coordinator shall
evaluate whether each SIU needs a revision to its spill plan. The Pretreatment
Coordinator may require any user to submit at a frequency less than two (2)
years such spill plan or require modification of an existing spill plan based
on changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that
had the potential to impact the POTW.
In alternate years, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each
NSRU is required to file a revision to its spill plan based on changes that
have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had the potential
to impact the POTW. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-6-6: CLOSURE PLAN:
   (A)   Any non-residential user meeting the requirements of Section
6-6-6-5.A including but not limited to those with wastewater discharge permits
that determines it will cease operations permanently, or if some of the
processes that classify the user as significant are closed, the user shall file
a written closure plan with the City. The closure plan shall be submitted 10
working days prior to the initiation of the plan and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   A description of each wastewater generating process that will be
closed;
      2.   A description of how the facility will be closed and the extent of
operations during the closure period;
      3.   An inventory and estimate of the volume of all process wastewater,
chemicals, and hazardous waste on site. A description of the methods for
disposal, including procedures for removing, transporting, treating, storing,
or disposing of all waste and identifying all off-site waste management
facilities to be used;
      4.   A schedule of the closure activities indicating the time required to
complete each closure step; and
      5.   Additional monitoring scheduled that will identify compliance with
pretreatment standards during the closure operations. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION:
6-6-7-1: WASTEWATER INFORMATION AND ANALYSIS:
When requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) calendar
days of the request. The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to prepare a
form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also prepare specialized forms
for various business types and functions. Information that may be required will
be consistent with that identified in Section
6-6-4 and Section
6-6-7-5. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-2: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT AUTHORITY AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to Significant
Industrial Users (SIUs) which includes Categorical Industrial Users (CIUs). No
SIU, including any CIU, shall discharge wastewater to the POTW without first
obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the Pretreatment
Coordinator except that a SIU, including any CIU, that has filed a timely
application pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
   (B)   General Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to SIU and CIU. At the
discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, the City may use general wastewater
discharge permits to control SIU or CIU discharges to the POTW if the following
conditions are met:
      1.   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
      2.   Discharge the same types of waste;
      3.   Require the same effluent limitations or BMPs;
      4.   Require the same or similar monitoring and/or reporting
requirements; and
      5.   In the opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, are more
appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.
   (C)   Other Wastewater Discharge Permits. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require other non-residential users to obtain either individual or general
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. The wastewater discharge permit will define that holders of permits
issued under this section shall not be classified as SIUs. Non-residential
users with wastewater discharge permits in this class may include but are not
limited to:
      1.   Any user that has been determined to be a non-significant CIU as
defined in Section
6-6-1-6;
      2.   Any user that has been determined not to be a SIU as defined in
Section
6-6-1-6 that the Pretreatment Coordinator requires to be regulated by
wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Any user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards that
opts not to discharge pollutants shall obtain a zero process wastewater
discharge permit;
      4.   Any user that is a non-categorical zero process wastewater
discharger that the Pretreatment Coordinator determines shall be permitted;
      5.   Non-Significant Regulated Users (NSRU) as defined below.
         (a)   NSRU that discharge a process wastewater flow greater than or
equal to one half (0.5) percent of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic
capacity, or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller;
         (b)   NSRU that discharge more than or equal to one half (0.5) percent
of the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW;
         (c)   NSRU that discharge one half (0.5) percent of the maximum
allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by a local limit
developed in accordance with Section
6-6-5-5; or
         (d)   NSRU that intermittently discharge any individual batch or
batches that would meet the criteria in 1, 2, or 3 above when discharged or
otherwise has the potential to discharge a slug load to the POTW;
      6.   Non-residential users that have devices installed to remove oils,
grease and sand;
      7.   Food Service Establishments (FSE);
      8.   Non-residential users required to eliminate or control specified
pollutants from their wastestream through the development and implementation of
a BMP Plan;
      9.   Non-residential users that discharge into any portion of the POTW;
      10.   Direct dischargers with NPDES Permits (as defined by IEPA) that use
any portion of the POTW.
   (D)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections
6-6-13 through
6-6-15. Obtaining an individual or general wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-3: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING
CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Any SIU or CIU required to obtain an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within ninety (90) calendar days after said date, apply to
the Pretreatment Coordinator for the appropriate wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with Section
6-6-7-5, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
180 calendar days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   Any non-SIU or non-CIU that is required to obtain individual or
general wastewater discharge permits shall file an application not less than
ninety (90) calendar days or within the time frame required in a notification
sent by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   General Permits for Food Service Establishments. No person shall
discharge, or cause to discharge any wastewater from FSE directly or indirectly
into the sewer system without first obtaining a FSE wastewater discharge
permit. The City will implement the FSE permit process by issuing a survey
provided by Section
6-6-4 specific to FSE. The survey will serve as the discharge application. Any
FSE that submits a survey in the timeframe required by the City will be deemed
to have complied with the permit requirements during the implementation of this
program. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-4: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW
CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Any CIU who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW
must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with Section
6-6-7-5, must be filed at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence pending review by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   Any non-CIU who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the
POTW that is required to obtain an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge or operations in the case of a zero process discharger, in accordance
with Section
6-6-7-5. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge
permit must be filed at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date upon
which any discharge or operations will begin or recommence pending review by
the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   An FSE that propose new connections may be required to obtain a
general FSE discharge permit in accordance with Section
6-6-7-5. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-5: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
CONTENTS:
   (A)   Individual Application Requirement. All users required to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit or zero process wastewater discharge
permit must submit a permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications
will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
   (B)   Individual Application Contents. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require all users to submit as part of an application all or some of the
following information:
      1.   All information required by Sections
6-6-4-1,
6-6-4-3 and
6-6-4-4;
      2.   Identifying and contact information for the site including name and
address of the facility, the name of the operator and owner as well as contact
information for the authorized representative and daily on-site contact.
      3.   Description of Operations.
         (a)   A brief description of the nature of the activities, services,
production, and plant processes on the premises. Include each product produced
by type, amount, process or processes, and a general rate of production.
         (b)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (c)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day) including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      4.   Time and duration of discharges with an estimate of the average
daily and maximum flow;
      5.   Waste Characteristics. Information showing the nature and
concentration of the discharge in relation to applicable pretreatment standards
and local limits;
      6.   Requests for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant regulated as a
categorical pretreatment neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Representative sampling and analysis
will be required to substantiate the request;
      7.   Plans and Diagrams
         (a)   Site plans / floor plans that show the footprint of the building
with an outline of major equipment similar to an emergency exit plan;
         (b)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         (c)   A diagram showing the location for monitoring the discharge of
all wastes covered by the permit; and
      8.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      9.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (C)   General Application Requirement. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require all users that are required to obtain a general wastewater discharge
permit to submit an application on a form provided by the City, which is
specific to the category regulated by the general wastewater discharge permit.
The form may require but is not limited to contact information, production
processes, the types of wastes generated, and the location for monitoring all
wastes if regulated by the general permit. Where the standard will require
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (D)   General Application Requirement for Food Service Establishments (FSE).
The Pretreatment Coordinator may require all FSE that are required to obtain a
general wastewater discharge permit to submit an application on a form provided
by the City which is specific to FSE. The form may require but is not limited
to contact information, general business information; facility operation;
kitchen fixtures; fats, oil and grease handling, kitchen clean-up and water
usage, grease interceptor or alternatives used, and sampling locations. The
City requires FSE to comply with a BMP and the FSE shall submit documentation
as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
    E.   Categorical Monitoring Waivers
      1.   Authority. Pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2)(v) and (vi), the
City may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling and other
technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be
present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake
water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the user.
This waiver is not available to users whose concentration standards are derived
from mass standards or production based standards. This authorization is
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than 5 years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before
the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge
permit.
         (c)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in Categorical Pretreatment Standards, except as
otherwise specified in the Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
      2.   Application Requirements
         (a)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         (b)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with Section
6-6-7-6, and include the certification statement in Section
6-6-7-6.
         (c)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was
used in the analysis.
      3.   Documentation and Record Retention for CIU Monitoring Waivers: Any
grant of the monitoring waiver by the Pretreatment Coordinator must be included
as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Pretreatment Coordinator for 3 years after expiration of the
waiver.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-6: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations".
   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this Section must be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator
prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-7: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt
of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Pretreatment
Coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. The Pretreatment Coordinator may deny any application for a Wastewater
Discharge Permit. If the Pretreatment Coordinator fails to act within ninety
(90) calendar days, a request for permit application shall be deemed to be
denied. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-8: TRUCKED DISCHARGES:
No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of any trucked wastes upon any
property of the City or at the POTW. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-7-9: INTERMITTENT DISCHARGES AND CLEAN-UPS:
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall discharge atypical waste,
contaminated waters from any non-domestic source or special waste or leachate
on an intermittent or one-time basis without first obtaining a connection
permit and wastewater discharge permit as provided in Sections
6-6-3-3 and
6-6-7-2, respectively. The request to discharge and project description shall
be submitted on a form provided by the City. In the event that such waste will
be hauled to a discharge point designated by the City, the discharger shall
also comply with the provisions of Section
6-6-7-7.
   (B)   An evaluation by the City shall be made to determine provisions
necessary to prevent the introduction of pollutants to the wastewater treatment
system which could:
      1.   Cause injury, interference or otherwise be incompatible with the
system or the use or disposal of bio-solids;
      2.   Constitute a hazard to humans, animals or the environment; and/or
      3.   Cause pass-through of pollutants into the receiving waters or the
atmosphere.
Provisions may include site specific discharge rates, unique standards - either
concentration or mass based or both, special monitoring and/or pretreatment
requirements. The discharge water from these special projects may be subject to
one or more surcharge fees as defined in Section
6-6-18-1. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS:
6-6-8-1: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of
the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Pretreatment
Coordinator. Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
   (B)   A general wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specific
time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the
permit. The City will identify in the individual or general wastewater
discharge permit whether or not the permittee is defined as a SIU.
   (C)   A general FSE discharge permit (FSEP) may be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed three (3) years from the effective date of the
permit. Each FSEP will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
   (D)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may extend a permit issued under Section
6-6-8-1.A, B or C above with a duration of less than five (5) years to a
maximum duration of five (5) years upon written notification. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-8-2: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate bio-solids management
and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (A)   Individual and General Wastewater Discharge Permits must contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the City in accordance with Section
6-6-8-5, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Effluent limits, including BMPs, based on applicable pretreatment
standards;
      4.   Requirements to control accidental spills and slug discharges, if
determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary;
      5.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants or BMPs to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
      6.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
   (B)   An individual wastewater discharge permit may contain the process for
seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge in accordance with Section
6-6-7-5.E. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Pretreatment Coordinator
shall be included as a condition of the user's permit.
   (C)   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits may contain, but
need not be limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to equalize, reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the POTW;
      3.   Requirements that allow the use of bypass of the pretreatment system
conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and Section
6-6-16-3;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
prevention containment and countermeasures/slug control plan or other special
conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Development and implementation of BMP Plans to reduce the amount of
pollutants discharged to the POTW if the categorical standards do not already
require the implementation of a BMP Plan;
      7.   The unit charge and/or schedule of surcharge fees for the management
of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      8.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      9.   Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a
national categorical pretreatment standard or local standard;
      10.   Documentation of any monitoring waiver approved by the Pretreatment
Coordinator for categorically regulated pollutants found to be not present and
requirements to re-institute monitoring in the event that a waived pollutant is
found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur
in the user's operation;
      11.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      12.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
   (D)   General Permits for Food Service Establishments. The general permit
for FSE will include grease interceptor requirements with operation and
maintenance requirements. All FSE shall implement BMP plan in its operation to
minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. Detailed requirements for
BMP plans shall be specified in the permit. This may include but is not limited
to:
      1.   Installation of drain screens;
      2.   Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil;
      3.   Disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage;
      4.   Employee training;
      5.   Record keeping requirements;
      6.   Notifications required, and
      7.   Kitchen signage.
If the FSE has a waiver for some aspect of the program, that waiver will be
documented in an attachment to the permit. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8-3: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the
user, may petition the Pretreatment Coordinator to reconsider the terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) calendar days of notice of its
issuance. The following conditions apply to wastewater discharge permit
appeals:
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (D)   If the Pretreatment Coordinator fails to act within thirty (30)
calendar days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit
shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial
review.
   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court for Kankakee County within sixty (60) calendar days. (Ord. 868,
2-1-2022)
6-6-8-4: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   To address substantial alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      3.   To address introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver
had been obtained;
      4.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      5.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
      6.   Violation of any terms or condition of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      7.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      8.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      9.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit;
      10.   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by Section
6-6-8-5; or
      11.   To reflect the issuance of a monitoring waiver.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may modify a general wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      3.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
      4.   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by Section
6-6-8-5. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8-5: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits shall not be transferred, assigned, or sold to a
new owner or new user in different premises or to a new or different operation
in the same or different premises without the expressed written approval of the
City. If the premises sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new
owner who will maintain the operation in the same premises, whether or not the
seller will continue to operate the equipment or the equipment is leased to
another entity for its operation at the site of the original permittee, then
the permit held by the seller and/or owner shall be reissued by the City to the
new owner and/or operator as a temporary permit; provided:
   (A)   The new owner and/or operator notified the City thirty (30) calendar
days in advance of the transaction, and
   (B)   The new owner and/or operator confirmed to the City, within 5 working
days of the transaction, of completion of the date of sale or execution of an
operating contract, and
   (C)   The new owner and/or operator shall apply for a new permit within
ninety (90) calendar days.
Failure to provide the sale/transfer notification defined in subsection A and B
above, renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of said sale and/or
transfer date. It is further provided that the temporary permit shall only be
effective for one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the date of sale or
transfer. The City shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary
permits as it has for violation of other wastewater discharge permits. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8-6: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may revoke an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
   (A)   Failure to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of significant changes
to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   (B)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Pretreatment Coordinator
of changed conditions pursuant to Sections
6-6-9-5 and
6-6-9-6;
   (C)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   (D)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
   (E)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   (F)   Refusing to allow the Pretreatment Coordinator and designee(s) timely
access to the facility premises and records;
   (G)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   (H)   Failure to pay fines;
   (I)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   (J)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   (K)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   (L)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or
operation ownership of a permitted facility; or
   (M)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business or operation ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8-7: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT RE-ISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, in accordance with Section
6-6-7-5, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-8-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (B)   The City shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality at a frequency determined by the City:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharge to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the Pretreatment Coordinator may deem
necessary.
   (C)   An intergovernmental agreement, as required by paragraph A, above,
shall contain the following conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which
are at least as stringent as those set out in Sections
6-6-5-2 and
6-6-5-5 for the area to be served by the City. The requirement shall specify
that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes
made to the City's ordinance or local limits.
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
non-residential user inventory at a frequency determined by the City but likely
on an annual basis;
      3.   A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the Pretreatment Coordinator;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Pretreatment Coordinator with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      7.   A provision ensuring the Pretreatment Coordinator access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the inter-municipal agreement. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
Each user of the POTW and facilities of the City shall provide reports as
necessary to comply with this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit.
Reporting requirements may apply to users that are not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-1: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USERS:
Should the City find that a non-residential user does not meet pretreatment
standards and requirements applicable to its discharge, causes or contributes
to a potential problem at the POTW, or when analysis of waste or observation of
the effect of such wastes on the POTW indicate that said wastes cannot be
treated satisfactorily at such POTW, or that said wastes are injurious to the
POTW, or to the treatment processes, or pollute the natural waters within the
City, its service areas or the Waters of the State of Illinois additional
pretreatment and/or O&M will be required by the City to meet pretreatment
standards and requirements. Such facilities as the City may deem necessary for
Pretreatment of the wastes shall be furnished by and at the expense of the user
as a condition of the discharge of said wastes into the POTW or to any natural
water within the City service area.
   (A)   Pretreatment Review: The Pretreatment Coordinator will require the
user to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter or
certified letter to the authorized representative of the user.
   (B)   Pretreatment Initiation Meeting. A Pretreatment Initiation Meeting
will be held between the Pretreatment Coordinator and the user to discuss the
problem and the solution to said problem. If it determined that changes in
operation and maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of
pretreatment equipment shall occur to resolve non-compliance, a schedule shall
be established with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both parties
to resolve the non-compliance. If appropriate, a compliance agreement defining
the agreed upon schedule will be sent from the City to the user shortly after
the meeting. If a schedule for compliance acceptable to the Pretreatment
Coordinator cannot be established, the matter will be referred for further
enforcement action consistent with the provisions of Section
6-6-13 as appropriate.
   (C)   Progress Reports. Progress reports will be filed by the user on a
schedule agreed to by the Pretreatment Coordinator and the user concerning the
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation). The user shall identify whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule.
   (D)   Final Report. A final report will be filed with the Pretreatment
Coordinator by the user normally required within 90 calendar days from the end
of the schedule deadline to verify the success or failure or the schedule
objective chosen by the user. The final report will if appropriate identify the
steps being taken by the user to resolve non-compliance. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USERS:
In the event that either the City, EPA or a user determines that the user is
regulated as a CIU by Standards and requirements promulgated by the USEPA in
accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, the following reports are
required to be filed by the user with both the City and USEPA.
   (A)   Baseline Monitoring Reports: Within either one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard,
or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing CIUs currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator
a report which contains the information listed below. At least ninety (90)
calendar days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become CIUs subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report
which contains the information listed below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      1.   Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      2.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
      4.   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      5.   Measurements of Pollutants.
         (a)   The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources;
         (b)   The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous daily maximum and long-
term average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard
requires a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard;
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
complete that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
A minimum of four (4) grab samples are required for pH, cyanide, total phenols,
oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds;
         (d)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow the use of the combined wastestream formula
of 40 CFR Part 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority;
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section
6-6-5-8 and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section
6-6-5-9;
         (f)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures; and
         (g)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the City.
      6.   Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative of the user (as defined in Section
6-6-1-6), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
      7.   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section
6-6-9-2.B.
      8.   Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
6-6-7-6.
   (B)   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by Section
6-6-9-2.A.7:
      1.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
      2.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) calendar
months;
      3.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Pretreatment
Coordinator no later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in
the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule;
      4.   In no event shall more than nine (9) calendar months elapse between
such progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator; and
      5.   All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section
6-6-7-6.
   (C)   Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline:
Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in
Section
6-6-9-2.A. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c) and Section
6-6-5-3, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
6-6-7-6. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS/SELF-MONITORING REPORTS:
   (A)   Significant Non-Categorical Industrial Users:
      1.   Significant Non-Categorical Industrial Users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than twice per
year (on dates specified by the City) submit a report to the City with a
description of the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
      2.   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of Sections
6-6-5-8 and
6-6-5-9.
      3.   All sampling and analysis may be performed by the City in lieu of
the significant non-categorical industrial user. In such cases, the City will
issue an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the City
will perform sampling and analysis semi-annually at minimum.
      4.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary
to determine the compliance status of the user.
      5.   Where the City itself collects all the information required for the
report, the significant non-categorical industrial user will not be required to
submit the report.
   (B)   Categorical Industrial Users:
      1.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standard
(CIU) shall, at a frequency determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but in
no case less than twice per year on dates specified by the City (normally in
July and January), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
At the discretion of the City and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the City may agree to
alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Section
6-6-7-6.
      2.   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of Sections
6-6-5-8 and
6-6-5-9.
      3.   This sampling and analysis may be performed by the City in lieu of
CIU. In such cases, the City will issue an attachment to the wastewater
discharge permit that specifies the City will perform sampling and analysis
semi-annually at minimum.
      4.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in Sections
6-6-5-8 and
6-6-5-9, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
      5.   Where the City has imposed mass limitations on users as provided for
by 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), the report required by paragraph B.1 of this section
shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment standards
in the discharge from the industrial user.
      6.   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the City in accordance with the procedures in in Section
6-6-5-3, the report required by paragraph B.1 shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the
report required by paragraph B.1 shall include the user's actual average
production rate for the reporting period.
      7.   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary
to determine the compliance status of the user.
      8.   Upon approval of a monitoring waiver for pollutants found to be not
present and revision of the user's permit by the Pretreatment Coordinator, the
user must certify on each periodic report with the statement in Section
6-6-7-6, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream
due to activities of the user with the following statement:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______(specify applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard part(s)), I certify that, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of the
_________(list the categorically regulated pollutant(s)) in the wastewaters due
to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report."
      9.   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of Section
6-6-9-3.B.1 or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, and notify the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   Non-Significant Categorical Users
      1.   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial Users as defined in Section
6-6-1-6 shall, at a frequency determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but no
less frequently than annually (on dates specified by the City) submit a report
which contains the certification statement contained in Section
6-6-9-3.C.2 below.
      2.   Certification Statement.
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ___, I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period
from _____________,________ to _____________,________ (months, days, year):
         (a)   The facility described as _____________________________
(facility name) met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial
User as described by Section
6-6-1-6;
         (b)   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
         (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information:
________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
___________________"
The report is required to be signed by an authorized representative of the
user.
   (D)   Other Non-Significant Regulated Users:
      1.   Categorical Zero Process Dischargers, Non-Categorical Zero Process
Dischargers, Batch Dischargers, Food Service Establishments and any firms
regulated by individual or general permit requirements including but not
limited to BMPs shall, at a frequency determined by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, submit a periodic report at a frequency defined in their
wastewater discharge permit.
      2.   The reports may require sampling and analyses or some other measure
to determine compliance with permit pretreatment standards and requirements.
The user must submit documentation necessary to determine the compliance status
of user as defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator and identified in the
wastewater discharge permit.
      3.   All FSE's with GI's must maintain cleaning logs. These logs shall be
immediately available at the time of an inspection and are required to contain
the following information:
         (a)   Person and company that performed the cleaning;
         (b)   Measurement of the depth of solids blanket and grease cap prior
to cleaning in each interceptor;
         (c)   Volume of material removed from each interceptor; and
         (d)   Location where waste will be disposed.
A copy of the cleaning log may be required to be submitted to the City by a
date specified in a request issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 868,
2-1-2022)
6-6-9-4: REPORTS FROM NON-PERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator as required. These reports
include but are not limited to surveys of business activities, water usage,
wastes discharged, spill and slug loading potential, pretreatment equipment,
waste hauling and facility layout. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-5: AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE CHANGE NOTIFICATION:
Any SIU that changes the authorized representative of its company as defined in
Section
6-6-1-6 shall file a change notice with the City within thirty (30) calendar
days. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-6: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Each user must notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of any planned substantial
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before
the change that for example results in an increase or addition or planned
shutdown or deletion of products. Immediate shutdowns or deletions of products
are required to be noticed within five (5) working days of determination.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
Section
6-6-7-5.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may issue or modify an existing
individual or general wastewater discharge permit under Sections
6-6-8-2 and
6-6-8-4 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20 percent) or greater, the
addition or deletion of a shift, the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants including changes to the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes
for which the user has submitted initial notification under Section
6-6-9-9, introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver had been
obtained, the addition of a new process regardless of waste discharge or lack
of discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion of a product.
   (D)   SIUs and CIUs are required to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-7: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   (A)   Initial Notification. In the case of any discharge, including, but not
limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone (within
fifteen (15) minutes), and notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident.
If this notification cannot be made to the POTW staff during routine business
hours, the user shall notify the City Police Department. This notification
shall include the name of the caller, location of the discharge, physical state
of discharge, chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, and
date and time of discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and corrective
actions taken by the user. The notification shall include what Federal, State
and local entities have also been notified by the user.
   (B)   The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (C)   Written Notification: Within fifteen (15) calendar days following such
discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Pretreatment Coordinator,
submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
   (D)   Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   A notice/sign shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees in English and the language of
common use whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph A
above. Employers shall ensure through documentation that all employees, who may
cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification
procedure. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within thirty
(30) calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not
required to resample if the Pretreatment Coordinator monitors at the user's
facility at least once a month, or if the Pretreatment Coordinator samples
between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of
this sampling. If the City performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
user, the City will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies
the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-9: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   (A)   Pursuant to 40 CFR 40 3.12 (p) any user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the USEPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the
user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than
one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under Section
6-6-9-6. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections
6-6-9-2.A,
6-6-9-2.C, and
6-6-9-3.B.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of such
regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-9-10: REPORT SUBMITTAL DUE DATES:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.
For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed or emailed on
the due date to the City. The original of the fax or email is required to be
mailed to the City postmarked within one (1) working day of the transmission.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-10: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
6-6-10-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The Pretreatment Coordinator and his designee(s), duly authorized agents of the
City, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, hereafter referred to as above named entities,
shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the
user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any individual or
general wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall
allow the above named entities ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, analyses,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the above named entities will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (B)   The City shall have the right to set up on the user's property or
require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   (C)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated twice yearly (at six month
intervals) to ensure their accuracy. The user shall submit these calibration
reports semi-annually to the City with the periodic compliance reports required
in Section
6-6-9-3.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Pretreatment Coordinator and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Pretreatment Coordinator and his
designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-10-2: RECORD KEEPING:
   (A)   Users. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements,
and documentation associated with BMPs established under Section
6-6-8-2. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the City, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   City. The City will maintain documentation of any monitoring waiver
issued per Section
6-6-7-5.D for a period of three (3) years after the expiration of the waiver.
The documentation will include the reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver. (Ord. 868, 2-
1-2022)
6-6-10-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Pretreatment Coordinator has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Pretreatment Coordinator may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of Kankakee County. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-11: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual or general wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and the Pretreatment Coordinator inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator and City Attorney, that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law.
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information
or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-12: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction
served by the POTW, a list of the users at any time which, during the previous
twelve (12) months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant non-compliance
shall be applicable to all SIUs and CIUs (or any other user that violates
paragraphs (C), (D) or (H) of this section and shall mean: 
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66 percent) or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-(6-) month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in
Section
6-6-5;
   (B)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33 percent) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-(6-) month period equals or
exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by Section
6-6-5 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Section
6-6-5 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the Pretreatment Coordinator has determined caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Pretreatment
Coordinator exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within forty-five (45) calendar days after the due
date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of BMPs, that
the Pretreatment Coordinator determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
6-6-13-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
   (A)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement including instantaneous limits, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation (NOV). Within ten (10)
working days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Pretreatment
Coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may initiate a pretreatment review
meeting for any violation issued under Section
6-6-13-1.A but most likely for the first violation of any parameter. The City
shall schedule a pretreatment review meeting, normally within thirty calendar
days of the determination that a meeting is required.
As a result of a pretreatment review meeting, the City may issue a compliance
directive stating that the user is in a "corrective action" status. A plan for
correction and compliance schedule illustrating milestones may be issued by the
City to the user. This plan for correction and compliance schedule may become
part of the user's permit. The user is responsible for meeting the permit
limits at all times. The plan for correction, compliance schedule and revised
permit does not relieve the user of meeting the permit limits and/or ordinance
requirements. The user shall take whatever actions are necessary to meet the
permit limits and permit conditions.
   (C)   As a result of a violation, the City may continue to sample the user
and inspect the user's progress towards meeting milestones as needed to
determine if the user is complying with the conditions of the plan of action,
compliance schedule and/or permit. In the event the City detects and documents
any violation; a NOV will be issued to the user.
   (D)   Each detected violation of the plan of action, compliance schedule,
and permit, will result in a NOV being issued to the user. When NOV #3 (total
of three NOVs) is issued, a "ticket" may be issued to the user, authorized
representative. The ticket is a legal notice requiring the user to appear in
court, City Adjudication Court. The City may charge assessments to the user as
provided for in the ordinance.
   (E)   When the user has met the conditions of the plan of action, compliance
schedule, and permit, the City will notify the user in writing that the
conditions have been satisfied and they are no longer under a "corrective
action" status if such a status was formally issued.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Pretreatment
Coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13-2: COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may enter into compliance agreements (i.e. consent
orders) assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for non-compliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the non-compliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections
6-6-13-4 and
6-6-13-5 and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13-3: SHOW CAUSE ORDER:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may order a user which has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear at a specified date and time to show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be
a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time.
If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or
other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the non-compliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all
such violations and directing the user to:
   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-13-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.
   (A)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Pretreatment
Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
Section
6-6-13-7 are initiated against the user.
   (B)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Pretreatment Coordinator prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections
6-6-13-3 or
6-6-13-7.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-13-7: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to the provisions in Section
6-6-8-6, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
   (A)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   (B)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   (C)   Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   (D)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   (E)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section
6-6-5.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under Section
6-6-13-3 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Pretreatment Coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-14: PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
6-6-14-1: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
Any entity or user violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
causes damage to or impairs the City's POTW shall be liable to the City for any
expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The City may
invoice the costs, including but not limited to, sampling and analyses
associated with the investigation, costs of mitigating impact to the POTW,
costs of preparing the administrative enforcement actions such as notices and
orders investigative and/or correction actions, and review of response(s) from
the user. In the event of damage, losses or impairments, the City shall bill
the user for the costs incurred by the City for any cleaning, repair,
replacement or other investigative and/or corrective action(s) as a response to
the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute
a violation of this chapter enforceable under the provisions of Section
6-6-13.
Recovery of costs incurred also includes but is not limited to the following
provisions specific for Food Service Establishments (FSE):
   (A)   Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee. FSE that operate without a grease
interceptor (GI) may be required to pay an annual Grease Disposal Mitigation
Fee to equitably cover the costs of increase maintenance of the sewer system as
a result of the FSE's inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater
discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to allow the new construction
of, or existing FSE undergoing remodeling to operate without an approved GI.
      1.   The Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee shall be established in Section
7-6-4 and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining
the sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or
solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease
interceptor or grease control device.
      2.   Sewer System Overflows, Public Nuisance, Abatement and Cleanup
Costs. Notwithstanding the waiver of grease interceptor installation for
existing FSE established in Section
6-6-3-8, FSE found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, Sewer System
Overflows (SSOs) or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge
of wastewater or waste containing FOG may be subject to costs incurred by the
City's established in Section
7-6-4. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare
of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore,
sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSE alone or collectively, are the
responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and individual(s) as a
responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the City must act immediately to
contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer
lateral or system serving a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or
operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to
abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety,
welfare, or property of the public, the City's costs for such abatement may be
entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and the individual
(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s) and may constitute a debt
to the City and become due and payable upon the City's request for
reimbursement of such costs. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-14-2: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   (A)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may fine
such user in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation. Each day that an Ordinance
violation continues, shall be treated as a distinct and separate offense.
   (B)   Users desiring reconsideration of such fines must file a written
request for the Pretreatment Coordinator to reconsider the fine along with full
payment of the fine amount within 30 calendar days of being notified of the
fine. Where a request has merit, the Pretreatment Coordinator may convene a
hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the
payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the
user.
   (C)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-14-3: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may petition the Circuit Court of
Kankakee County through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the individual or general wastewater discharge permit, order, or
other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-14-4: CIVIL PENALTIES:
When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may petition the Circuit Court of
Kankakee County through the City Attorney for civil penalties as follows:
   (A)   Any user shall be subject to the imposition of a civil penalty in at
least the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) a day for each
violation. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. Each
day that an Ordinance violation continues, shall be treated as a distinct and
separate offense.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may recover costs, including but not
limited to, filing fees, witness fees, attorneys' fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-14-5: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Pretreatment
Coordinator may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the Pretreatment Coordinator is empowered to take more than
one enforcement action against any non-compliant user. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
6-6-15-1: FAILURE TO REPORT OR NOTIFY:
   (A)   Sewer Extension and Connection Permits: Any entity who fails to file
for and obtain a sewer extension or connection permit prior to commencing
construction of said extension or connection required by this chapter may be
subject to the following late filing fees in addition to extension, connection
or annexation fees:
      1.   First Notice   Issuance of Warning/Citation.
      2.   Second Notice: two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3. Cost per day per Population Equivalent (PE) for each additional day
past second notice deadline: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (B)   City Reports or Notifications: Any entity who fails to file any report
or notification so required by this chapter may be subject to the following
late filing fees:
      1.   First Offense: less than thirty (30) calendar days past due:
issuance of Warning.
      2.   Recurring reporting violations or thirty (30) or more calendar days
past due: one hundred dollars ($100.00).
NOV response non-compliance: two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
Cost per additional day past final request deadline fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   Substantial Change Notification: No written notification of
substantial changes whether discharged or not:
At start-up or shutdown: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Per each additional fifteen (15) days in excess of thirty (30) calendar days:
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (C)   Reports or Notifications required by Significant or Categorical
Industrial Users: Any entity who fails to file any periodic pretreatment report
(semi-annual), baseline monitoring report, or 90-day final compliance report so
required by this chapter may be subject to the following late filing fees:
      1.   First Offense - less than 30 calendar days past due: issuance of
Warning.
      2.   Recurring reporting violations or thirty (30) or more calendar days
past due: two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
NOV response non-compliance: five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Cost per additional day past final request deadline: one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      3.   Substantial changes: No written notification of substantial changes
whether discharged or not:
At start-up or shutdown: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Per each additional fifteen (15) days in excess of thirty (30) calendar days:
two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   (D)   Ownership Notification Specific to Entities With Wastewater Discharge
Permits
      1.   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
facility, or any portion thereof with an individual permit: one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
facility, or any portion thereof with a general permit: five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15-2: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 868, 2-1-
2022)
6-6-15-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused
by its discharge. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15-4: PAYMENT FOR OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any
outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of
this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15-5: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the
user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after
the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply and paid
outstanding costs, fees, and penalties. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15-6: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Pretreatment Coordinator. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred
in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-15-7: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are hereby declared to be non-responsible users and therefore
are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or
services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to
the City held by a user found to be in significant non-compliance with
pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-16: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
6-6-16-1: UPSET:
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, "Upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph C, below, are met.
   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the Pretreatment
Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within
five (5) working days)
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-
compliance;
         (b)   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for non-compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-16-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for non-compliance with the general prohibitions in Sections
6-6-5-2.A and B or the specific prohibitions in Sections
6-6-5-2 C1-26 (excluding paragraphs C2, C10 and C17) if it can prove that it
did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or
interference or that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable bio-solids use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-16-3: BYPASS:
   (A)   For the purposes of this section,
 
BYPASS:                 The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
                        portion of a user's treatment or pretreatment facility.
                        Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
                        treatment facilities which causes them to become
                        inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
                        occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
                        damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
                        production.
 
   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
   (C)   Bypass Notifications
      1.   Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Pretreatment Coordinator, at least ten (10)
working days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      2.   Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the Pretreatment
Coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) working
days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis
if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
   (D)   POTW Actions
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Pretreatment Coordinator may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under paragraph C of this
section.
      2.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph D.1 of
this section. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-17: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
6-6-17-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The City may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the City's Pretreatment Program unique to a specific user, which may
include:
   (A)   Categorical pretreatment standard determination, establishment and
documentation for wastewater discharge permit;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users per Section
7-6-4;
   (C)   Fees for any direct discharger that utilizes the City's sewer
conveyance system and/or any portion of the treatment capability of the City's
POTW;
   (D)   Fees for reviewing plans or construction relating to spill prevention
containment and countermeasures/slug load plans as defined in Section
6-6-6-5;
   (E)   Fees for reviewing FSE waivers per Section
6-6-3-8.C;
   (F)   Fees for responding to report of potential problems as defined in
Section
6-6-9-7;
   (G)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (H)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs associated with the
enforcement activity taken by the Pretreatment Coordinator to address user non-
compliance; and
   (I)   Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the City. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-17-2: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the City set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, if the POTW is fined by the state or USEPA for violation of the
POTW NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of
discharge of pollutants by a user or group of users, then the fine, including
all legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs
incurred by the City shall be charged to the responsible user or group of
users. Such charges shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
remedies the City may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law or
in equity.
   (B)   If the discharge from any non-residential user causes a deposit,
obstruction or damage to any portion of the POTW, the POTW shall cause the
deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be
promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor and
supervision, shall be borne by the person or non-residential user causing such
deposit, obstruction, or damage. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18: USER AND SURCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY:
6-6-18-1: USER AND SURCHARGE RATES:
There has heretofore been and continues to be a minimum charge and basic user
rate for the use and service supplied by the POTW of the City. Such rate shall
apply as established and scheduled from time to time by the corporate
authorities of the City.
   (A)   The User Rate will be found in Section
7-6-2 for users in the City. The City may issue default rates for defined
classes of users including residential and non-residential.
   (B)   If a non-residential user has waste that at some time exceeds a BOD of
200 mg/l and a TSS of 250 mg/l, a surcharge or strength rate may apply in
addition to the user rate. The surcharge rate or strength rate is based on the
following three (3) components: flow discharged, billable BOD, and Total
Suspended Solids. The billable BOD will be calculated in the same manner as
defined in Section
7-6-3-4.A.1.a.1. The actual Surcharge Rates will be found in Section
7-6-2-4. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-2: BILLS GENERALLY:
   (A)   The rates or charges for service under this chapter shall be payable
monthly. The user of the service shall be liable to pay for the service to such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the City only upon
the condition that the user of the service is liable therefore to the City.
Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City Collector on the on or
about the 20th of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed.
   (B)   All sewer bills are due and payable thirty (30) calendar days after
issuance. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-3: DELINQUENT BILLS:
   (A)   An invoice not paid by the due date and which has an outstanding
balance shall have a late fee assessed. Such late fee shall be as set forth in
Section
7-6-4.
   (B)   If the charges for the services under this chapter with a balance of
at least $500 are not paid within ninety (90) calendar days after the issuance
of the bill for such services, the City may proceed with termination of such
services shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be
reinstated until all claims are settled. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-4: COLLECTION AGENCIES:
In addition to any other method of collection as herein provided or as provided
by laws, the City may turn delinquent users over to collection agencies. Any
user being turned over to such an agency for collection shall first be sent a
notice of the City's intent to do so. Any outstanding water invoices will also
be added to the sewer use charges being turned over to the collection agency.
The City may impose a collection agent turnover fee on any customer so turned
over to such an agency. If so, the notice must state to the customer the amount
of such fee. Such fee shall be set forth in Section
7-6-4. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-5: LIEN - NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
   (A)   Whenever a bill for a sewer service totaling five hundred dollars
($500) or more remains unpaid for ninety (90) calendar days for quarterly
service after it has been issued, the City Clerk shall file, with the Record of
Deeds of the county where the premises are located, a statement of lien claim.
This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the City Clerk has notice of this condition, a notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid
for one hundred and five (105) calendar days after it has been issued.
   (C)   The failure of the City Clerk to record such lien or to mail such
notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the following
section. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-6: SALE - FORECLOSURE:
Property subject to lien for unpaid charges under this chapter shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be apply to pay
the charges, after deducting the costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the
City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters against the property for which the bill has remained unpaid one hundred
and five (105) calendar days in the case of a quarterly bill after it has been
issued. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-7: REVENUES:
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the coverage
system shall be deposited in the Sewerage account of the Sewerage fund. All
such revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart
from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City,
and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
City Treasurer not more than ten (10) working days after receipt of the same,
or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the City of Momence." Said Treasurer
shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute
in the Illinois Municipal Code, effective July 1, 1961, as amended (Illinois
Revised Statutes, Chapter 24). (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-8: ACCOUNTS:
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage fund, and at
regular intervals, the Treasurer shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show that the receipts and
disbursements of the Sewerage system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the POTW,
including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the
waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under
the industrial cost recovery system meet these regulations. In this regard, the
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following;
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year,
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed,
      3.   Number of users connected to the system,
      4.   Number of non-metered users, and
      5.   A list of users discharging non-residential wastes and volume and
strength of waste discharged. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-9: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the City Treasurer, shall be
recorded in the office of Recorder of Deeds of Kankakee County and shall be
deemed notice to all users of the sewerage system of the contents of this
chapter, including the charges of the system by the City on their properties.
(Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-10: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the City which
are applicable to the City system of user charges or industrial cost recovery,
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any State Grant or loan. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-18-11: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER:
The City Clerk shall maintain the necessary records for determination of user
share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection services as
required by Sections
6-6-18-2 through
6-6-18-6. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and
expenditure of all moneys collected for industrial cost recovery in accordance
with Sections
6-6-18-2 through
6-6-18-6. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-19: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
6-6-19-1: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-19-2: CONFLICT:
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting
with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 868, 2-1-2022)
6-6-19-3: OFFENSES UNDER PREVIOUS ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect such offense or
act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. Nothing contained
in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending. (Ord.
868, 2-1-2022)
CHAPTER 7
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Permit Required
6-7-2: Compliance With State Regulations, Code Adopted
6-7-3: Tank Tests Conducted
6-7-4: Leaks, Procedures To Abate
6-7-5: Storage Restrictions
6-7-6: Abandoned Tanks
6-7-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm, entity, corporation, business or other association shall
install any underground storage tank to be used for the storage of gasoline,
flammable liquids, volatile oils or other combustible materials hereinafter
defined without first obtaining a building permit from the city. (Ord. 319, 12-
16-1985)
6-7-2: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS, CODE ADOPTED:
No permit shall be issued by the city for the installation of an underground
gasoline storage tank or tanks unless such tank or tanks complies in all parts
with the provisions of the Illinois administrative code, title 41, chapter 1,
entitled "state fire marshall - part 170 - storage, transportation, sale and
use of gasoline and volatile oils: rules and regulations relating to service
stations", which administrative code is hereby adopted by the city for the
purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the type, installation and
keeping of underground gasoline storage tanks and which administrative code
provisions are entitled "title 41: fire protection - chapter 1: state fire
marshall - part 170", of which not less than three (3) copies have been and now
are filed in the office of the city clerk and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as though set forth at length herein. These provisions
are controlling in the installation and keeping of underground gasoline storage
tanks within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 319, 12-16-1985)
6-7-3: TANK TESTS CONDUCTED:
In addition to the provisions of title 41 of the Illinois administrative code
herein adopted, all persons, firms or entities maintaining underground gasoline
storage tanks shall be required to test those tanks for leakage biannually and
shall report the results of said test to the city within fourteen (14) days of
said test. All such facilities shall be tested on or before June 30, 1986, and
every two (2) years thereafter. Such testing shall be performed by a person,
firm or corporation duly qualified to test such underground flammable liquid
storage tanks and the testing business must be accepted and certified by the
Momence fire protection district chief. Each test shall be conducted during
normal working hours and an inspector from the district or city shall be
present during all such testing. Each test shall be for tank tightness, using
the tank system tightness tester model 1000 of the Kent-Moore service tool
division or one of equal testing standards and capability which has been
specifically approved by the district or city. All tests shall be conducted to
give proof of tightness to the standards of NFPA volume 13, section 329. All
cost factors for the required tank testing procedure shall be borne by the
owner of said tank. In addition, on or before May 1, 1986, all persons, firms,
entities, businesses or other associations using underground tanks for the
storage of gasoline or other flammable liquids as herein defined shall
construct and have operational a pipe sump observation hole next to the
underground tank or tanks so as to accumulate gasoline in the event any leak
develops and to warn city officials of such leak. The city shall have the right
to make random checks of the pipe sump observation holes and, by the
installation of such underground gasoline tanks in accordance with the
provisions hereof, the owner, occupant and/or user of said tanks consents to
such random checks and inspections by city personnel. (Ord. 319, 12-16-1985)
6-7-4: LEAKS, PROCEDURES TO ABATE:
In the event that a leak develops in any underground storage tank, immediately
upon such discovery, the owner, occupant, user or tenant of such storage
facility having immediate control thereof shall, without further notice from
the city, drain and pump said storage facility dry of gasoline and shall not
use or fill said tank with gasoline or any other liquid until such time as the
leak has been stopped and the city and state fire marshal certify the tank as
capable of proper leak free operation. (Ord. 319, 12-16-1985)
6-7-5: STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
No person, firm, corporation or other business entity shall keep any
aboveground container for the storage of gasoline or other flammable liquids in
excess of three hundred (300) gallons; provided, however, that no aboveground
storage of such materials and liquids shall be allowed at any zoning district
other than commercial or manufacturing. (Ord. 319, 12-16-1985)
6-7-6: ABANDONED TANKS:
In the event that any underground tank becomes abandoned and its use ceases
within the meaning of title 41 of the Illinois administrative code incorporated
by reference herein, then, immediately upon such abandonment, the owner or
occupant thereof shall remove said tank. In the event that the owner or
occupant fails to remove said tank after five (5) days' notice from the city,
the city shall be entitled to remove said tank and to charge the owner for the
cost of such removal and disposal. (Ord. 319, 12-16-1985)
CHAPTER 8
SHADE TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
6-8-1: Title
6-8-2: Purpose And Intent
6-8-3: Definitions
6-8-4: City Tree Board; Expanded Duties
6-8-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SHADE TREE ORDINANCE of the
city. (Ord. 449, 10-21-1996)
6-8-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   (A)   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants
within the city.
   (B)   Intent: It is the intent of the city council that the terms of this
chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      1.   The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants within the city; and
      2.   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of the city from property damage, caused or
threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs,
or other plants located within the community. (Ord. 449, 10-21-1996)
6-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section:
CITY OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the city limits of the city of Momence,
Illinois, and
   (A)   Owned by the city in fee simple absolute, or
   (B)   Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use
for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except
lawn grass and flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in height. (Ord. 449,
10-21-1996)
6-8-4: CITY TREE BOARD; EXPANDED DUTIES:
   (A)   Duties: The city tree board, hereinafter "tree board" shall perform
the following expanded duties as outlined by title 2, chapter 7 of this code:
      1.   The tree board, with the assistance of a certified arborist shall
develop, and each subsequent year, update the urban forestry management plan.
The plan shall outline urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the
next five (5) years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities to
be undertaken by the city, the reason for those activities and the possible
funding sources.
      2.   The tree board shall make available to any interested person copies
of the shade tree ordinance, information about the activities of the tree
board, copies of the arboricultural specifications manual and copies of the
urban forestry management plan. (Ord. 449, 10-21-1996)
CHAPTER 9
SMOKE FREE ACT
SECTION:
6-9-1: Findings
6-9-2: Definitions
6-9-3: Smoking In Public Places, Places Of Employment, And Governmental
Vehicles Prohibited
6-9-4: Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
6-9-5: Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas
6-9-6: Exemptions
6-9-7: Enforcement; Complaints
6-9-8: Violations
6-9-9: Injunctions
6-9-10: Discrimination Prohibited
6-9-11: Entrances, Exits, Windows, And Ventilation Intakes
6-9-1: FINDINGS:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF MOMENCE SMOKE FREE
ACT.
The city council of the city of Momence finds that tobacco smoke is a harmful
and dangerous carcinogen to human beings and a hazard to public health.
Secondhand tobacco smoke causes at least sixty five thousand (65,000) deaths
each year from heart disease and lung cancer according to the National Cancer
Institute. Secondhand tobacco smoke causes heart disease, stroke, cancer,
sudden infant death syndrome, low birth weight in infants, asthma and
exacerbation of asthma, bronchitis and pneumonia in children and adults.
Secondhand tobacco smoke is the third leading cause of preventable death in the
United States. Illinois workers exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke are at
increased risk of premature death. An estimated two thousand nine hundred
(2,900) Illinois citizens die each year from exposure to secondhand tobacco
smoke.
The city council of the city of Momence also finds that the United States
surgeon general's 2006 report has determined that there is no risk free level
of exposure to secondhand smoke; the scientific evidence that secondhand smoke
causes serious diseases, including lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory
illnesses such as bronchitis and asthma, is massive and conclusive; separating
smokers from nonsmokers, cleaning the air, and ventilating buildings cannot
eliminate secondhand smoke exposure; smoke free workplace policies are
effective in reducing secondhand smoke exposure; and smoke free workplace
policies do not have an adverse economic impact on the hospitality industry.
The city council of the city of Momence also finds that the Illinois
environmental protection agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be
reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air
cleaners, which are capable only of filtering the particulate matter and odors
in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand smoke. The American
Society Of Heating, Refrigerating And Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases
its ventilation standards on totally smoke free environments because it cannot
determine a safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, which contains cancer
causing chemicals, and ASHRAE acknowledges that technology does not exist that
can remove chemicals that cause cancer from the air. A June 30, 2005, ASHRAE
position document on secondhand smoke concludes that, at present, the only
means of eliminating health risks associated with indoor exposure is to
eliminate all smoking activity indoors. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section
6-9-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from any entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and class
rooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence
or home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care,
adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a
"place of employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date
of this chapter, whether incorporated or not, b) is the owner, lessee, or
occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at
all times, c) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain, and d) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For
purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is
managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by
the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or
both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the
payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in section
6-9-11 of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from any entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster
care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place"
includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores,
offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries,
museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing
homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting
rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities,
including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or
state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers,
retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities,
ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas,
lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no
less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel,
motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public
accommodations that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: (A) An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
   (B)   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere.
"Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
STATE AGENCY: Has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of
section 3 of the Illinois purchasing act (now repealed).
UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Has the meaning ascribed to it in section 1 of
article VII of the Illinois constitution of 1970. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-3: SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT, AND GOVERNMENTAL
VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public
place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased,
or operated by the state, city of Momence, or a political subdivision of the
state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by section
6-9-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-4: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   (A)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of
that place.
   (B)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed by the owner, operator, manager, or
other person having control of the area where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place
or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is
also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
subsections
6-9-4(A) and (B) of this chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-6: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
   (B)   Retail tobacco stores as defined in section
6-9-2 of this chapter in operation prior to the effective date of this chapter.
The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31
an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior
calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs
and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after the effective date of this chapter may only qualify for an exemption if
located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke
from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited.
   (C)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (D)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-7: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   The city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may assess
fines pursuant to section
6-9-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-8: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates section
6-9-3 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under section
6-9-3 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates section
6-9-4 of this chapter shall be fined: 1) not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, 2) not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first
violation, and 3) not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
for each additional violation within one year after the first violation, or as
amended and approved by the list of approved fines by the city council. (Ord.
709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-9: INJUNCTIONS:
The city of Momence or any individual personally affected by repeated
violations may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of
this chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-10: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
6-9-11: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS, AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from any
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure
that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open
windows, or other means. (Ord. 709, 4-4-2011)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Street Numbering
7-1-2: Obstructing Streets
7-1-3: Excavations
7-1-4: Construction; Permission Required
7-1-5: Open Cellar Doors
7-1-6: Removing Earth
7-1-7: Obstructing Waterways
7-1-8: Racing In Streets
7-1-9: Driving Over Sidewalks 1  (Rep. by Ord. 737, 7-16-2012)
7-1-10: Regulating Size And Weight Of Vehicles
7-1-11: Unattended Vehicles On City Property
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-4-13 of this code.
7-1-1: STREET NUMBERING 1 :
   (A)   The numbers of streets or avenues running north or south shall begin
from the Kankakee River and all streets or avenues lying north of the Kankakee
River shall have the word "north" prefixed to their respective names and all
streets lying south of the Kankakee River shall have the word "south" prefixed
to their names.
   (B)   The numbers of all streets and avenues running east and west shall
start from Range Street (now known as Dixie Highway) and all such streets and
avenues lying east of said Range Street (now known as Dixie Highway) shall have
the word "east" prefixed to their respective names and the streets lying west
of said Range Street (now known as Dixie Highway) shall have the word "west"
prefixed to their names. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
 
Notes
1 2. See also title 4, chapter 2, "Numbering Buildings", of this code.
7-1-2: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of obstructing travel
or traffic upon any street, sidewalk, avenue, alley or public place in the city
by stopping of teams thereon or by hawking or crying of goods at auctions, by
placing or suffering goods, boxes or other material or thing in an unreasonable
or dangerous amount thereupon, or in any manner to interfere with the proper
and accustomed use of any such street, sidewalk, avenue or alley. It shall be
the duty of any conservator of the peace within the city to remove or cause to
be removed any such obstruction which shall come to his knowledge or notice.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any conductor, engineer, brakeman or other
person having care or control of any engine, car or train of cars to cause or
suffer the same to remain upon or in any manner obstruct any street, sidewalk,
avenue or alley within the limits of the city for a longer time than ten (10)
minutes.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw any stones,
sticks, logs, stumps, manure or other rubbish or materials in, over or upon any
street, alley or highway in the city so as to endanger life or limb or to cause
the destruction of property, or to throw or deposit any manure, ashes, dirt or
rubbish of any kind in the gutters of the city. (Ord. 246, 1-2-1979)
7-1-3: EXCAVATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or excavate in or upon any
street, alley, public way or municipal property of the city without first
having obtained written consent from the city council.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or in any manner make or
cause to be dug or in any manner made, any hole, opening, trench or tunnel in,
through or across or under any paving or macadamizing or any paved or
macadamized streets in the city unless such person shall, before commencing any
such work, or causing the same to be commenced, file with the city engineer a
written statement setting forth the time when, place where and purpose for
which such hole, opening, trench or tunnel is proposed to be made and used, and
all work thereafter done in making or digging any such hole, opening, trench or
tunnel; and refilling the same including the replacing and repairing of any
pavement or macadamizing taken up or disturbed in the prosecution of such work
shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city
engineer, and in such manner as to leave the street macadamizing and paving in
as good condition after such work is finished and the ground settled, as before
such work is commenced as nearly as possible. Nothing in this subsection shall
be construed to extend the right to any person to make any hole, opening,
trench, excavation or tunnel in, across or under any of the streets.
   (C)   Any person making or causing to be made any hole, opening, trench,
tunnel or excavation, as set forth within the meaning of the preceding
subsection, for any purpose in any paved or macadamized street in the city,
shall, without any unnecessary delay, cause the same to be filled up to the
proper level and grade of said macadamized or paved street, and in such filling
the earth shall be tamped so that it shall be solid when filled up and shall
not cave in, the filling and surface of such street shall be of the same
material of which the macadamized or paved street is constructed, and shall be
done in accordance with the plans and specifications under which said street or
streets may have been originally macadamized or paved, and such filling and
surface shall conform with the proper level of the street.
Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with the requirements of this
subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty, and
the city engineer is empowered and he shall forthwith cause said filling up or
repairs to be made and completed as aforesaid, and the cost or expense thereof
may be collected of the person whose duty it was to do the same, and recover it
by a separate suit in the name of the city. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
7-1-4: CONSTRUCTION; PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, lay or put any
sidewalk, curb, gutter, pavement or other structure in or upon any street,
alley, public way or municipal property of the city without first having
obtained written consent from the city council. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
7-1-5: OPEN CELLAR DOORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or leave open any cellar door, or
grating of any vault on any highway, or any sidewalk, or suffer the same to be
kept open; or to suffer any sidewalk in front of his premises to become or
continue to be so broken as to endanger life or limb. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
7-1-6: REMOVING EARTH:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first having obtained written
permission from the building inspector or any alderman, to dig, remove or carry
away or cause or procure the same to be done, any sod, earth, stone, sand or
gravel from any street, alley or public ground in the city. (Ord. 227, 7-3-
1978)
7-1-7: OBSTRUCTING WATERWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of stopping up or obstructing
any ditch, drain or other necessary and proper outlet for water upon any street
in the city. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
7-1-8: RACING IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of driving or racing within
the limits of the city in such a manner as to endanger the person or lives of
others. (Ord. 227, 7-3-1978)
7-1-9: DRIVING OVER SIDEWALKS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 737, 7-16-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-4-13 of this code.
7-1-10: REGULATING SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definition Of Words And Phrases: The following words and phrases when
used in this code shall, for the purpose of this code, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this chapter, except when the context
otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in another
chapter of this code and applicable to that chapter or a designated part
thereof is applicable.
    AXLE LOAD: The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes
forty inches (40") apart extending across the full width of the vehicle.
   CITY: The city of Momence.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for
hire or not for hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
   CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE: Any vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds' actual
weight, registered gross weight or GVWR that is required to comply with 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/12-712 and 12-713 on identification
required to be displayed.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The value specified by the manufacturer
or manufacturers as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of
a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination
weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the
towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer,
GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of
the towed unit and any load on the unit.
   GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in
combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon.
   HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY: Every vehicle as defined in the Illinois vehicle
code and designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or
livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like
vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement
of husbandry.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and
motorized wheelchairs. For this act, motor vehicles are divided into two (2)
divisions:
First Division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of
not more than ten (10) persons.
Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than
ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living quarters,
those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo
or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first division
remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division.
   NONDIVISIBLE LOAD OR VEHICLES: Permit loads are deemed to be reasonably
dismantled (nondivisible) if, when separated into smaller loads or vehicles,
further dismantling would:
      1.   Compromise the intended use of the load or vehicle; that is, make it
unable to perform the function for which it was intended;
      2.   Destroy the value of the load or vehicle; that is, make it unusable
for its intended purpose; or
      3.   Require more than eight (8) work hours to dismantle using
appropriate equipment. The applicant for a nondivisible load has the burden of
proof as to the number of work hours required to dismantle the load.
   PERMIT ROUTE: The route authorized by the issuing authority with proper
jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying
an indivisible load that exceeds normal dimensions or weight or a combination
thereof.
   SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
   TANDEM AXLES: Any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than
forty inches (40") and not more than ninety six inches (96") apart, measured to
the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in
section 15-111 1  for special hauling vehicles.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   (B)   Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicles:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive,
to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly
permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway
under the jurisdiction of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes sections 5/15-102 (width), 15-103 (height), 15-107 (length), 15-111
(weight) and 15-316 (local restrictions).
      2.   Size and weights limitations while operating on city streets shall
not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations
owned or operated by or for any governmental body or private snow and ice
removal operations per 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-101(c) or to
implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the
furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or
combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or
dimension permit issued by the city. These exceptions do not include operation
over a posted weight restricted elevated structure.
      3.   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed
by ordinance under authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/15-
102, 15-103, 15-107, 15-111, 15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such
limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations
or in violation of such restrictions.
      4.   Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such
vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (C)   Permits For Overweight And/Or Overdimension Vehicles:
      1.   A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within
the jurisdiction of the city of Momence which exceeds the dimensions and
weights permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed.
For a shipping container to be considered a nondivisible load and eligible to
be hauled under an oversize/overweight permit issued by the city of Momence, it
must be in a sealed shipping container for international shipment and in route
for import or export to/from a foreign country. Upon request from law
enforcement or city of Momence officials, the driver must present
documentation, such as a bill of lading or manifest that specifically ties the
sealed container being moved to the container listed in the documentation
through the unique container number (consists of 4 letters and 7 numbers). The
documentation must also clearly state the foreign country destination or origin
of that container. Failure to produce such documentation shall result in the
load being considered a divisible load and ineligible to be permitted.
Furthermore, intermodal oversea container permits must comply with the same
axle spacing requirement as the Illinois department of transportation.
         (a)   Axle Spacing Requirements: The spacing requirements for all
overweight loaded routine and LCO permits, as well as all towed routine
permits, are as follows:
            (1) The spacing between the steer axle and the first axle on the
tractor tandem may not be less than eight feet one inch (8'1");
            (2) The spacing between the last axle on the tractor and the first
axle of the trailer may not be less than eighteen feet six inches (18'6"); and
            (3) The sum of all axle spacings must be at least forty three feet
six inches (43'6").
As a result, failure to comply with these requirements for the load may be
considered to be operating without a permit and subject to be fined back to
legal weight.
      2.   The city with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction may upon application to the Momence police department on forms
provided by the police department and good cause being shown therefor issue a
special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the
maximum. The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special
permit application:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
         (b)   Applicant's name.
         (c)   Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round
trip, multiple routing or limited continuous operation (LCO) permit.
         (d)   The description and registration number of the power unit.
         (e)   Description of the object or vehicle to be moved.
         (f)   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         (g)   The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles.
         (h)   Maximum gross weight of the vehicle.
         (i)   The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load.
         (j)   Requested routing over city streets to and from a specific
location.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
         (a)   A one-way or single trip movement means one move from the point
of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point
of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip
permits are effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance
unless otherwise directed by the Momence police department.
         (b)   "Round trip movement" means two (2) trips over the same route in
opposite directions with the same vehicle and load. Round trip permits are
effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days from the date of issuance.
         (c)   Multiple moves are those in such close proximity to each other
in distance or in time that the police department would consider incorporating
two (2) or more permit moves within one permit application. Multiple move
permits, when granted by the police department, shall be for a period of time
not to exceed ninety (90) days from issuance.
         (d)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) permits may be issued to a
vehicle and load in a like manner as the Illinois department of transportation
upon presentation of a valid copy of the IDOT, Kankakee County, Momence
Township and Ganeer Township issued LCO permit (should any of these be
necessary for access to/from city of Momence maintained highways), and payment
of the appropriate fees established in the accompanying fee schedule.
      4.   The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based
on the below chart for a single routing which will be valid for seven (7)
calendar days (single issue), round trip routing valid for fourteen (14)
calendar days (single issue) and multiple and LCO routings valid for a base
period of one week, one calendar month or quarter (3 months). Multiple and LCO
permits may be issued for a maximum of four (4) consecutive permit periods with
the permit fee calculated in the appropriate multiples of the base week, month
or quarter permit. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on the
permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the
Momence Chief of Police or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or
routing is permitted without expressed written permission by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee and the permit must be carried physically or
electronically in the power unit to which the permit applies.
   (D)   Fee Schedule; Regular Permits (Does Not Include Limited Continuous
Operation International Intermodal Shipments):
            Fee1
Permit Size Single Round Trip Multiple      LCO
            Trip              (Per Quarter) (Per Quarter) (Nonintermodal)
                       Fee1
Permit Size            Single             Multiple      LCO
                       Trip    Round Trip (Per Quarter) (Per Quarter)
                                                        (Nonintermodal)
Weight (with load):                                   
 Up to 100,000 pounds $ 50.00 $ 75.00    $150.00       $150.00
 100,001 - 120,000    75.00   100.00     200.00        200.00
 120,001 - 150,000    100.002 125.002                  
 Over 150,000         100.002 125.002                 
Width (with load):                                    
 Up to 12'            25.00   40.00      75.00         75.00
 12'1" - 13'6"        50.00   75.00      100.00        100.00
 Over 13'6" wide      50.002  75.002                   
Height (with load):                                   
 13'6" - 14'6"        25.00   40.00      75.00         75.00
 Over 14'6"           50.002  75.002                   
Length (with load):                                   
 Up to 100'           25.00   40.00      75.00         75.00
 Over 100'0"          50.002  75.002                  
 
Notes:
   1.    If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension
issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or
dimension factor only.
   2.    Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road
damage fees.
(Ord. 796, 7-20-2015)
   (E)   Fee Schedule; Limited Continuous Operation International Intermodal
Shipments:
 
                     Fee
Permit Size - Weight                                    Quarter
(With Intermodal     Week                               January 1 - March 31
Container)           Monday - Sunday Calendar Month     April 1 - June 30
                                                        July 1 - September 30
                                                        October 1 - December 31
Up to 100,000 pounds $100.00         $300.00            $750.00
100,001 - 120,000    150.00          450.00             100.00
Spotter semi-tractors (permitted route: Railroad Avenue
between Third and Sixth Streets. No axle spacing        750.00
requirements or international paperwork required to be
carried in vehicle)
 
(Ord. 796, 7-20-2015; amd. Ord. 826, 3-20-2017)
   (F)   Permit Provisions:
      1.   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to approve
the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required
fees, the Momence Police Department shall issue a permit allowing passage of
the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over City streets. The permit shall be
specific and contain:
         (a)   Permit number.
         (b)   The dates the permit is valid.
         (c)   Whether the permit is for single, round, multiple or LCO trip
routing.
         (d)   The description of object or vehicle to be moved.
         (e)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height.
         (f)   The authorized routing over City streets including the origin
and termination point within the City.
         (g)   The fee paid.
         (h)   The date and signature of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
         (i)   In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the
permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the
protection of the general public and city streets.
      2.   It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or
herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move
is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
         (a)   The permittee is in compliance with all operational and
provision requirements;
         (b)   All dimension, axle spacing and weight limitations specified in
the permit will not be exceeded;
            (1) The spacing between the steer axle and the first axle on the
tractor tandem may not be less than eight feet one inch (8'1"); and
            (2) The spacing between the last axle on the tractor and the first
axle of the trailer may not be less than eighteen feet six inches (18'6"); and
            (3) The sum of all axle spacings must be at least forty three feet
six inches (43'6").
         (c)   All operation, registration and license requirements have been
complied with;
         (d)   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements have been met; and
         (e)   The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to
persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the
object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation
or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. He or she
agrees to hold the city harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or
proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the city for any claim it may be
required to pay arising from the movement.
      3.   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle (either physically or
electronically) to which the permit applies at all times while operating on
streets within the city and shall be exhibited upon demand to any law
enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the city.
      4.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a
city permit whether it be by size, weight or general/special provisions, and
either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty and
either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for
such violation.
   (G)   Vehicles Prohibited On Certain Streets:
      1.   As provided under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
sections 5/15-101, 15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by
ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating
under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-101, 15-111
or 15-316 while utilizing city streets under "reasonable access" rules will be
considered in violation of this section if they are not utilizing the most
direct route to points of loading and unloading.
      2.   The following streets are restricted to a six (6) ton (12,000
pounds) weight limit as determined by registered weight, gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR), gross combination vehicle weight rating (GCWR) or actual weight:
Street From
Street            From
Ash Street        2nd Street to 7th Street
Chestnut Street   4th Street to 7th Street
Chocolate Street  River Street to Washington Street
Indiana Street    State Route 1 to State Route 17
Keyser Street     Oak Street to railroad right of way
Locust Street     River Street to 7th Street
Maple Street      Washington Street to 7th Street
Mill Street       State Route 1 to the east end
Railroad Avenue   Washington Street to 3rd Street
River Street      Range Street (State Route 1) to Chocolate Street
Walnut Street     Washington Street to 7th Street
Washington Street Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
2nd Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
3rd Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
4th Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
5th Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
6th Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
7th Street        Range Street (State Route 1) to Railroad Avenue
 
      3.   The superintendent of public works is authorized and directed to
post or cause to be posted, streets designated as restricted weight and/or
dimension routes as governed by subsection (G)2 of this section.
   (H)   Oversize Vehicles Permitted On Certain Streets:
      1.   As provided under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
section 5/15-111, the city has designated the following portions of streets
and/or highways as class II designated streets. Vehicles utilizing those as
such, can be of a length consistent with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section
5/15-107.
Class II designated streets:
 
Street          From
Mechanic Street Range Street (State Route 1) to the westernmost end
Railroad Avenue Industrial Drive to 3rd Street
 
      2.   The superintendent of public works is authorized and directed to
post or cause to be posted, streets designated as class II truck routes as
governed by subsection (H)1 of this section.
   (I)   Penalty:
      1.   Any violation of the weight limitations set forth in this chapter,
any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects,
fails to comply with, or resists enforcement of, the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each calendar day a violation occurs; or
      2.   For any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-316, any
person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be fined an
amount as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-316(e) as now
in effect or as hereafter amended and in effect as of the date of such
violation; and/or
      3.   For any violation of the dimension and weight limitations set forth
in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 103, 107 and 111, any person, firm
or corporation convicted of such violation shall be additionally fined an
amount as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-113 as now in
effect or as hereafter amended and in effect as of the date of such violation.
      4.   In addition to seeking a fine, as hereinabove provided, the city
attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the city of Momence to
enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter or to collect any damages
allowed by law, including, but not limited to, liability for damages as
provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-318 as now in effect or
as hereafter amended and in effect as of the date of the underlying violation.
      5.   Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and driver of such
vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. (Ord. 796, 7-20-2015)
   (J)   Use Of Revenues Restricted: Separate accounting procedures shall be
established for the collection, holding and disbursement of revenues generated
under this chapter. Sixty percent (60%) of revenues thus generated are to be
used solely for street repairs. Forty percent (40%) of revenues thus generated
are to be used for police department equipment purchases. (Ord. 810, 2-15-2016)
   (K)   Local Farmers' Inbound Grain Vehicles:
      1.   For the period of August 1 through December 15 of each calendar
year, all inbound local farmers' vehicles, whose primary purpose on city of
Momence streets is to deliver grain to Orr Grain, Inc., located at 500 Railroad
Avenue in Momence, Illinois, may use the following route: From Dixie Highway,
turn east on River Street, then north on Chocolate Street to Washington Street,
turn east on Washington Street to Railroad Avenue, north on Railroad Avenue to
Orr Grain, Inc.
      2.   At no time will any vehicle be allowed to use this route when
exiting Orr Grain, Inc. All outbound semi-tractor trailers must use Railroad
Avenue to Industrial Drive as a means of departing from Orr Grain, Inc. No
provisions of this subsection shall allow for any vehicle to be stopped on, or
obstructing any part of the roadway, as defined in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes. (Ord. 818, 9-19-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-111.
7-1-11: UNATTENDED VEHICLES ON CITY PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or otherwise leave unattended any
vehicle on any city property within the city, so designated by resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 351, 7-5-1988)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Scope Of Regulations
7-2-2: Survey Plat
7-2-3: Permit Fee
7-2-4: Construction Specifications
7-2-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The method prescribed herein shall apply to all concrete sidewalks built within
the limits of the city either upon the application by an owner of property or
in compliance with the provisions of a general improvement ordinance. (Ord.
209, 4-16-1928)
7-2-2: SURVEY PLAT:
Every application for the construction of any sidewalk shall be accompanied
with a survey plat showing the location of the sidewalk to be built and a
profile showing the elevation and grades of the crown of street paving and the
proposed sidewalk, or a drawing, if the city council may require. (Ord. 214, 3-
6-1978)
7-2-3: PERMIT FEE:
Applications for sidewalk permits shall be made to the city council, who will
issue the necessary permits upon the approval of the survey plat by the city
council. The permittee shall build the sidewalk in the location and to
elevations and grades authorized by the city council, and the applicant shall
pay a permit fee of one dollar ($1.00) for one hundred (100) lineal feet of
walk or fraction thereof. (Ord. 209, 4-16-1928)
7-2-4: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
Refer to section
7-9-1 of this title. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC LIBRARY
(Rep. by Ord. 521, 6-3-2002)
CHAPTER 4
WATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Connection; Meters Required; Regulations
7-4-3: Service Pipes; Stopcocks
7-4-4: Plumbing
7-4-5: Tapping; Connecting
7-4-6: City To Maintain Water Lines
7-4-7: Builders Using Water
7-4-8: Access To Premises
7-4-9: Tampering With Fixtures, Hydrants
7-4-10: Sprinkling Restricted
7-4-11: Right To Shut Off Water
7-4-12: Using Water Without Permit
7-4-13: Connection Before Local Improvement
7-4-14: Liability For Damage
7-4-15: Service Fees And Reconnection Fees
7-4-16: Private Wells, Ground Water And Potable Water
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words mentioned herein and used in this chapter and in proceedings hereto
shall, unless the same be inconsistent with the context, be construed to mean
as follows:
COMMITTEE: The Committee on Waterworks of the City.
CONSUMER: Any person who, himself or by his employees or customers, uses the
City water furnished by the City to the premises used and occupied by him, in
whole or in part, for business purposes; or any person who, by himself or by
any member of his family or by his guests, uses the City water furnished by the
City to the premises used and occupied by himself and family, or by himself, if
living alone, in whole or in part for dwelling purposes.
ENGINEER: The person in the employ of the City as an "engineer", as described
in this chapter.
MONTH: Calendar month.
OWNER: The owner of the premises supplied with water by the City.
PREMISES: Where same refers to those used for business purposes, shall mean the
one building owned or occupied by the consumer, separated from other or
adjoining buildings by division walls or partitions, but this shall not be
construed to include the premises of a consumer using and occupying more than
one building for the conduct of one and the same business; and where same
refers to dwelling houses, shall mean the one place of residence and the
outbuildings belonging thereto. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-2: CONNECTION; METERS REQUIRED; REGULATIONS:
Within two (2) years of the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, the
owner of all houses, buildings or properties situated within the City, located
on streets in which there is located a public water main, or are located within
five hundred feet (500') of a public water main, shall be required to make
connection to the public water main in accordance with all provisions of this
Code applicable to the application and installation of a connection to the
public water main including required payments. (Ord. 832, 11-6-2017)
   (A)   Meters Required: Any person, except as hereinafter provided, using
water furnished by the City or making any connection with any service water
supply pipe of the City shall connect his service pipe with a meter of standard
pattern, to be approved by the City Collector or Committee on Waterworks, so
that all water consumed shall pass through such meter and be accurately
measured and the amount definitely ascertained. In addition thereto, all such
persons using water furnished by the City shall install a remote water meter
reader on the outside of the premises being furnished water so as to allow the
reading of the meter by the City without entering the premises. The owner of
the premises shall pay for said remote reader and the cost of installation of
such shall be paid for by the City. The location of the remote reader shall be
determined by the City. All remote water meter readers shall be of a type
approved by the City Engineer or the Committee on Waterworks. (Ord. 267, 2-16-
1981)
   (B)   Setting Meters, Stop Boxes: All meters hereafter to be placed in
connection with the City waterworks system shall be set under the direction of
the City Engineer, in some convenient place in the cellar or, if there be no
cellar, on the first floor of the building to be served, to be approved by the
City Engineer, or, if outside of the building, such meter shall be set in brick
or concrete pits, having walls eight inches (8") thick, not less than three
feet (3') wide by three and one-half feet (31/2') long by four and one-half
feet (41/2') deep brought to grade, and provided with an iron or concrete cover
not less than eighteen inches by twenty inches (18" x 20") in size, suitable
steps or ladder shall be put in place for convenience of inspection and reading
of meter when required. The location of meter pits outside of buildings shall,
as far as practicable, be between the sidewalk and curb lines. When not
practicable to so place the meter pit, its location shall be designated by the
city engineer. Provisions shall be made to keep the meter pit free from water.
In tapping city water mains, a stop box or cut off shall in every case be set
on the service pipe, the top of which shall be flush with the surface of the
ground, and at the outer edge of the street sidewalk of the premises being
served. Any person removing, destroying or covering over any such stop box
shall be subject to penalty, liable for the cost of restoration of the same.
   (C)   Installation Of Meters: All meters shall be installed by the owner,
under the direction and supervision of the city engineer or committee on
waterworks, at the expense of such owner.
   (D)   Approval: All meters, before being set or reset, must be tested and
approved by the city engineer or the committee on waterworks.
   (E)   Removal Of Meters: No meter shall be removed for any purpose from any
supply pipe by any person whatsoever, without obtaining a written permit from
the city collector or committee on waterworks so to do. And when any meter is
removed by such consent of the city collector or committee on waterworks it
must be replaced within ten (10) days, and before being replaced it must be
tested and approved by the city engineer or committee on waterworks at the
expense of the owner.
   (F)   Meters To Be Sealed: All meters which are now installed and which
shall hereafter be installed in the city shall be sealed by the city engineer
or committee on waterworks or their assistant, and no meter shall be broken, or
seal thereon broken, until after the city collector or committee on waterworks
shall have been notified and the reading of the meter shall have been taken by
the city collector or committee on waterworks, or their assistant.
   (G)   Testing: Whenever any owner or occupant of premises shall deem that
his meter is registering incorrectly he may request the city collector to test
the same. The city collector shall, upon request, cause the person designated
by the city council for testing meters to remove and test the same at the
expense of such owner or occupant, the amount of such expense to be included in
his next water bill. Any meter not exceeding two percent (2%) from actual
correctness is hereby declared to be a correctly registering meter.
   (H)   Back Pressure: If a meter is used in connection with a steam boiler or
under any conditions where it is exposed to a back pressure, the same must be
protected by a check valve, placed between the outlet of said meter and such
back pressure.
   (I)   Failure Of Meter: If a meter at any time fails to register, or does
not register correctly, the sum the property owner shall pay for water service
for that month shall be the same as paid the preceding month. No deductions
shall be made from any bill on account of leakage. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
   (J)   Repair Of Meters: All meters now in use and connected, and all meters
hereafter to be placed in use in connection with the city waterworks system are
hereby declared to be fixtures, and shall be set and kept in good repair at the
expense of the owner, and any meter found in need of repair shall be removed by
the superintendent and repaired by him at the expense of the owner of the
actual cost of repairs and labor. Whenever it may become necessary to repair
the service pipe between the city main and any meter on account of leakage or
for other cause, such repair shall be made under the supervision of the
superintendent who shall be notified of the same, and at the expense of the
owner of the actual cost of repairs and labor, and such pipe shall be replaced
with copper pipe, in accordance with the provisions of subsection
7-4-3(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 569, 3-7-2005)
7-4-3: SERVICE PIPES; STOPCOCKS:
   (A)   There shall be a stop and waste cock attached to every supply pipe at
the point where it enters the building inside the same so as to admit the water
being shut off. Where service pipes are intended to supply two (2) or more
premises or tenements, a separate service cock shall be used for each tenement
or premises. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
   (B)   All service pipes shall be laid not less than four feet (4') below the
established surface grade at all points of all streets, alleys and public
grounds of the city where a surface grade is now or shall hereafter be
established; and, at least four feet (4') below the surface of the ground at
all other points; and, no pipe shall be used except three-quarter inch (3/4")
copper pipe from the water mains to the property line; and, no pipe except
three-quarter inch (3/4") copper pipe shall be used from the said property line
to the outlet of such service pipe. (Ord. 566, 11-1-2004)
   (C)   Hydrants, plugs, stop boxes, service pipes, stopcocks and all
attachments and fixtures pertaining thereto shall be kept in good repair and
condition by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which they are
situated, at his own expense. And it is expressly provided that no claim shall
be made or allowed against the city or any of its officers or employees on
account of the breaking of said water apparatus or on account of the stoppage
of the supply of water by reason of accident to the pumping machinery or mains,
or for the necessary alteration or repair of the same. The city collector, city
engineer or the committee on waterworks or their agents shall have free access
at all reasonable hours upon the premises of the consumer for the purpose of
reading the meter; or he or they may remove a meter at any time for repair or
for testing its accuracy, and when any meter shall be found incorrect in
measurement and unfit for further use, such meter shall be replaced at once by
one that is approved by the city engineer, at the expense of the owner thereof.
   (D)   In putting down and repairing pipes, the streets, avenues, alleys and
sidewalks shall be opened in a manner which will occasion the least
inconvenience to the public and which will admit the uninterrupted passage of
water along the gutter of the street, avenue or alley. No excavation in any
street, avenue, alley or other public place shall be left open overnight except
by permission of the city engineer and every precaution shall be taken to
ensure safety. The street, avenue, alley or sidewalk shall be restored to as
good a condition as it was in previously to making the excavation and all dirt
and rubbish shall be immediately removed after the completion of the work,
under the direction of and to be approved by the city engineer 1 . (Ord., 4-3-
1939)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  7-1-3, "Excavations", of this title.
7-4-4: PLUMBING:
Any plumber or pipe fitter wishing to do business in connection with the city
waterworks shall, before entering into an agreement to do so, procure a state
license and shall be governed in all respects by the ordinances and regulations
which are or may be adopted by the city council. Such plumber shall also be
responsible for all damages the city may sustain at his hands, and the city
council may require any and all plumbers and pipe fitters to give bond in such
amount as may be fixed upon, to indemnify and save harmless the city from any
and all damages the city may sustain by reason of his failure to comply with
all rules and regulations of the city which now or may hereafter be
established. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-5: TAPPING; CONNECTING:
   (A)   Persons To Perform Work; Supervision: No person except a plumber,
regularly licensed by the state shall do any part of the work of tapping or
connecting with any water mains or water pipes in the city, or with the laying
of the service pipes from the city water mains or water pipes, or with the
connecting of said service pipes with the meter, hydrant, faucet or other
service outlet, and all such work shall be done under the supervision of the
city engineer, or such other person as shall be chosen so to do by the city
council.
   (B)   Installation: The expense of tapping and connecting with the water
mains and water pipes of the city, and the expense of the service pipe
including all appliances and fixtures used and work done in so doing, and in
connecting the same with the meter, including the digging and filling of the
trenches in which said service pipes are laid, or that is necessary to be dug
and filled in order to successfully tap such water mains and water pipes, and
all repairs or alterations of said service pipes, appliances or connections
shall be paid for by the person at whose application such connections are made,
or work performed; provided, that the said water meter shall be furnished by
the city at cost to the property owner, to be paid for when delivered.
   (C)   Connections: All connections shall be made of extra strong lead pipe
of the weight herein specified, from the tap to the stop box, unless the meter
shall be placed on a city water main, and the number of taps shall be according
to the specifications of this subsection. The lead pipe shall not be less than
the following weights for the respective sizes:
 3/4" pipe, per foot, 3 pounds 8 ounces
11/4" pipe, per foot, 6 pounds
11/2" pipe, per foot, 6 pounds
In no case shall any tap of over three-fourths inch (3/4") in size be made in
any water main; and, where there is a one and one-fourth inch (11/4") supply
pipe, there shall be used not less than two (2) 3/4-inch taps; and where there
is a one and one-half inch (11/2") supply pipe, there shall be used not less
than three (3) 3/4-inch taps; and where there is a two inch (2") supply pipe,
there shall be used not less than four (4) 3/4-inch taps, and in no case shall
these taps be less than eighteen inches (18") apart in said water main.
   (D)   Cross Connections With Private Water Supply, Not Permitted: No person
shall be permitted to use a cross connection between the city water supply and
a private water supply or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. If a
private water supply is used on any premises where the city water supply is
available, such private water supply shall not be used unless the city water
supply is completely disconnected from such private water supply either by an
air space in a manner approved by the city engineer or committee on waterworks,
or by capping the city water supply service.
Where a private water supply is used on the same premises with the city water
supply, a check valve of a type approved by the city engineer or committee on
waterworks and paid for by the consumer, shall be installed in the city water
service.
   (E)   Records Of Taps: It shall be the duty of the city collector to keep a
correct record of all taps made on the water mains of the city in a book to be
provided for that purpose, showing the location of the tap, the description of
the premises, and the date making said tap, and it shall be his duty, before
issuing a permit to any person to connect with such tap, to ascertain the
amount due and collect the same.
   (F)   Supervision: All taps and connections shall be put in under the
direction and supervision of the city engineer, who shall see that all the
material is of a quality suitable for the purposes for which same is used.
   (G)   Separate Taps: Every consumer shall have and maintain a separate and
independent tap for connection with the city water main for each building or
premises for which water is furnished, and no person shall be permitted to
connect his service pipe with the service pipe of any other consumer; and no
such taps or connections, heretofore made, shall be repaired or extended, but
whenever the same shall become in need of repair or an extension shall be made,
such service pipe shall be connected directly with the city water main in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-6: CITY TO MAINTAIN WATER LINES:
The city shall maintain existing water lines of residents of the city and shall
maintain water lines hereafter installed by residents of the city from the city
water main to the curb stop. (Ord., 10-2-1961)
7-4-7: BUILDERS USING WATER:
Whenever builders, brick masons, plasterers or contractors use the water of the
city in or about their work, the same shall be metered and be charged for at
the regular rate. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-8: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All employees connected with the city waterworks, the city collector, the city
engineer, the committee on waterworks or any member thereof, shall have free
access at all reasonable hours to premises where water is furnished by the
city, to make necessary examinations and inspections. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-9: TAMPERING WITH FIXTURES, HYDRANTS:
No person shall make any alterations, tamper with, or change in any manner, any
meter, water distribution control valve, service pipe, cock, any attachment, or
fixture pertaining thereto, without the written permission of the mayor,
superintendent of water and sewer, or public works director. No person shall
open or in any manner tamper or interfere with any city hydrant without the
written permission of the mayor, superintendent of water and sewer, public
works director, or some officer of the fire department of the city of Momence.
Penalty for violations of this section shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per incident to be paid to the city. (Ord. 688, 7-5-2010)
7-4-10: SPRINKLING RESTRICTED:
All hose being used for garden purposes, street or lawn sprinkling, washing of
motor vehicles, buggies, etc., cleaning and like purposes must be shut off
instantly upon any alarm of fire being given, and shall not be used again until
signal is given that such fire is out.
The mayor of the city shall have the right, whenever in his opinion the public
good requires it, by proclamation, to order that no water from the waterworks
system of the city shall be used for street and lawn sprinkling; provided, that
in such proclamation he shall state the days or hours of the day when the same
shall not be used for such purposes; and it shall be unlawful for any person to
use water from the city waterworks system for such purposes during any time
when the mayor shall by such proclamation have prohibited its use. (Ord., 4-3-
1939)
7-4-11: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
   (A)   In case of fire, or an alarm of fire, or while making repairs, or
constructing new work, the city reserves the right to shut off the city water
for as long a time as may be necessary.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith, shall have
the water turned off from his premises. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-12: USING WATER WITHOUT PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any hydrant, stopcock or
other fixture without first having obtained a permit from the city collector,
or for any person, having discontinued or been shut off from the use of the
water from the city waterworks system, to again commence the use of such water
without first having obtained a permit for so doing from the city collector, or
for any person to turn on the supply of city water without the permission of
the city collector or the committee on waterworks, or to use water from the
city waterworks system without the knowledge or consent of the proper
authorities. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-13: CONNECTION BEFORE LOCAL IMPROVEMENT:
The owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land abutting upon any street or
avenue in the city shall, within thirty (30) days after receiving notice in
writing of the intention to initiate a local improvement of the said street or
avenue, make all connections with the city water main and the city sewer in
said street or avenue from said main or sewer, to the curb line in front of
said lot, tract or parcel of land so abutting on the street or avenue to be
improved. The notice of public hearing by the board of local improvements in
any paving improvement of the roadway of any street or avenue in the city
shall, in the absence of other written notice, be considered and deemed due
notice under the requirement and provisions of this section.
No owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land abutting upon the streets or
avenues of the city, nor any other person, shall be permitted to excavate or
remove the roadway of any street or avenue for the purpose of making any
connection or connections with any city water main or sewer after the
completion of pavement or other local improvement of the roadway of said street
or avenue in the city, unless he shall have first obtained the consent of the
council thereto by a resolution in writing, duly adopted by the council, and
shall also have filed in the office of the city collector a bond in the sum of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) with good and sufficient sureties, payable to
the city and conditioned to replace and repair the pavement or roadway of said
street or avenue, and to put the same in as good a condition as it was in
previously to the excavating and making of the connection or connections, and
to maintain, repair and keep the same in such condition for the period of one
year after the making of the connection or connections aforesaid. (Ord., 4-3-
1939)
7-4-14: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE:
The city shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or break in any
service pipe, or for damage caused by a failure to repair the same promptly,
nor shall the city be liable for any damage caused by the repair or
installation of such pipe or resulting therefrom when such work is not done by
the city. (Ord., 4-3-1939)
7-4-15: SERVICE FEES AND RECONNECTION FEES:
   (A)   In the event that as a result of nonpayment of sewer or water bills or
through any other voluntary or involuntary action on the part of the landowner
or occupant of any premises served by water in the city such water service is
turned off, then before such service shall be reconnected the owner or occupant
requesting such reestablishment of service shall, at the time of such request,
pay to the city the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as and for a
reconnection fee. (Ord. 565, 11-1-2004)
   (B)   In the event that any water meter becomes damaged and is rendered
inoperable more than one time in any twenty four (24) month period, upon such
second occasion within any such twenty four (24) month period such owner or
occupant requesting a new or repaired water meter shall pay to the city upon
such request the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) as and for a service fee
for installing and/or repairing such water meter. (Ord. 313, 7-15-1985)
7-4-16: PRIVATE WELLS, GROUNDWATER AND POTABLE WATER:
   (A)   Private Wells:
      1.   Unlawful To Drill: It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a
private well in the city. (Ord. 568, 3-7-2005)
      2.   Use Of Water: It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from
any private well for drinking or cooking purposes. (Ord. 459, 8-18-1997; amd.
Ord. 466, 2-2-1998)
   (B)   Use Of Groundwater As A Potable Water Supply:
      1.   Prohibited: The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply
groundwater from within the corporate limits of the city by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, except at points
of withdrawal by the city.
      2.   Definitions:
    PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods.
      3.   Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this subsection
(B) shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day
for each violation. (Ord. 466, 2-2-1998)
CHAPTER 5
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-5-1: Systems Combined
7-5-2: Department Created
7-5-3: Application For Service; Deposit
7-5-4: Metering Of Water For Apartment Houses
7-5-5: Fire District; Hydrant Fee (Rep. by Ord. 485, 4-3-2000)
7-5-6: Liability For Payment
7-5-7: Delinquencies
7-5-8: Discontinue Service
7-5-9: Collector To Render Bills
7-5-10: Revenues Kept Separate
7-5-11: Waterworks And Sewerage Fund
7-5-12: System Of Accounts
7-5-13: Provisions On File With County
7-5-14: Delinquent Sewer Bills; Disconnection
7-5-15: Diverting Water Prohibited
7-5-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
   (A)   It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary for the best
interests of the city that the existing waterworks system of the city and the
existing sanitary sewerage system of the city be combined into a single utility
to be known and designated as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of
the city.
   (B)   All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the now existing
waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system of the city is hereby found,
determined and declared to constitute the properties of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system of the city.
   (C)   Upon the effective date hereof said existing waterworks system and
said sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated by the city as a
combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
city, and all improvements and extensions to said waterworks and sewerage
system, either or both, shall be considered as improvements and extensions to
said combined utility; and all the properties, assets, obligations and
liabilities of all kinds of said waterworks system and of said sanitary
sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue shall be held,
used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and
liabilities of said combined utility. (Ord., 1-3-1961)
7-5-2: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the city to be known and
designated as the combined waterworks and sewerage department of the city, and
there shall be placed in charge of the general management and control thereof a
superintendent, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council expressed by ordinance, it being hereby determined and declared
that the establishment of said department and the appointment of a
superintendent thereof is necessary and expedient for the best interests of the
city, said superintendent shall qualify for office in the same manner as any
elective official of the city and shall post such bond in such amount as may be
determined by the mayor. All necessary employees of said department shall
likewise be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council
expressed by ordinance. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-3: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; DEPOSIT:
Upon the application of the owner or any authorized agent or tenant of the
owner, premises will be furnished through the connections already made, and
upon compliance with the rates, rules and regulations of the city, and after
approval of the application by the city endorsed thereon.
The application shall state the name of the owner of the premises, the
character and extent of the service desired, the description of the premises,
including the name of the street and house number, if any, and such other
information as may be reasonably required by the city.
At the time of making application for service, applicant must make payment to
the city of the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00), the same to be held by the
city during the time said service is furnished to the applicant as a security
deposit guaranteeing payment of bills submitted by the city for such service
from time to time. Upon termination of service the said security deposit shall
be returned to applicant.
A new application must be made and approved by the city upon any change in
ownership in property, or in tenancy, as described in the application, and the
city shall have the right to discontinue the water and sewer service until such
new application is made and approved. (Ord. 145, 12-20-1971)
7-5-4: METERING OF WATER FOR APARTMENT HOUSES:
Apartment houses containing four (4) or more separate units or apartments may
install one water meter of sufficient size and capacity to service all of the
rental units in a single building. In the event that one meter is so installed,
the owner of said building shall receive two thousand (2,000) gallons of water
per month for each unit of said apartment building for the minimum water rate
charged under the existing water rate schedule 1  times the total number of
units. After said total minimum gallonage has been consumed, the rates charged
for gallonage in excess thereof shall be in accordance with the existing
charges by the city allocated to the next succeeding gallonage bracket above
the permitted minimum times the total number of units in said building. (Ord.,
6-6-1966)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  7-6-1 of this title.
7-5-5: FIRE DISTRICT; HYDRANT FEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 485, 4-3-2000)
7-5-6: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
   (A)   The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof and the user of
either water or sewage service or both water and sewage service shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for the services supplied to the premises
and the services furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition
that the owner, occupant, and user of the service become and remain jointly and
severally liable therefor to the city for payment thereof. (Ord. 295, 7-5-1983)
   (B)   Bills shall be rendered by the city at the end of each month and shall
be payable within twenty (20) days after the date thereof. If payment is not
made in the full amount of the bill within said twenty (20) day period, then
interest shall be added on the unpaid amount at five percent (5%) per month
from and after the due date of said bill until paid. (Ord. 560, 9-7-2004)
   (C)   In the event the city is required to commence legal proceedings to
obtain the payment of a delinquent sewer and water charge, then the owner,
occupant, or user, as the case may be, as defendant(s) shall, as provided for
by statute, pay to the city the city's reasonable attorney fees incurred in the
collection of said delinquent bill. (Ord. 295, 7-5-1983)
7-5-7: DELINQUENCIES:
   (A)   In the event said rates or charges for water and sewerage service, or
either of them including any penalty then due are not paid within thirty (30)
days after the rendition of the bill for such service, such charges and
penalties shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. A
delinquency notice identifying the delinquent charges and penalty shall be sent
to the customer and all owners of record. The delinquency notice shall provide
that failure to pay the delinquent charges and penalty within fifteen (15) days
of the date of the notice may result in a lien upon the property.
   (B)   Once a delinquency notice in compliance with subsection (A) of this
section has been sent to all owners of record, a lien in the amount of the
delinquent charges is created upon the premises served. Whenever any charges
remain unpaid for fifteen (15) days after a delinquency notice has been sent,
the city may file with the county recorder of deeds a notice of lien. This
notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the
premises served sufficient for the identification thereof, the amount of money
due and the date when such amount became delinquent. The city shall send a copy
of the notice of lien to all owners of record of the premises. (Ord. 637, 8-20-
2007)
   (C)   At the first council meeting in May, and every three (3) months
thereafter, the city clerk shall report a full list of names of all water
takers that have not paid their water rentals up to date. The city clerk shall
publish a list of all water takers who are delinquent in the payment of their
water rents by May 31 of each year, and shall also publish a list of all water
takers who are delinquent by November 30 of each year. (Ord. 708, 3-21-2011)
7-5-8: DISCONTINUE SERVICE:
If all charges and penalties for water and sewerage service, or either of them
are not paid within fifty (50) days after the rendition of the bill for such
service, then such service can be discontinued without further notice and
cannot be reinstated until all bills and penalties due thereon are paid in
full, and current. A payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is due for
service reinstatement. Should same owner have all charges and penalties for
water and sewerage service, or either of them not paid within the fifty (50)
days recur, then the service reinstatement fee shall increase an additional one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 811, 3-7-2016)
7-5-9: COLLECTOR TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the city collector to render bills for water and
sewerage service, or either of them, and all other charges in connection
therewith, and to collect all monies due thereon, and it is hereby made the
duty of all officials of the city to enforce payment of all unpaid bills and
penalties in the manner and form, time and procedure under the laws of the
state of Illinois thereunto enabling. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-10: REVENUES KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the city collector separate and apart from
his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and
all of said sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be delivered to the
city treasurer not more than ten (10) days after the receipt of the same, or at
such frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the city
council. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-11: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND:
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
said system, as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in a
separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the city of
Momence", and said treasurer shall administer said fund in every respect in the
manner provided by state law. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-12: SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts, in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals the city council shall cause to be made
an audit by an independent auditing concern, of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the combined system. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-13: PROVISIONS ON FILE WITH COUNTY:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the city clerk, shall be filed in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Kankakee County, Illinois, and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for water and
sewerage service supplied to any occupant or user of such services on their
properties. (Ord., 5-18-1961)
7-5-14: DELINQUENT SEWER BILLS; DISCONNECTION:
   (A)   In the event that any user of the city sewer service suffers or
permits the charges rendered by the city to such user for sewer services to
remain unpaid for a period of more than six (6) months, the city shall take all
necessary steps to disconnect said service. Prior to said sewer service being
disconnected, the city shall give said user thirty (30) days' notice to bring
all unpaid charges current. Said notice shall be by registered mail or, if said
occupant is no longer at the premises or refuses the delivery of registered
mail, by posting a notice of intended disconnection at said place of proposed
disconnection. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the city
shall then take such steps to disconnect the delinquent user from the sewer
system. (Ord. 334, 11-17-1986)
   (B)   In the event that after said disconnection the present user or any
subsequent owner or occupant of said disconnected account desires to connect to
the sewer system, such connection shall be made by the city upon payment of the
total amount of unpaid sewer charges and a five hundred dollar ($500.00) city
reconnection fee. (Ord. 507, 11-19-2001)
7-5-15: DIVERTING WATER PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any persons or other entity receiving
water to permit, allow or cause the diversion of potable water from said place
of use to any other dwelling. Each and every day that diversion of water off
premises takes place shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 509, 11-19-
2001)
CHAPTER 6
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Water Service Rates And Charges
7-6-1-1: Water Connection Fee
7-6-1-2: Determination Of Rates And Charges
7-6-2: Sewer Service Rates And Charges
7-6-2-1: Definitions
7-6-2-2: Sewer Connection Fee
7-6-2-3: Determination Of Rates And Charges
7-6-2-4: Basis Of Charges; Determination Of Rate Surcharge
7-6-2-5: Study Of Revenue System
7-6-2-6: Use Of Revenues Restricted
7-6-2-7: Billing System; Liability Of Owner
7-6-2-8: Enforcement
7-6-2-9: Effective Date Of Rates
7-6-2-10: Annual Cost Review
7-6-3: Industrial Cost Recovery System
7-6-3-1: Definitions
7-6-3-2: Determination Of Uses Subject To Industrial Cost Recovery Charges
7-6-3-3: Determination Of Industrial Cost Recovery Charges
7-6-3-4: Monthly Billing System
7-6-3-5: Revenue System
7-6-3-6: Review Of Records
7-6-4: Fee Schedule
7-6-1: WATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES:
7-6-1-1: WATER CONNECTION FEE:
All persons desiring to connect or tap onto the water line of the city shall
pay to the city clerk the appropriate sum from the table at the end of this
section prior to any such connection and shall obtain the approval of the city
building inspector as to the location and method of tapping onto said water
line prior to any connection thereto. No tapping shall be approved until the
city has further established that the water so being supplied shall be metered
in an appropriate fashion to allow the city to establish on a monthly basis the
amount of water consumed at said premises. All materials and installation by a
licensed plumber are the responsibility of said person desiring to connect or
tap onto the city water line.
Water tap-in fee1:
 As of 5-1-1997       $ 500.00
 As of 1-1-1999       800.00
 As of 1-1-2001       1,100.00
 As of 1-1-2003       1,400.00
 As of 1-1-2005       1,700.00
 As of 2-1-2015       250.00
                           
Water inspection fee   100.00
                          
Preliminary plat fee   100.00
                          
Final plat fee         100.00
 
Note:
   1.   For multi-family residences, water tap-in fees are computed at the rate
of full price for the first unit and 1/2 price for each additional unit.
(Ord. 792, 2-16-2015)
7-6-1-2: DETERMINATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The charge for water service will be based upon the amount of water consumed on
each premises supplied with water service by the waterworks system of the City
as follows:
   (A)   For each establishment furnished water, the charge shall be a minimum
of thirty-two dollars and fifty five cents ($32.55) per month with a further
charge of two dollars and six cents ($2.06) per thousand gallons used, or part
thereof, per month on all gallons used. There shall be added to each monthly
bill, in addition to the calculated amount specified above, the additional sum
of seven dollars ($7.00) per month.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any of the above provisions regarding minimum charges,
it is hereby established for any service connection servicing more than one
residential unit through any size connection a minimum monthly charge of
thirty-two dollars and fifty-five cents ($32.55) times the number of units so
furnished from said connection and a further charge of two dollars and six
cents ($2.06) per thousand gallons used, or part thereof, per month on all
gallons used. There shall be added to each monthly bill, in addition to the
calculated amount specified above, the additional sum of seven dollars ($7.00)
per month.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any of the above provisions regarding minimum charges,
any establishment furnished water through more than one service connection
shall pay only one minimum service charge per month and shall further pay for
water furnished a charge of two dollars and six cents ($2.06) per thousand
gallons used, or part thereof, per month on all water used per month. There
shall be added to each monthly bill, in addition to the calculated amount
specified above, the additional sum of seven dollars ($7.00) per month.
   (D)   Beginning on May 1, 2025, the charges for water rates shall be as set
forth below, amended on May I of each calendar year:
 
Charge               2025   2026   2027   2028   2029   2030   2031   2032
Water Base Rate      $32.55 $32.55 $32.55 $32.55 $32.55 $32.55 $32.55 $32.55
Water Rate per 1,000 $2.06  $2.12  $2.97  $4.16  $5.82  $8.15  $9.37  $10.78
gallons
Southside Water Line $7.00  $7.00  $7.00  $7.00  $7.00  $7.00  $7.00  $7.00
Charge
 
   (E)   Beginning on May, 2033, in the event the annual rate review is not
completed by May 1 of each calendar year, the rate will nonetheless increase by
three percent (3%) and shall remain at that amount for the next twelve (12)
months unless another fee is established, and the section amended. (Ord. 603,
3-6-2006; amd. Ord. 804, 11-2-2015; Ord. 871, 3-7-2022; Ord. 895, - -2025)
7-6-2: SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES:
7-6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this section
7-6-2 shall be as follows:
DOMESTIC USER: Any private residence, commercial establishment or institution
which discharges normal domestic sewage to the publicly owned treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any manufacturing or processing facility that discharges
industrial waste to a publicly owned treatment works.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater discharges resulting from industrial, trade,
or business processes as distinct from their employees' domestic waste or waste
from sanitary conveniences.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or sanitary
conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial processes, when such
domestic wastes do not exceed a BOD strength of two hundred milligrams per
liter (200 mg/l), or a suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: Includes all costs, direct or indirect,
necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and treatment on
a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters that conform with
all related federal, state and local requirements. These costs include
replacement.
REPLACEMENT COSTS: The expenditures for procuring and installing equipment,
accessories and appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and
performance for which treatment facilities were designed, during their service
life. This term includes replacement.
SANITARY SEWAGE: The waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks,
bathtubs, showers, household laundries, basement floor drains, garage floor
drains, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking
fountains, stable floor drains, and all other water carried wastes except
industrial wastes.
SERVICE LIFE: Refers to the useful life of real property and equipment and
shall, for the purposes of this chapter, equal fifty (50) years for real
property and fifteen (15) years for new equipment.
SURCHARGE: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service
charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength
than the concentration values established in section
7-6-2-4 of this chapter.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on the users of a treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance of such works. (Ord. 179, 3-1-1976)
7-6-2-2: SEWER CONNECTION FEE:
All persons desiring to connect or tap onto the sewer system of the city shall
pay to the city clerk the appropriate sum from the table at the end of this
section prior to any such connection and shall obtain the approval of the city
building inspector as to the location and method of tapping onto said sewer
system prior to any connection thereto. All materials and installation by a
licensed plumber are the responsibility of said person desiring to connect or
tap onto the city sewer system.
Sewer tap-in fee1:         
 
 As of 5-1-1997       $1,000.00
 As of 1-1-1999       1,600.00
 As of 1-1-2001       2,200.00
 As of 1-1-2003       2,800.00
 As of 1-1-2005       3,400.00
 As of 2-1-2015       250.00
                         
Sewer inspection fee   100.00
                          
Preliminary plat fee   100.00
                          
Final plat fee         100.00
 
Note:
   1.   For multi-family residences, sewer tap-in fees are computed at the rate
of full price for the first unit and 1/2 price for each additional unit.
(Ord. 792, 2-16-2015)
7-6-2-3: DETERMINATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
For the use of and the service rendered by the sewage works, rates and charges
shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate
or building that is connected with the city's sewer system or otherwise
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids, either
directly or indirectly, into the sewer of the city, which rates and charges
shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount determinable
as follows:
   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, sewage rates and charges per
month for the sewage works shall consist of a uniform fixed rate which shall be
charged to all users, and a variable rate applicable to all users which shall
be based on the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises
subject to such rates and charges, as the same is measured by the water meter
there is use.
   (B)   The fixed rate charged to all domestic users shall be twenty-six
dollars and sixty-six cents ($26.66) per month and the variable rate additional
charge for all domestic users shall be two dollars and forty-nine cents ($2.49)
per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water usage, or part thereof, per month.
These rates shall constitute the domestic user charge rate.
   (C)   Those classified as industrial users, the total fixed industrial
charge of six thousand, eight hundred dollars ($6,800.00) per month, will be
allocated amongst all the industrial users based on each individual industrial
users' monthly use per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water as calculated by
the Superintendent of the Sewer Department compared to the utilization of that
same standard quantity of water per month by all industrial users. The variable
rate additional charge for all industrial users shall be two dollars and forty-
nine cents ($2.49) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water usage, or part
thereof, per month. These rates shall constitute the industrial user charge
rate.
   (D)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the city's
sewer system, either directly or indirectly, is not a user of water supplied by
the city's waterworks, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by
a meter, or is measured by a meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount
of water shall be otherwise measured or determined by the city, in order to
ascertain the rates of charge, or the owner or other interested party, at his/
her expense, may install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring
devices, or any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the
city for the determination of the sewage discharge.
   (E)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water, or other liquids into the city's
sewer system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water supplied by the
city's waterworks, and in addition uses water from another source which is not
measured by a water meter, or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to
the city, then the amount of water used shall be otherwise measured or
determined by the city in order to ascertain the rates of charge, or the owner,
or other interested party at his expense may install and maintain meters,
weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the city for the determination of sewage discharge.
   (F)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharges
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the city's sewer
system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the city
that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters does not and
cannot enter the sanitary sewer system, then the owner or other interested
party shall install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or
any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the city for the
determination of sewage discharge.
   (G)   In the event two (2) or more residential lots, parcels of real estate
or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into the
city's sewer system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each such case,
for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged for each
user and the minimum charge and the sewage rates and charges shall apply to
each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate, or buildings
served through the single water meter.
   (H)   The sewer rates shall apply to any user of the sewer system without
regard to what point in the sewage treatment process sanitary sewage, treated
or untreated industrial wastes, water or other liquids are inserted into any
point in the city's sewer treatment or delivery process.
   (I)   In the event two (2) or more dwelling units such as trailers,
apartments, or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other
liquids into the city's sewer system, either directly or indirectly, are users
of water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in
such case, billing shall be for a single service in the manner set out in
section 7-6-1-2 of this chapter, except that the fixed charge shall be equal to
the number of dwelling uni ts multiplied by the fixed rate specified in
subsection (B) of this section. In the case of trailer parks the number of
dwelling units shall be computed and interpreted as the total number of
trailers located and installed in said park plus any other dwelling units
served through the meter. A dwelling unit shall be interpreted as a room or
rooms or any other space or spaces in which cooking facilities are provided.
   (J)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as well as
for other uses, the city may, in its discretion, make adjustments in the
minimum charge and in the user charge as may be equitable.
   (K)   For the service rendered to the city, the city shall be subject to the
same rates and charges hereinabove provided or to rates and charges established
in harmony therewith.
   (L)   Beginning May 1, 2025, the charges for sewer rates shall be as set
forth below, amended on May 1 of each calendar year:
 
Charge               2025   2026   2027   2028   2029   2030   2031   2032
Sewer Base Rate      $26.66 $26.66 $26.66 $26.66 $26.66 $26.66 $26.66 $26.66
Sewer Rate Per 1,000 $2.49  $2.57  $3.60  $5.04  $7.05  $9.87  $11.35 $13.05
Gallons
 
   (M)   Beginning on May 1, 2033, in the event the annual review is not
completed by May 1 of each calendar year, the rate will nonetheless increase by
three percent (3%) and shall remain in that amount for the next twelve (12)
months unless another fee is established and this section amended. (Ord., 3-2-
1970; amd. Ord. 179, 3-1-1976; Ord. 517, 6-3-2002; Ord. 601-A, 3-20-2006; Ord.
873, 3-21-2022; Ord. 895, - -2025)
7-6-2-4: BASIS OF CHARGES; DETERMINATION OF RATE SURCHARGE:
In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted to the
services rendered, the city shall base its charges not only on volume but also
on the strength and character of the sewage and waste which it is required to
dispose of. The city shall require the owner or other user to measure and
determine the strength and content of all sewage and waste discharged, either
directly or indirectly into the city's sewer system in such manner and by such
method as may be deemed practical in the light of the conditions and attending
circumstances of the case in order to determine the proper charge. The owner or
other user shall furnish a central sampling point available to the city at all
times.
Extra charges based on the strength of the sewage and liquid wastes shall be
made on the following basis: (Ord. 516, 6-3-2002)
   (A)   Rate Surcharge Based Upon Suspended Solids: There shall be an
additional charge of twenty four cents ($0.24) per one thousand (1,000) gallons
of flow for each one hundred milligrams (100 mg), or fraction thereof, of
suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l)
of fluid.
   (B)   Rate Surcharge Based Upon BOD: There shall be an additional charge of
twenty four cents ($0.24) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of flow for each one
hundred milligrams (100 mg), or fraction thereof, of biochemical oxygen demand
in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) of fluid. The city
council is authorized to prohibit the dumping of wastes into the city's sewer
system which, in its discretion, is deemed harmful. (Ord. 707, 2-22-2011)
   (C)   FOG Surcharge: The FOG surcharge for fats, oils, and greases (FOG)
loadings from industrial users which are in excess of one hundred milligrams
per liter (100 mg/l) are hereby established. When this concentration is
exceeded, the surcharge will be sixty cents ($0.60) per pound.
   (D)   Slug Or Slug Load: When a "slug or slug load" as defined herein is
detected at any location in the sanitary sewers, and the source of same can be
confirmed, a charge shall be made and invoiced by the superintendent, as
follows:
      1.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for the discharge of any
wastewater having a pH equal to or greater than 4.5 and less than 5.0.
      2.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for the discharge of any
wastewater having a pH less than 4.5.
      3.   A user whose discharge flow exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) gallons
per day of the violations or as an average during the month of the violations
shall be charged twice the amounts described in subsections (D)1 and (D)2 of
this section.
      4.   Plus any extra expenses, losses, and/or damages occasioned by the
city of Momence by reason of such "slug or slug load" entering the sanitary
sewers or POTW. (Ord. 516, 6-3-2002)
7-6-2-5: STUDY OF REVENUE SYSTEM:
In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may remain fair and
equitable and be in proportion to the cost of providing services to the various
users, the city shall cause a study to be made within a reasonable period of
time following the first full calendar year of operation subsequent to the
completion of the improvement project. Such study shall include, but not be
limited to, an analysis of the costs associated with the treatment of excessive
strength effluents from industrial users, determination of users subject to the
industrial cost recovery charges 1 , volume and delivery flow rate
characteristics attributed to the various users or user classes, the financial
position of the sewage works and the adequacy of its revenue to provide
reasonable funds for operation and maintenance, replacements and capital
improvements to the waste treatment system. Therefore, on an annual basis,
within a reasonable period of time following the normal accounting period, the
city shall cause a similar study to be made for the purpose of reviewing the
fairness and equity of the rates and charges for sewage services on a
continuing basis. Said studies shall be conducted by officers and/or employees
of the city or by a firm of certified public accountants and/or a firm of
consulting engineers which firms shall have experience in such studies. (Ord.
179, 3-1-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  7-6-3 of this chapter.
7-6-2-6: USE OF REVENUES RESTRICTED:
Separate accounting procedures shall be established for the collection, holding
and disbursement of revenues generated under this chapter. Revenues thus
generated are to be used solely for the operation, maintenance and replacement
of the treatment works. (Ord. 179, 3-1-1976)
7-6-2-7: BILLING SYSTEM; LIABILITY OF OWNER:
The rates and charges shall be prepared and billed by the city monthly as the
city may deem appropriate and as determined by the bylaws and regulations of
the city as herein provided for and shall be collected in the manner provided
by law and ordinance 1 . Said rates and charges will be billed to the tenant or
tenants occupying the property served unless otherwise requested in writing by
the owners, but such billing shall in nowise relieve the owner from liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of the
properties served, which are occupied by tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining
whether such rates and charges have been paid by such tenants; provided, that
such examination shall be made in the office in which said records are kept and
during the hours that such office is open for business. (Ord. 179, 3-1-1976)
 
Notes
  2. See sections
1 7-5-6 through
  7-5-9 of this title.
7-6-2-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The city shall make and enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be deemed
necessary for the safe, economic and efficient management of the city sewer and
connections to the sewer system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating
and refunding of rates and charges. (Ord. 179, 3-1-1976)
7-6-2-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES:
Except as otherwise provided, the rates and charges as herein set forth shall
become effective on the date that sanitary sewers of the sewer system are made
available for connection to any lot, parcel of real estate or building; but in
any event, said rates and charges shall become effective no later than May 1,
1976. (Ord. 179, 3-1-1976)
7-6-2-10: ANNUAL COST REVIEW:
The superintendent, not less than annually, shall prepare an estimate of
Momence sewer utility cost components for operation, maintenance, and
replacement. These estimated cost components shall be reviewed no less than
annually, and approved by the city council. (Ord. 707, 2-22-2011)
7-6-3: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM:
7-6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the terms
used in this section shall be as follows:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act and amendments of 1972, public law
92-500, adopted by the 92nd congress on October 18, 1972.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY: The recovery by the city from the industrial users of
the treatment works of the grant amount allocable to the treatment of wastes
from such users pursuant to section 204(b) of the act.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD: That period during which the grant amount
allocated to the treatment of wastes from industrial users is recovered from
the industrial users of such works, which shall be a period of thirty (30)
years.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works
identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", 1972, office of
management and budget, United States government, as amended and supplemented,
under the following divisions: A, B, D, E and I.
A user in the divisions listed above may be excluded from this class if it is
determined that it will introduce primarily domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater discharges resulting from industrial, trade
or business processes as distinct from their employees' domestic waste or waste
from sanitary conveniences.
NONINDUSTRIAL USER: Any governmental or residential user of a publicly owned
treatment works which introduces primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes
from sanitary conveniences. The term also includes commercial, institutional
and other industrial users where it has been determined that the waste
contributed by these users is primarily segregated domestic wastes or waste
from sanitary conveniences.
PROJECT: Project no. C170865 which is defined as a separate and distinct
project for construction of the Momence municipal sewage works which was
sponsored by the U.S. environmental protection agency under the provisions of
public law 92-500. This project does not include past or future construction,
equipment or other services not included under the specific project number and
in the approved plans, specifications and change orders for the project.
RECOVERED AMOUNTS: The annual payments from industrial users for their shares
of the federal grant allocable to the cost of treating industrial wastes, which
is determined by dividing the total federal grant amount allocable to treatment
of industrial waste by the industrial cost recovery period.
RETAINED AMOUNTS: Fifty percent (50%) of the amounts recovered from industrial
users, together with interest earned thereon. (Ord. 181, 3-1-1976)
7-6-3-2: DETERMINATION OF USES SUBJECT TO INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES:
The city shall determine which users are subject to paying the industrial cost
recovery charges, in the following manner:
   (A)   The city shall require appropriate employees of the sewage works to
review billing records and prepare a list of all potential industrial users, as
identified in each of the divisions listed in section
7-6-3-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   The list of all potential industrial users shall be analyzed on the
basis of data available at the sewage works billing office (i.e., type of
business, volume charges, excessive loading charges, estimated number of
employees, etc.) for the purpose of developing preliminary lists of probable
"industrial" and probable "nonindustrial" users.
   (C)   The city shall conduct an immediate survey of all probable
"industrial" users in order to substantiate the validity of classifying a
particular user as an "industrial" user. Each user initially classified as an
industrial user shall be notified as to his classification.
   (D)   After completing the survey of all probable "industrial" users, the
city shall review the list of probable "nonindustrial" users to determine if
the initial classification of any of these users should be reconsidered. Where
appropriate, individual users will be contacted in order to determine the
proper classification.
   (E)   After an industrial user has been notified of his classification, the
user may request reconsideration by furnishing data and measurements acceptable
to the city for the determination of sewage discharge. The city shall have the
right to measure and determine the strength and content of all sewage and waste
discharges, either directly or indirectly into the city's sanitary sewage
system, in such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable in the
light of the conditions and attending circumstances of each case in order to
determine the proper user classification.
   (F)   Within a reasonable period of time following completion of the sewage
works construction project, the city shall have completed the initial
classification of all industrial users. During the first calendar year of
operation, subsequent to completion of the construction project, and annually
thereafter, the city will review, classify and reclassify all users as either
industrial or nonindustrial users based upon measurements and data obtained by
the city or furnished by individual users. Normally, each user will retain his
classification until the next succeeding classification period. However, if
there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery flow rate
characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an individual user, then
the classification of the user may be reviewed and established during the year
in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of each case. (Ord.
181, 3-1-1976)
7-6-3-3: DETERMINATION OF INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGES:
   (A)   In the event that a user of the treatment works is classified as an
industrial user and is not excluded from this classification based on its
sewage characteristics, a separate charge shall be levied on the user in
addition to that established in section
7-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 181, 3-1-1976)
   (B)   The industrial cost recovery charges for the treatment of industrial
wastes at the treatment plant shall be based upon the volume of sewage flow
billed to industrial users, as determined in accordance with appropriate
provisions for determining billed flow included in section
7-6-2 of this chapter and the total strength and character of industrial wastes
which is introduced into the waste treatment system. The strength and character
of industrial wastes shall be measured at the industrial user's expense as
provided for in section
7-6-2 of this chapter and furnished to the city. The owner or industrial user
shall furnish a central sampling point available to the city at all times. In
the event that measurement of the strength and character of industrial wastes
are not provided to the city on a timely basis, the measurements of the
strength and character of industrial wastes shall be determined by the city on
the basis of a sample, authorized hereunder, to be taken by the city for the
purpose of appropriate billing. The industrial cost recovery rates for the
treatment of wastes shall be as follows:
 
Monthly flow                $0.12 per 1,000 gallons
Monthly total pounds of BOD 0.08 per pound
Monthly total pounds of SS  0.08 per pound
 
(Ord. 515, 6-3-2002)
   (C)   However, in the event an "industrial user" can and does show to the
satisfaction of the city that a portion of the total monthly billed sewage flow
is from sanitary conveniences, then the flows and pollutant loadings to which
the industrial cost recovery charge is applied, shall be determined on the
basis of net flow and pollutant loadings excluding sanitary conveniences.
   (D)   If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery
flow rate characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an industrial
user, such user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
   (E)   If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works, each
existing industrial user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
   (F)   An industrial user's share shall include only that portion of the
grant assistance allocable to its use or to capacity firmly committed for its
use.
   (G)   An industrial user's share shall not include an interest component.
(Ord. 181, 3-1-1976)
7-6-3-4: MONTHLY BILLING SYSTEM:
The industrial cost recovery charges for the treatment services on or after the
effective date hereof shall be prepared and billed monthly. (Ord. 181, 3-1-
1976)
7-6-3-5: REVENUE SYSTEM:
The city shall account for all industrial cost recovery payments in the
following manner:
   (A)   All revenues derived from the industrial cost recovery rates and
charges shall be segregated and kept in a special fund, separate and apart from
all other funds of the city. The special fund shall be designated the "water
pollution control center industrial cost recovery fund" and payment of said
amount into said fund shall be deemed a reasonable expense of operation of the
sewage works for the purpose of computing net operating revenue.
   (B)   Within one hundred twenty (120) days following the end of the first
calendar year after completion of construction and improvements to the
treatment works, and annually thereafter, the city shall return fifty percent
(50%) of the amounts recovered through the industrial cost recovery charges,
together with any interest earned thereon, to the U.S. treasury. The remaining
fifty percent (50%) retained by the city shall be invested in authorized
obligations of the U.S. government or any agency thereof pending use of the
retained amount for reconstruction or expansion.
   (C)   Eighty percent (80%) of the funds retained by the city in the water
pollution control center industrial cost recovery fund or authorized
investments and the interest earned thereon, shall be expended only for the
purpose of eligible costs of the expansion and reconstruction of the treatment
works associated with the project and necessary to meet requirements of the
act. All such expansion or reconstruction programs must be approved in writing
by the regional administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency prior
to commitment or expenditure of the retained funds. The remaining twenty
percent (20%) of the funds retained by the city may be utilized for any
authorized use established by the city. (Ord. 181, 3-1-1976)
7-6-3-6: REVIEW OF RECORDS:
Upon request from EPA, the city shall encourage each industrial user to permit
representatives of the U.S. environmental protection agency to review
appropriate industrial sewage records for the purpose of independently
verifying the flow and characteristics of industrial wastes which are
introduced into the treatment works. No waste introduced into the waste
treatment system shall interfere with the operation or performance of the
sewage treatment works. All users are subject to the requirements of
pretreatment standards established by federal and state law. (Ord. 181, 3-1-
1976)
7-6-4: FEE SCHEDULE:
ASSOCIATED WITH ORDINANCE SECTION ITEM FEE
ASSOCIATED WITH ORDINANCE ITEM                       FEE
SECTION
6-6-2-2.C.6               Sewer Extension Plug       $50
                          Deficient Work - Each
6-6-2-2.C.7               additional review or       $50
                          inspection
6-6-3-2.C                 Grinder Pump System Permit $50
                          & Inspection Fee
6-6-3-3.A.5               Sanitary Sewer Connection  $50
                          Permit & Inspection Fee
6-6-3-3.C.1               Street Opening Refundable  $500
                          Deposit
                          Shut Down Fee - Failure to
6-6-3-3.C.2               Properly Barricade Street  $100
                          Opening
6-6-3-6.A.1               Sampling Manhole           $50
                          Inspection Fee
6-6-3-6.A.2               Flow Meter Inspection Fee  $50
6-6-3-6.A.3               Sampling Equipment         $50
                          Inspection Fee
6-6-3-7.A.1               Garbage Grinder Inspection $50
                          Fee
6-6-3-7.A.2               Grease, Oil & Sand         $50
                          Interceptor Inspection Fee
6-6-3-7.A.3               Neutralizing Basin         $50
                          Inspection Fee
6-6-3-8.A.3               Grease Interceptor         $50
                          Inspection Fee
6-6-3-8.G                 Food Service Establishment $50
                          (FSE) Waiver Fee
6-6-3-8.G.3 &             Grease Disposal Mitigation Actual cost plus 3% admin.
6-6-14-1                  Fee                        fee
6-6-17-1.B                Industrial User Sampling - $10/per sample day
                          collection by City
                         Analysis of Industrial      
                          User Samples:
                         BOD                        $20
                         NH3-N (Ammonia Nitrogen)   $18
                         pH                         $8
                         Settle ability             $15
                         Temperature                $5
                         TSS                        $10
                         Outside Laboratory         As Invoiced by Lab
                          Analysis Cost
6-6-18-3                  Late Fee (unpaid bill)     5% of the Past Due Amount
                                                     Actual cost to
6-6-18-4                  Collection Agency Fee      municipality plus 3%
                                                     admin. cost
 
(Ord. 870, 3-7-2022)
CHAPTER 7
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-7-1: General Policy
7-7-2: Definitions
7-7-3: Water System
7-7-4: Cross Connection Prohibited
7-7-5: Survey And Investigations
7-7-6: Where Protection Required
7-7-7: Type Of Protection Required
7-7-8: Backflow Prevention Devices
7-7-9: Inspection And Maintenance
7-7-10: Booster Pumps
7-7-11: Plumbing Installations, Water Supply Protection
7-7-12: Violations
7-7-1: GENERAL POLICY:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply systems from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (B)   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the city.
   (C)   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the superintendent of water or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair
as required in subsection
7-7-5(E) of this chapter for a period of a least five (5) years. The
superintendent of water may require the consumer to submit a cross connection
inspection report to the Momence water and sewer department to assist in
determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross
connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross connection control device
inspector certified by the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 372,
5-7-1990)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids, or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
DIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shut off valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including,
without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of "any foreign substance" (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited
to:
   (A)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   (B)   Process waters;
   (C)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   (D)   Cooling waters;
   (E)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems;
   (F)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
   (G)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a community water supply or a
noncommunity water supply.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord.
372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-3: WATER SYSTEM:
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: 1)
the public water supply system, and 2) the consumer's water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the superintendent of water up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
a production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-4: CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   1. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the agency.
      2.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-5: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   (A)   Inspection: The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable
times to the approved cross connection control device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the
consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance or cross connection
control devices within the consumer's premises.
   (B)   System Information: On request by the superintendent of water, or his
authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the
piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The
consumer's premises shall be opened at all reasonable times to the
superintendent of water for the verification of information submitted by the
inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross
connection inspection results.
   (C)   Water Use Surveys: It shall be the responsibility of the water
consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to
determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to his water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the
public potable water system. All cross connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
320/3.
   (D)   Backflow Prevention: It is the responsibility of the water consumer to
prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage.
      2.   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency as a
cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspector of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   (E)   Testing And Records:
      1.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least
annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
      2.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4.
      3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
      4.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test;
         (b)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-6: WHERE PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises,
where in the judgment of the superintendent of water actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and
the source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the superintendent of water.
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of
the superintendent of water and/or the cross connection control device
inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which made it
impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890 and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative
code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
superintendent of water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   (A)   The type of protection required under section
7-7-6 of this chapter shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
   (B)   The type of protection required under section
7-7-6 of this chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord.
372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on site. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by
passed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test of visual inspections, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection (A) of this section.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
superintendent of water. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut off
device designed to shutoff the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the
superintendent of water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
7-7-11: PLUMBING INSTALLATIONS, WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION:
   (A)   All plumbing installed within city shall be installed in accordance
with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the
superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water
will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved
devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of the
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause surveys
and investigations to be made for determining if industrial and other potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations
shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every
two (2) years, or as often as the superintendent of water shall deem necessary.
Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a
period of at least five (5) years.
   (D)   The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the Momence water and sewer
department for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and that the water superintendent or his authorized agent shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Momence
water and sewer department for the purpose of verifying information submitted
by the customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On
demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish
to the superintendent of water any information, which he may request regarding
the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent
of water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this section.
   (E)   The superintendent of water of the Momence water and sewer department
is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection
in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take
such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and
until a reconnection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the Momence
water and sewer department. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be
effected when the superintendent of water is assured that imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action
shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent
actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply;
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of water or the
Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the public water supply, the superintendent of water, or its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for an injury, damages or lost revenues
which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance
with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination was with or
without notice.
   (F)   The customer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material
or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 371, 5-7-1990,
eff. 5-7-1990)
7-7-12: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   The superintendent of water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
superintendent of water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on
the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of water,
and the required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of
utilities/operations.
   (D)   Neither the Momence water and sewer department, the superintendent of
water or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the Momence
water and sewer department for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may
result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination of the water supply was
with or without notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup
of the potable water supply system.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, whether the same was
caused before or after notice. (Ord. 372, 5-7-1990)
CHAPTER 8
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Gregory Blaine MacDonald Park
7-8-3: Hours Of Use, All City Parks
7-8-4: Unlawful Use, All City Parks
7-8-5: Penalty
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
CITY PARK: A parcel of land commonly used and designated as a city park. (Ord.
717, 7-18-2011)
7-8-2: GREGORY BLAINE MACDONALD PARK:
A parcel of land commonly known as 11-13 North Dixie Highway shall be
designated as a city park and shall be known as Gregory Blaine MacDonald Park.
(Ord. 717, 7-18-2011)
7-8-3: HOURS OF USE, ALL CITY PARKS:
City parks shall be open to the public daily from dawn till dusk, with the
exception of Conrad Park, which will be open from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. till
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 717, 7-18-2011)
7-8-4: UNLAWFUL USE, ALL CITY PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon city park grounds other than
as approved in section
7-8-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 717, 7-18-2011)
7-8-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalty as provided in this code and as established in the list of fines and
fees. Each day that any offense shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 717, 7-18-2011)
CHAPTER 9
OFFICIAL CITY STANDARDS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Street Construction And Design Standards
7-9-1: STREET CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (A)   Primary thoroughfares: In accordance with Illinois department of
transportation (IDOT) "Minimum Standard For Street Design".
   (B)   Secondary thoroughfares: In accordance with Illinois department of
transportation (IDOT) "Minimum Standard For Street Design".
   (C)   Streets: In accordance with Illinois department of transportation
(IDOT) "Minimum Standard For Street Design".
   (D)   Combination concrete curb and gutter:
      1.   The material shall be class X Portland cement concrete per "Illinois
Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition.
      2.   The curb and gutter shall conform to IDOT type M3.12 for minor
streets and cul-de-sacs in residential areas. The curb and gutter type in other
areas and street classifications shall be as specified by the plan commission
and city engineer.
   (E)   Concrete valley gutter:
      1.   The material shall be class X Portland cement concrete per "Illinois
Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition.
      2.   The curb and gutter shall conform to IDOT type M3.12, depressed
curb. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
   (F)   Pavement design:
      1.   Design of the pavement structure shall conform to the Illinois
department of transportation (IDOT) design manual. The design period shall be
twenty (20) years and the estimated ADT shall be subject to the approval of the
city engineer. The design shall meet the following minimum requirements:
         (a)   Publicly maintained - residential: The base course shall be CA-
6 crushed stone. Minimum thickness shall be ten inches (10"). The surface shall
be bituminous concrete binder and surface courses. The binder course shall be
two and one-half inches (21/2") in thickness and the surface course shall be
one and one- half inches (11/2") in thickness. The total asphalt surfacing
shall total four inches (4").
         (b)   Publicly maintained - commercial: The base course shall be CA-
6 crushed stone. Minimum thickness shall be six inches (6"). The surfacing
shall be bituminous base course and bituminous concrete binder and surface
courses. The bituminous base course shall be five inches (5") in thickness. The
binder course shall be two and one-half inches (21/2") in thickness, and the
surface course shall be one and one-half inches (11/2") in thickness. The total
asphalt surfacing shall total nine inches (9").
         (c)   Truck route: Truck route pavement shall be one and one-half
inches (11/2") bituminous surface course, over two and one-half inches (21/2")
bituminous binder course, over seven inches (7") bituminous base course, over
six inches (6") CA-06 base course type B. The total asphalt thickness shall be
eleven inches (11").
         (d)   Alleys: Alley pavement design shall conform to the design for
publicly maintained residential streets.
         (e)   Privately maintained - off street parking: The subdivider may
select one of the following options for this pavement structure:
            (1) The base course shall be CA-6 crushed stone. Minimum thickness
shall be ten inches (10"). The surfacing shall be bituminous concrete binder
and surface courses. The binder course shall be one and one-half inches (11/2")
in thickness, and the surface course shall be one and one-half inches (11/2")
in thickness. The total asphalt surfacing shall total three inches (3");
            (2) The base course shall be CA-6 crushed stone. Thickness shall be
four inches (4"). The surface shall be class X concrete with welded wire mesh
six by six (6 x 6) and shall be eight inches (8") in thickness. (Ord. 562, 9-7-
2004)
   (G)   Pavement base:
      1.   Flexible pavement: The materials and methods of construction shall
conform to the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition.
      2.   Rigid pavement: Not applicable.
   (H)   Surface course: The materials and methods of construction shall
conform to the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition.
   (I)   Driveways: The materials and methods of construction shall conform to
the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", latest edition.
The subdivider may select one of the following options for driveway
construction:
      1.   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6 or
CA-10, nine inches (9") in thickness, and surface course consisting of
bituminous concrete surface course two and one-half inches (21/2") in thickness
(asphalt) (4 inches in thickness for commercial, industrial or school) (all
thicknesses measured with materials in place compacted);
      2.   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6 or
CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness and class X Portland cement concrete, six
inches (6") in thickness (8 inches for commercial, industrial or school),
reinforced with six inches by six inches (6" x 6") 10/10 welded wire paving
mesh (all thicknesses measured with materials in place, compacted);
Any alternate materials in addition to those described above shall be presented
to the city engineer for his approval prior to inclusion in the construction
drawings and specifications. No bituminous surface treatment (oil and chip
surfaces) will be allowed.
      3.   All curb cuts necessary for driveways accessing on city streets
shall be completed as follows:
The complete existing combination concrete curb and gutter shall be removed and
then replaced with a new combination concrete curb and gutter (depressed)
according to the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition. At no time shall any portion
of the combination concrete curb and gutter be poured as an integral part of
the driveway. A joint using three-fourths inch (3/4") preformed bituminous
expansion joint filler shall be provided between the back of the curb and the
driveway portion.
      4.   Driveways may be finished off to match the top of the existing curb
without a curb cut, if and only if such curb is modified M3:12 or at a height
less than three inches (3") measured up from the gutter pan flow line.
All gutter pans or gutters shall be kept clear of all materials. No concrete,
asphalt or any other material will be permitted in the gutter pan. This
prohibitive restriction also applies to pipes or any other device placed in the
gutter pans to provide a better approach to the driveway.
No driveway shall be constructed at a grade that exceeds eight percent (8%)
from the garage to the street unless the city engineer specifically approves a
greater slope. (Ord. 552, 3-15-2004)
   (J)   Sidewalks: Sidewalks are to be located on the right of way, the
nearest edge being one foot (1') from the property line. The sidewalks are to
be five inches (5") higher than the curb on the side close to the curb, and six
inches (6") higher than the curb on the side far from the curb.
   (K)   Public sidewalks intersecting with street curb and gutter: The back of
the curb at this point of intersection shall be depressed and shall not exceed
one and one-half inches (11/2") elevation over the flow line of the gutter pan.
The materials and methods of construction shall conform to the "Illinois
Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition.
      1.   Material shall be base course consisting of IDOT gradation CA-6 or
CA-10, four inches (4") in thickness, and class X Portland cement concrete,
five inches (5") in thickness. The thickness of the concrete shall be increased
to six inches (6") where the sidewalk crosses a driveway. (All thicknesses
measured with materials in place, and compacted, where applicable.);
      2.   Width shall be five feet (5') except where the plan commission or
city engineer deem a wider sidewalk necessary.
   (L)   Pedestrian walkways: Pedestrian walkway improvements shall conform to
the specifications for sidewalks, including the width requirement. The sidewalk
shall generally be centered in the pedestrian walkway.
   (M)   French drains: Minimum pipe diameter shall be eight inches (8") laid
at a minimum slope of four-tenths percent (0.4%). Where larger pipe sizes are
necessary, the minimum slope shall conform to IEPA recommendations. These
drains shall be perforated drain tile, except in special cases where the city
engineer requires these drain pipes to be solid wall.
      1.   The french drain tiles shall be provided an easement separate from
the public utilities easement provided for gas, electric, or telephone, etc.
      2.   The material for the french drain tile shall be culvert quality
field tile or ABS N-12 storm sewer pipe or equivalent. In areas where the
minimum slope cannot be maintained, ABS N-12 pipe shall be used at a slope
approved by the city engineer.
      3.   The french drain tile, where perforated tile is utilized, shall have
bedding, and backfill to six inches (6") over the top of the pipe, of one inch
(1") clean stone.
      4.   An inlet shall be installed at all locations where the pipe changes
direction, changes pipe size, at a multiple pipe connection, or an endpoint.
      5.   A six inch (6") magnetic locator strip shall be installed above all
drain pipes and extended into the inlets, to aid in future efforts to determine
pipe location.
   (N)   Storm sewers: All streets shall be provided with inlets and
underground drainage facilities having a design capacity adequate to carry off
surface water falling or coming on the streets in a 10-year storm as that term
is used in publications of the state water survey, division of the department
of energy and natural resources of the state of Illinois. Sufficient inlets
shall be provided so that no pavement is designed to allow water to drain
across the crown of an intersection street or is carried in the gutter for more
than four hundred feet (400'). Storm sewer systems shall be constructed with
bell and spigot or tongue and groove pipe of such type as required to provide
adequate strength for the load to be carried.
      1.   Pipe materials for any storm sewer which crosses public streets
shall be reinforced concrete pipe of appropriate class for the conditions under
which it will be installed or ductile iron. Storm sewers in other areas may be
reinforced concrete pipe, or HDPE (N-12 or equal) pipe with smooth interior
walls, of the appropriate class for the condition under which it will be
installed.
      2.   Manholes shall be precast concrete, with plastic steps, and poured
inverts. All frames and lids shall be heavy duty with a lid measuring twenty
two and three-fourths inches (223/4") diameter and embossed "storm sewer".
      3.   Detention pond improvements shall include the following in addition
to the requirements in title 4, chapter 5 of this code:
         (a)   Underdrains: Underdrains with an inlet shall be provided at all
storm sewer outfalls into a detention pond to accommodate residual storm flows.
         (b)   End Sections: End sections shall be installed at all storm sewer
outfalls into a detention pond. The end section shall be precast concrete.
         (c)   Concrete Swales: A concrete paved swale or paved ditch may be
required by the plan commission and the city council in detention ponds where
the slope of the bottom is less than one percent (1%).
         (d)   Turf Improvements: Turf improvements shall include installation
of a minimum of four inches (4") of topsoil, fertilizer, and seeding. Final
acceptance of the improvements will be withheld until the turf is established.
   (O)   Sanitary sewers: All sanitary sewers shall be located in the center of
the roadway. Trench backfill of IDOT CA-7 shall be used from the initial
backfill to the base course of the roadway. Service laterals shall receive the
same treatment and extend to serve the lots at both sides of the street. The
ends of the service laterals shall be watertight capped and timbers extended to
the surface for location purposes.
      1.   Pipe materials shall be PVC SDR 35, bell and spigot type, or
approved alternate, and shall be bedded and initial backfilled with IDOT
gradation CA-07 in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction", latest edition.
      2.   Pipe testing shall be performed in accordance with Illinois
environmental protection agency (IEPA). The pipe for all sanitary sewer mains
shall be deflection tested and air tested. All sections shall be air tested to
detect leakages.
      3.   Sanitary services may be installed either at the time of
installation of the sanitary sewer main, or they may be cut in using a PVC
saddle, attached to the main using stainless steel straps and utilizing an
elastomeric gasket. The saddle shall be silicone caulked to assure
watertightness of the system. Service pipe for each service shall be PVC SDR
35, push-on type with elastomeric gaskets. No glue joints between the sanitary
sewer main and the house will be allowed.
      4.   Sanitary sewer manholes shall be precast concrete with plastic
steps, A-LOK or approved equal cast in place pipe gaskets at all pipe
entrances, and poured concrete inverts. All sanitary sewer manhole frames and
lids shall be gasketed with a lid measuring twenty two and three-fourths inches
(223/4") diameter and "sanitary sewer" embossed in the lid. Sanitary sewer
manholes shall be installed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction", latest edition.
   (P)   Water main: Water mains shall be located in the roadway approximately
four feet (4') in from either edge of pavement. The original material excavated
from the trench shall be reinstalled in lifts not to exceed eight inches (8")
loose measure and each lift compacted to one hundred percent (100%) of a
standard proctor (ASTM D-697). Water main improvements shall conform to the
following:
      1.   Water main disinfection shall be accomplished by gas chlorination in
accordance with Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) requirements;
      2.   Pressure testing shall be accomplished at the same time as
disinfection, with pressure reaching one hundred fifty (150) psi for one hour;
      3.   Water main pipe shall be D.I.P., class 52, with an 8 mil polywrap
encasement, and be of the gasketed bell and spigot type. The water main shall
have two (2) brass wedges for signal conductivity at each push-on joint.
Fittings shall be as follows:
         (a)   Tapping sleeves shall be Mueller mechanical joint sleeve H-615
for all sizes;
         (b)   Tapping valves shall be Mueller super-seat resilient seat NRS
tapping valve with M.J. X. FL. Ends H-687 mechanical joint X flanged end;
         (c)   System valves shall be Mueller super-seat NRS valve with M.J. X
M.J. Ends, A-2370-20.
      4.   System valves shall be manufactured by Mueller and shall be as
follows:
         (a)   System valves for eight inches (8") or smaller shall be gate
valves;
         (b)   System valves for larger than eight inches (8") shall be
butterfly valves.
      5.   Any end of main extension shall have a system valve and one twenty
foot (20') length of pipe with a fire hydrant provided at an unlooped end of
all mains.
      6.   System valve boxes shall be Tyler pipe item 664-S which extend from
thirty nine (39) to sixty inches (60"), top section length of twenty six inches
(26"), and bottom section length of thirty six inches (36"), with the lid
marked "water".
      7.   Fire hydrants shall be Mueller A423 Super Centurion 200, five and
one-fourth inches (51/4") main valve opening, three-way (2 hose nozzles and 1
pumper nozzle) and shall have a five and one- half foot (51/2') barrel section
to bury line. Hydrants shall be connected to the main utilizing anchor
couplings as required by the city superintendent of public works.
      8.   Blow offs shall not be allowed. A fire hydrant shall be provided at
the end of main extensions for flushing purposes. Where a hydrant is not
designed by overall plan to be located at the end of a main, it shall be
relocated to the next advance location with the next subdivision addition.
      9.   Services shall be as follows:
         (a)   Corporation stops shall be Mueller 110 compress connection H-
15008 for one inch (1") and 10500 series double strap saddle for one and one-
half inches (11/2") or two inches (2");
         (b)   Shut off valve shall be Mueller 110 compression H-15042 for
three-fourths inch (3/4") or one inch (1"), or H-15209 for one and one-half
inches (11/2") or two inches (2");
         (c)   Service shut off valve box shall be Mueller H 10314 adjustable
curb box, extending from forty one (41) to sixty four inches (64"), with an
operating rod installed on the curb stop to within twelve inches (12") of the
curb box lid. The lid shall have a brass plug and be embossed "water";
         (d)   Service pipe shall be minimum diameter of one inch (1"), type K
copper, bedded and initial backfilled in sand.
   (Q)   Street name signs: At all intersections or per the plan commission.
(Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 10
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-10-1: Scope Of Regulations
7-10-2: Survey Plat
7-10-3: Permit Fee
7-10-4: Construction Specifications
7-10-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The methods represented herein shall apply to all driveways built within the
limits of the city either upon the application by an owner of property or in
compliance with the provisions of a general improvement ordinance. (Ord. 553,
3-15-2004)
7-10-2: SURVEY PLAT:
Every application for the construction of any driveway shall be accompanied
with a survey plat showing the location of the driveway to be built and a
profile showing the elevation and grades of the crown of street paving and the
proposed driveway or a drawing if the city council may require. (Ord. 553, 3-
15-2004)
7-10-3: PERMIT FEE:
Applications for driveway permits shall be made to the city council, who will
issue the necessary permits upon the approval of the survey plat by the city
council. The permittee shall build the driveway in the location and to
elevations and grades authorized by the city council, and the applicant shall
pay a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 553, 3-15-2004)
7-10-4: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
See section
7-9-1 of this title. (Ord. 553, 3-15-2004)
CHAPTER 11
COMBINED STREETS/ALLEYS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-11-1: System Created
7-11-2: Department Created
7-11-3: Department Head Of Streets/Alleys And Maintenance
7-11-1: SYSTEM CREATED:
   (A)   It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary for the best
interests of the city that the existing streets and alleys department be
combined with a newly formed maintenance department. This single utility is to
be known and designated as the streets/alleys and maintenance department of the
city of Momence, Illinois. (Ord. 686, 5-3-2010)
7-11-2: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
   (A)   There is hereby established an executive department of the city to be
known and designated as the streets/alleys and maintenance department of the
city, and there shall be placed in charge of the general management and control
thereof, a superintendent, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
approval of the city council, it being hereby determined and declared that the
establishment of said department and the appointment of a superintendent
thereof is necessary and expedient for the best interests of the city, said
superintendent shall have the skills necessary to run the department and do
maintenance in all city departments. The mayor, with the approval of the city
council, shall likewise appoint all necessary employees of said department.
(Ord. 686, 5-3-2010)
7-11-3: DEPARTMENT HEAD OF STREETS/ALLEYS AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Office Created: There is created the office of superintendent of
streets/alleys and maintenance, who shall be appointed each year by the mayor,
with the approval of the city council.
   (B)   Director Of Public Works As Streets/Alleys And Maintenance Department
Head: At the discretion of the mayor, and with the approval of the city
council, the director of public works may be appointed each year to perform the
duties of the department head of streets/alleys and maintenance.
   (C)   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The superintendent of streets/alleys and maintenance shall be
responsible for the administration of all streets/alleys and maintenance issues
in the city of Momence, Illinois.
      2.   The city of Momence streets/alleys and maintenance superintendent,
will act under the direct supervision of the director of public works and will
be directly responsible to said director of public works.
         (a)   Be responsible for the maintenance of all public works
facilities;
         (b)   Be responsible for that portion of the annual budget dealing
with the department of streets/alleys and maintenance and will be responsible
for its implementation;
         (c)   Be in charge of all purchasing by the department of streets/
alleys and maintenance and will be responsible for the coordination and
implementation of the various procedures and policies for purchasing;
         (d)   Represent the city in all matters relating to streets/alleys and
maintenance and in any other way deemed necessary by the mayor, city council,
or director of public works.
   (D)   Appointment: The appointment of an individual as superintendent of
streets/alleys and maintenance shall create no property interest or other
manner of contractual right in said position. Said position shall be deemed to
create an employment at will relationship between the city and newly appointed
superintendent of streets/alleys and maintenance.
   (E)   Compensation: The compensation or other benefits paid to the
superintendent of streets/alleys and maintenance shall be such as may be duly
established by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 767, 7-
15-2013)
TITLE 8
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Speed Zones
8-1-2: Driving While Intoxicated (Rep. by Ord. 259, 6-2-1980)
8-1-3: Reckless Driving (Rep. by Ord. 576, 3-21-2005)
8-1-4: U-Turns (Rep. by Ord. 574, 3-21-2005)
8-1-5: Trains
8-1-6: Island Park Bridge
8-1-7: Compression Release Engine Braking
8-1-8: Spilling Loads And Depositing Debris On Roadways Prohibited
8-1-1: SPEED ZONES:
It is hereby declared by the city council that the basic statutory vehicular
speed limits established by section 11-601 of the Illinois vehicle code are
greater or less, respectively, than that considered reasonable and proper on
the street or highway, respectively, listed in the following schedule for which
the city has maintenance responsibility, and which is not under the
jurisdiction of the department of transportation, state of Illinois.
By virtue of section 11-601 of the above code, the city council determines and
declares that reasonable and proper absolute maximum speed limits upon those
respective streets and highways described in the schedule shall be as stated
therein.
Signs giving notice thereof shall be erected in conformance with the standards
and specifications contained in the "Illinois Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices For Streets And Highways".
   SCHEDULE OF ALTERED SPEED ZONES
Name Of Street     FTomMaximum
Or Lane                    Speed Limits
Name Of Street     From  To            Maximum
Or Lane                                    Speed Limits
Cherry Lane    2nd Street    Thomas Drive  20
Hickory Lane   2nd Street    Thomas Drive  20
Mill Street    Range Street  Island Park   20
Spruce Street  2nd Street    Thomas Drive  20
Sycamore Lane  2nd Street    Thomas Drive  20
Thomas Drive   Sycamore Lane Spruce Street 20
Willow Street  2nd Street    Thomas Drive  20
 
(Ord. 697, 10-18-2010)
8-1-2: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED:
(Rep. by Ord. 259, 6-2-1980)
8-1-3: RECKLESS DRIVING:
(Rep. by Ord. 576, 3-21-2005)
8-1-4: U-TURNS:
(Rep. by Ord. 574, 3-21-2005)
8-1-5: TRAINS:
   (A)   Speed: Any railroad corporation shall not by itself or agents, run any
train, locomotive engine or car at a speed of more than fifteen (15) miles per
hour or less than ten (10) miles per hour through the corporate limits of the
city.
   (B)   Brakemen: Any railroad corporation operating or running any train,
locomotive engine or car through the city shall provide a brakeman with a
flashing red light or flares at any railroad- highway grade crossing in the
city through which said train, locomotive engine or car is passing if such
train, locomotive engine or car shall remain in the railroad tracks without
moving for any period in excess of ten (10) minutes, except where such train,
railroad car or engine cannot be moved by reason of circumstances over which
the railroad corporation has no control.
   (C)   Penalty: If any railroad corporation shall violate any of the
provisions of this section, said corporation shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 215, 3-6-1978)
8-1-6: ISLAND PARK BRIDGE:
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on the pedestrian bridge which
connects North Maple Street with Island Park; provided, however, this section
shall not apply to motorized wheelchairs or any type of motorized vehicle used
by a physically handicapped person. Any person found guilty of this section
shall, upon conviction, be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 387, 7-6-1992)
8-1-7: COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING:
   (A)   Prohibited: No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon
any public highway located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any area of the
city of Momence that contains any single-family or multi-family dwelling units,
any compression/engine brake on any vehicle for any reason. For purposes of
this section, a "compression release engine brake" is defined as any mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by
converting engine power to compressed air which results in additional,
excessive, loud or explosive noise from such vehicle.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00), and not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 495, 3-5-2001)
8-1-8: SPILLING LOADS AND DEPOSITING DEBRIS ON ROADWAYS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven within the city in such a manner as to
cause any dirt, clay, mud, stones or any other material to be deposited upon
any roadway. The owner or operator of any vehicle which deposits dirt, clay,
mud, stones or other material upon a roadway shall promptly remove such
material from the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle with a load unless said load and
any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent said covering or
load from becoming loose, detached, or from falling onto the roadway. (Ord.
626, 2-20-2007)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING
SECTION:
8-2-1: No Parking Places
8-2-2: Parking At Curb
8-2-3: Parallel Parking
8-2-4: Vehicles For Sale
8-2-5: Loading Zone
8-2-6: All Night Parking
8-2-7: Time Limit Parking
8-2-8: Handicapped Parking Only
8-2-9: Standing, Stopping Or Parking; Where Prohibited
8-2-10: Improper Parking On Roadway
8-2-11: Tickets
8-2-12: Signs
8-2-13: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
8-2-14: Prima Facie Proof
8-2-15: Certain Streets; No Parking
8-2-16: Penalty
8-2-17: Parking During Snow Removal
8-2-18: Certain Streets; Residential Parking Only
8-2-19: School Bus Loading Zones
8-2-20: Parking Of Motorized Vehicles On Residential Areas
8-2-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control
device:
   (A)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   (B)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 280, 3-1-
1982)
8-2-2: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the two (2) right wheels of the
vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line,
except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
(Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
8-2-3: PARALLEL PARKING:
   (A)   Definitions: Whenever in this section the following terms are used,
they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
    INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property
lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such
streets cross.
   PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon.
   ROADWAY OR STREET: Every way set aside for public travel except footpaths.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street, including bicycles.
   (B)   Parallel Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the
following roadway, except parallel to the curb as appropriately marked:
River Street from the intersection of Dixie Highway, also known as Illinois
State Route 1, easterly to the terminus of said River Street. (Ord. 280, 3-1-
1982)
8-2-4: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
   (A)   Vehicles that display a "For Sale" or similar sign shall be parked in
a lot on a hard surface where the sale of new or used vehicles is permitted.
(Hard surface includes: gravel, asphalt, and concrete.)
   (B)   A private individual may only park a vehicle with a "For Sale" sign
for display at that individual's home on a hard surface, including the driveway
or roadway in front/side of the residence. (Vehicles are prohibited from being
displayed on soft surfaces, such as grass or dirt.)
   (C)   A vehicle with a "For Sale" sign may not be maintained or parked for
display in the public right of way or public property for the sole purpose of
selling. (This section does not apply if the vehicle is parked incidental for
other purposes.)
   (D)   Any individual who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to penalty as provided in this code, and as established in the list of
fines (subsection
1-4-1(B) of this code). (Ord. 765, 7-15-2013)
8-2-5: LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes and for the driver to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any
place designated by the mayor and council as a loading zone and marked as such.
(Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
8-2-6: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
   (A)   Restricted Areas: No person shall park any vehicle on any of the
following streets, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls:
North Dixie Highway from River Street north to Mechanic Street.
North Locust Street from River Street north to 2nd Street.
River Street from Pine Street east to Chocolate Street.
Second Street from Pine Street east to Walnut Street.
Washington Street from Pine Street east to Walnut Street. (Ord. 690, 7-5-2010)
8-2-7: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   (A)   Purpose: Except on holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated, between the hours
of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. in any area designated
as a limited parking area and so marked.
   (B)   Lot Definitions: In this section and throughout this code:
Lot #1: City lot on the north side of River Street, and east of Dixie Highway.
Lot #2: City lot on the south side of River Street, and east of Dixie Highway.
Lot #3: City lot on the south side of River Street, and west of Dixie Highway.
Lot #4: City lot on the north side of Washington Street, and west of Dixie
Highway.
Lot #5: City lot on the north side of Mill Street, and east of Dixie Highway.
(Ord. 753, 11-19-2012)
   (C)   Fifteen Minute Parking: The following shall be designated fifteen (15)
minute parking:
The parking space on Dixie Highway on the northwest side thereof, next to River
Street, Monday through Sunday, from eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M.
The parking space on Dixie Highway on the southeast side thereof, next to
Washington Street, Monday through Saturday, from seven thirty o'clock (7:30)
A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.
The parking space on Dixie Highway on the southwest side thereof next to
Washington Street, and the parking space on Washington Street, on the southwest
side thereof, next to Dixie Highway, adjacent to the handicapped parking space.
The parking space on the north side of West Washington Street, adjacent to, and
west of the alley, Monday through Saturday, from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to
five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. (Ord. 753, 11-19-2012; amd. Ord. 770, 9-3-2013;
Ord. 778, 4-7-2014; Ord. 794, 5-4-2015)
   (D)   Two Hour Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle more than
two (2) consecutive hours on Washington Street between Pine Street and Locust
Street.
   (E)   Three Hour Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle more than
three (3) consecutive hours on:
City parking lot #1.
Dixie Highway, east and west side between 2nd Street and River Street.
Locust Street between 2nd Street and River Street. (Ord. 753, 11-19-2012)
8-2-8: HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY:
It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates issued to a physically handicapped person or disabled
veteran or such devices as local authorities deem proper as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran in any
parking space specifically reserved, by posting of an official sign, for motor
vehicles bearing such registration plates.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within any
parking area designated within the city for handicapped parking unless said
person is handicapped and is driving a vehicle with a city handicapped sticker.
   (B)   The parking spaces on Washington Street on the north side thereof next
to Locust Street on the east are hereby designated as handicapped parking
spaces. The chief of police of the city is hereby directed to post two (2) such
spaces on Washington Street adjacent to Locust Street as handicapped parking
spaces only. The city does hereby also designate one (1) handicapped parking
spot at 107 North Locust Street.
   (C)   The city council is hereby authorized from time to time by written
resolution to designate additional handicapped parking spaces for posting by
the chief of police for usage within the city by handicapped persons only.
(Ord. 573, 3-21-2005; amd. Res. 221, 5-6-2024)
8-2-9: STANDING, STOPPING OR PARKING; WHERE PROHIBITED:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
   (A)   At any place where official sign prohibits parking or standing or
stopping;
   (B)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of safety zone
indicated by signs or yellow markings;
   (C)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (D)   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (F)   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
   (G)   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted). (Ord. 280,
3-1-1982)
8-2-10: IMPROPER PARKING ON ROADWAY:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave
any vehicle off the roadway. The city, with respect to streets under its
jurisdiction or for the maintenance of any, may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street where,
in its opinion, such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using
the street or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. (Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
8-2-11: TICKETS:
Police officers, after making note of license number of the vehicle and the
name of the offender, where possible, may issue a ticket covering any parking
offense under this chapter, notifying the offender to pay the fine therefor at
the city hall. Such officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant
if the offender does not appear and pay said fine within the time specified.
(Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
In the event that any person has at any time ten (10) or more parking tickets
outstanding, the police chief of the city or an officer under his direction is
hereby authorized to swear out a warrant for the arrest of such violator. Upon
the issuance of the arrest warrant, the city clerk shall mail said warrant to
the last known address of such offender. In the event that more than sixty (60)
days elapse from the date of such mailing of notification, then and in that
event, the city clerk is hereby authorized to notify the circuit clerk of
Kankakee County of such outstanding arrest warrant, number of parking tickets
unpaid, the full name, date of birth, sex, and driver's license number of the
violator, and the registration number of the motor vehicle registered to such
violator with request that the circuit clerk thereby on forms as prescribed by
the Illinois secretary of state request the Illinois secretary of state to
suspend the driver's license of such violator until such time as such tickets
are paid in full, all in accordance with the provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 as in force from time to time. (Ord. 309, 1-7-1985)
8-2-12: SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor and council,
shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
8-2-13: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Any car or other vehicle parked on the aforementioned streets under section
8-2-6 of this chapter, during the hours when parking thereon is prohibited, may
be removed and towed away. The police department and all members thereof are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any such car or other vehicle parked in violation of
said section. Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe
place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car upon payment
of a fee as determined by the mayor and council within twenty four (24) hours
after the time such car was removed. (Ord. 280, 3-1-1982)
8-2-14: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that any car or other vehicle which is illegally parked is registered
in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person
was in control of the automobile at the time of the violation. Proof of the
name of the person to whom the vehicle is registered may be made from printed
booklets issued by the secretary of state's office, Springfield, Illinois, and
such evidence shall be prima facie proof that the owner of said vehicle as
found therein is the registered owner thereof. (Ord. 309, 1-7-1985)
8-2-15: CERTAIN STREETS; NO PARKING:
   (A)   No Parking: At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicular
parking on the following streets:
From the Dixie Highway east on Mill Street to the entrance to Island Park.
Harvard Street in the city; provided, however, that the parking of motor
vehicles is hereby allowed on both sides of Harvard Street in the 100 block
only.
North on Illinois Route 1 also known as Dixie Highway to River Street.
On both sides of Dixie Highway from Second Street to Third Street.
On both sides of Illinois Route 1/17, also known as Range Street, from Mechanic
Street northerly plus or minus five hundred feet (±500') to the north corporate
limits of Momence.
The junction of Route 1 and 17 and Route 114, also known as Illinois Route 1.
The north and south sides of Industrial Drive at any time.
Walnut Street between Oregon Street and Vermont Street.
West Washington Street from Pine Street to Hill Street.
      1.   At any time it shall be unlawful to permit the parking of any truck
whose gross weight exceeds eight thousand (8,000) pounds on the following
streets:
The east side of South Gladiolus Street between Vermont Street and Oregon
Street and the east and west sides of South Gladiolus Street from Oregon Street
to the south end of South Gladiolus Street. (Ord. 612, 10-17-2006)
   (B)   During Certain Hours:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on either side of West Second
Street between Franklin Street and Hickory Street between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on the north side of West 4th
Street between Dixie Highway (Route 1) and Pine Street on school days, between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M.,
and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and three thirty o'clock (3:
30) P.M.
Any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of Momence approved fine
list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 768, 8-5-2013)
   (C)   Overweight Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle with an empty weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds or any
vehicle with more than fourteen (14) wheels on Mechanic Street on either side
thereof between Pine Street and State Route 1 otherwise known as the Dixie
Highway at any time. (Ord. 285, 9-20-1982)
   (D)   Residential Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
motor vehicle on either side of the 500 block of North Chestnut Street or on
the north side of the 300 block of East Washington Street or 121 E. Second
Street, unless said motor vehicle belongs to a resident of said block and those
in the 500 block of North Chestnut Street, both sides and the 300 block of East
Washington Street, on the north side, are hereby designated as an area for
residential parking only and shall be posted as such. (Ord. 841, 5-21-2018)
No person shall park any vehicle on the west side of North Locust between
Mechanic Street and railroad tracks in the 700 block of North Locust unless
such person is a resident of said neighborhood or is visiting a resident of
said neighborhood, and no person shall park his or her vehicle in front of any
property on the east side of the 700 block of North Locust used for residential
purposes unless such person is a resident of said neighborhood or is visiting a
resident of said neighborhood. (Ord. 345, 10-5-1987)
8-2-16: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of Momence approved fine
list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 680, 4-19-2010)
8-2-17: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
   (A)   Parking restrictions shall be in effect for the entire City during any
snowfall that accumulates to the point of requiring plows to clean the streets.
All residents shall be required to adhere to parking restrictions as defined:
      1.   On odd dates, vehicles shall be parked only on the side of the
street with even numbered houses or buildings.
      2.   On even dates, vehicles shall be parked only on the side of the
street with odd numbered houses or buildings.
      3.   Odd or even dates shall be determined at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and run until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the following morning.
      4.   Street sides with open space or no buildings shall be considered as
being numbered the opposite of the other side of the street.
      5.   These restrictions will be in place for a minimum of forty eight
(48) hours after the snowfall ends or until any street in question is
completely cleared.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with the City of Momence
approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   (C)   In the event that any vehicle is so illegally parked after the
requisite snowfall accumulation, the police shall, upon finding any such
vehicle in violation, post a sign on said vehicle indicating the violation and
requiring it to be moved within twenty four (24) hours. If such vehicle is not
removed within twenty four (24) hours so as to be in compliance with this
section, the police shall cause the vehicle to be towed and the cost of towing
shall be paid by the owner thereof in addition to any fine otherwise imposed by
this section. (Ord. 777, 4-7-2014)
8-2-18: CERTAIN STREETS; RESIDENTIAL PARKING ONLY:
   (A)   At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicular parking
except for residents immediately adjacent thereto on the following streets:
Oregon Street.
The southeast corner of Second and Market Streets.
The southeast corner of Third and Pine Streets.
The southwest corner of Pine and West Washington Streets.
112 South Walnut Street. (Ord. 634, 8-6-2007; amd. Ord. 756, 3-18-2013; Ord.
759, 5-6-2013)
   (B)   The following streets are designated as "residential parking only"
areas, during the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
on Monday through Friday, and vehicular parking shall be restricted to
residents immediately adjacent thereto:
Cherry Street.
Hickory Street.
Sycamore Street. (Ord. 634, 8-6-2007)
8-2-19: SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONES:
   (A)   Parking shall be prohibited in designated school bus loading zones
between seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M.
and between two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. and three thirty o'clock (3:30)
P.M., on any day in which school is being held.
   (B)   The following locations are hereby established as school bus loading
zones within the city of Momence:
The south side of Second Street between Virden Street and the driveway of the
east parking lot at the Momence Junior High School.
The west side of Franklin Street between Second Street and River Street. (Ord.
604, 3-20-2006)
8-2-20: PARKING OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
   (A)   To park, store or keep any motorized vehicle in any rear, side, or
front setback on private property on grass is prohibited. This provision does
not include recreational vehicles, golf carts, and/or nonhighway vehicles.
   (B)   Loading, unloading, and visiting, provided no type of hazard is
created, with prior notification and approval by the police department, will be
permitted. (Ord. 782, 6-2-2014)
CHAPTER 3
INTERSECTIONS; THROUGH STREETS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Stop Intersections Designated
8-3-3: Yield Intersections Designated (Rep. by Ord. 698, 12-6-2010)
8-3-4: Through Streets Designated
8-3-5: Signs And Signals
8-3-6: Tickets
8-3-7: Arrests
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines
of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such streets
cross.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or
property abutting thereon.
ROADWAY OR STREET: Every way set aside for public travel except footpaths.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, including bicycles. (Ord., 9-15-1958)
8-3-2: STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into the intersections of the
following named streets without first bringing such vehicle to a complete stop:
   (A)   One-Way Stop Intersections:
Circle, west, entering Franklin Street.
Cornell Street, north, entering Indiana Street.
Doe Run, east, entering Brown Drive.
Elm Street, south, entering River Street.
Illinois Street, east, entering Ash Street.
Industrial Drive, east, entering Railroad Avenue.
Louise Street, north, entering Doe Run.
Louise Street, south, entering Park Street.
Oak Street, south, entering Keyser Street.
Oregon Street, west, entering Gladiolus Street.
Pine Street, north, entering 4th Street.
Pine Street, south, entering North Street.
Pine Street, south, entering 5th Street.
Thomas Drive, north, entering Spruce Street.
Vermont Street, west, entering Gladiolus Street.
Walnut Street, south, entering Washington Street.
Washington Street, east, entering River Street.
Wilbur Street, north, entering Keyser Street.
2nd Street, west, entering Locust Street.
3rd Street, east, entering Hill Street.
3rd Street, east, entering Railroad Avenue.
3rd Street, west, entering Franklin Street.
3rd Street, west, entering Market Street.
4th Street, east, entering Railroad Avenue.
4th Street, west, entering Sycamore Street.
5th Street, east, entering Railroad Avenue.
6th Street, east, entering Railroad Avenue. (Ord. 691, 7-19-2010; amd. Ord.
699, 12-6-2010)
   (B)   Two-Way Stop Intersections:
Ash Street, north and south, entering Ohio Street.
Ash Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Brown Street, north and south, entering Stirling Place.
Chestnut Street, north and south, entering 5th Street.
Chestnut Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Elm Street, north and south, entering Washington Street.
Elm Street, north and south, entering 4th Street.
Elm Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Hill Street, north and south, entering River Street.
Hill Street, north and south, entering Washington Street.
Hill Street, north and south, entering 4th Street.
Hill Street, north and south, entering 5th Street.
Illinois Street, east and west, entering Harvard Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering Illinois Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering Ohio Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering Washington Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering 4th Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Locust Street, south, entering River Street, and River Street, west, entering
Locust Street.
Maple Street, north and south, entering Ohio Street.
Maple Street, north and south, entering 4th Street.
Maple Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Market Street, north and south, entering Washington Street.
Market Street, north and south, entering 5th Street.
Market Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Ohio Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street.
Pine Street, north and south, entering Washington Street.
Pine Street, north and south, entering 3rd Street.
Pine Street, north and south, entering 6th Street.
Walnut Street, north and south, entering 3rd Street.
2nd Street, east and west, entering Maple Street.
2nd Street, east, entering Ash Street, and Ash Street, south, entering 2nd
Street.
3rd Street, east and west, entering Ash Street.
3rd Street, east and west, entering Locust Street.
3rd Street, east and west, entering Maple Street.
4th Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street.
5th Street, east and west, entering Ash Street.
5th Street, east and west, entering Elm Street.
5th Street, east and west, entering Locust Street.
5th Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street.
6th Street, east and west, entering Ash Street. (Ord. 712, 6-20-2011)
   (C)   Three-Way Stop Intersections:
Ash Street, north and south, entering Illinois Street, and Illinois Street,
east, entering Ash Street.
Franklin Street, north and south, entering Washington Street, and Washington
Street, west, entering Franklin Street.
Franklin Street, north and south, entering 4th Street, and 4th Street, east,
entering Franklin Street.
Franklin Street, north and south, entering 5th Street, and 5th Street, west,
entering Franklin Street.
Hickory Street, north, entering 4th Street, 4th Street, east, entering Hickory
Street, and Hickory Circle, south, entering Hickory Street.
River Street, east and west, entering Pine Street, and Pine Street, south,
entering River Street.
Thomas Drive, east and west, entering Cherry Lane, and Cherry Lane, north,
entering Thomas Drive.
Thomas Drive, east and west, entering Willow Street, and Willow Street, north,
entering Thomas Drive.
Vermont Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street, and Walnut Street,
north, entering Vermont Street.
Virden Street, south, entering River Street, and River Street, east and west,
entering Virden Street.
Washington Street, east and west, entering Maple Street, and Maple Street,
south, entering Washington Street. (Ord. 718, 8-1-2011; amd. Ord. 733, 2-6-
2012)
   (D)   Four-Way Stop Intersections:
Illinois Street, east and west, entering South Maple Street, and South Maple
Street, north and south, entering Illinois Street.
Illinois Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street, and Walnut Street,
north and south, entering Illinois Street.
Indiana Street, east and west, entering Harvard Street, and Harvard Street,
north and south, entering Indiana Street.
Locust Street, north and south, entering Vermont Street, and Vermont Street,
east and west, entering Locust Street.
River Street, east and west, entering Franklin Street, and Franklin Street,
north and south, entering River Street.
River Street, east and west, entering Market Street, and Market Street, north
and south, entering River Street.
Walnut Street, north and south, entering 6th Street, and 6th Street, east and
west, entering Walnut Street.
Water Street, east and west, entering Hill Street, and Hill Street, north and
south, entering Water Street.
2nd Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street, and Walnut Street, north and
south, entering 2nd Street.
3rd Street, east and west, entering Elm Street, and Elm Street, north and
south, entering 3rd Street.
4th Street, east and west, entering Ash Street, and Ash Street, north and
south, entering 4th Street.
4th Street, east and west, entering Market Street, and Market Street, north and
south, entering 4th Street.
5th Street, east and west, entering Walnut Street, and Walnut Street, north and
south, entering 5th Street. (Ord. 691, 7-19-2010; amd. Ord. 712, 6-20-2011)
   (E)   No Right Turn: It shall be unlawful to turn right at the intersection
of the alley perpendicular to Walnut Street between Oregon and Vermont Streets
in the city. (Ord. 691, 7-19-2010; amd. Ord. 854, 10-5-2020)
8-3-3: YIELD INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
(Rep. by Ord. 698, 12-6-2010)
8-3-4: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute
through streets, and it shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into the
intersection of the following named streets without first bringing such vehicle
to a full stop:
Railroad Avenue.
Washington Street from the Momence High School to the Kankakee River. (Ord.
691, 7-19-2010)
8-3-5: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
Suitable signs shall be erected designating stop and yield intersections. It
shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of
any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the city council or
in accordance with the laws of the state. All signs established by direction of
the city council shall conform to the state standards for traffic signs. (Ord.,
3-18-1963)
   (A)   Left Turn Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for traffic southbound on
Pine Street to turn left at the intersection of Pine Street and 6th Street.
(Ord. 476, 5-17-1999)
8-3-6: TICKETS:
Police officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle and the
name of the offender where possible, may issue a traffic violation ticket
covering offenses under this chapter notifying the offender to appear in court
at the time designated for hearing such cases. Such officer may sign a
complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does not appear at the
time and place so specified. (Ord. 187, 7-19-1976)
8-3-7: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of this chapter shall be released upon
proper bail being furnished as required by statute. (Ord. 187, 7-19-1976)
CHAPTER 4
BICYCLES, SKATES, AND MINI-MOTORIZED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Application Of Regulations
8-4-2: Compliance With Traffic Laws
8-4-3: Obedience To Traffic Signs, Signals
8-4-4: Using Right Side Of Roadway
8-4-5: Riding Abreast
8-4-6: Using Bicycle, Minibike, Moped, Rollerblade Or Skateboard Path
8-4-7: Speed
8-4-8: Emerging From Alley, Driveway
8-4-9: Use Of Bicycle Seat Required
8-4-10: Number Of Passengers
8-4-11: Carrying Articles
8-4-12: Parking Bicycles
8-4-13: Driving Or Riding On Sidewalks
8-4-14: Bicycle Equipment
8-4-15: Penalty
8-4-16: Parent's Responsibility
8-4-17: Minibikes, Go-Carts
8-4-18: Mopeds
8-4-19: Rollerblades, Skateboards
8-4-20: Golf Carts/Utility Vehicles
8-4-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations, applicable to bicycles, rollerblades, skateboards, go-carts,
minibikes and mopeds, shall apply whenever they are operated upon any street or
path set aside for the exclusive use of this equipment subject to those
exceptions stated herein. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a bicycle, using rollerblades or operating a skateboard,
minibike or moped upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall
be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the
laws of this state and the city, declaring rules of the road applicable to the
driver, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those
provisions of law which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 443, 8-
19-1996)
8-4-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS:
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle, using rollerblades or operating a
skateboard, minibike or moped shall obey the instructions of officials
directing traffic or of official traffic control signals, signs and other
control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or U-
turn or left turn is permitted, no person riding a bicycle or using
rollerblades or operating a skateboard, minibike or moped shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle, minibike, moped or skateboard or removes rollerblades to make such
turn, in which event, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to
pedestrians. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-4: USING RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
Every person operating a bicycle, minibike or moped, using rollerblades or
operating a skateboard upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of
the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or one proceeding in the same direction. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-5: RIDING ABREAST:
Persons riding bicycles, minibikes or mopeds, using rollerblades or operating
skateboards upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on
paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
minibikes, mopeds, rollerblades or skateboards. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-6: USING BICYCLE, MINIBIKE, MOPED, ROLLERBLADE OR SKATEBOARD PATH:
Wherever a usable path for bicycles, minibikes, mopeds, rollerblades or
skateboards has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle, minibike and
moped riders and users of rollerblades and operators of skateboards shall use
such path and shall not use the roadway. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-7: SPEED:
No person shall operate a bicycle, minibike or moped, use rollerblades or
operate a skateboard at a speed greater than to be reasonable and prudent under
the conditions then existing. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-8: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle, minibike or moped, person using rollerblades or
operator of a skateboard emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area, extending across any
alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-9: USE OF BICYCLE SEAT REQUIRED:
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached and made part of such bicycle. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-10: NUMBER OF PASSENGERS:
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped to carry. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-11: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle, minibike or moped shall carry any package,
bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon
the handlebars. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-12: PARKING BICYCLES:
No person operating a bicycle, minibike or moped shall park said bicycle,
minibike or moped upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or
upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, minibike or moped or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-13: DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
   (A)   No person may use or operate a scooter, motorized bicycle, or any
motorized vehicle, upon a city sidewalk in the business district (see
subsection
8-4-19(C) of this chapter).
   (B)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, using rollerblades,
skateboard or other vehicle(s) upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the
right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking
and passing such pedestrian.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motorized
bicycle, motorized vehicle, golf carts, or ride any animal or cause the same to
be ridden or driven upon any sidewalk in the city. This section does not apply
to persons operating a golf cart, garden tractor or other similar vehicle on
the east sidewalk of Dixie Highway from East Ohio Street to East River Street,
or any sidewalk associated with a driveway. (Ord. 737, 7-16-2012)
8-4-14: BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Lights: Every person using a bicycle in the nighttime hours shall see
that the same shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a
white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the
front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible
from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to
the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to a red reflector.
   (B)   Brakes: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle. (Ord. 649, 6-16-
2008)
8-4-15: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty
offense and shall be fined in accordance with the city of Momence approved fine
list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 680, 4-19-2010)
8-4-16: PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-17: MINIBIKES, GO-CARTS:
   (A)   Sections
8-4-1 through
8-4-12,
8-4-15 and
8-4-16 of this chapter shall be applicable to go-carts and minibikes as well as
bicycles, rollerblades and skateboards.
   (B)   Other operation of go-carts and minibikes by licensed drivers shall be
deemed to be unlawful within the city if they violate the sections or chapters
of any part of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-18: MOPEDS:
   (A)   Sections
8-4-1 through
8-4-12,
8-4-15 and
8-4-16 of this chapter shall be applicable to mopeds as well as bicycles,
rollerblades and skateboards.
   (B)   Other operation of mopeds by licensed drivers shall be deemed to be
unlawful within the city if they violate the sections or chapters of any part
of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-19: ROLLERBLADES, SKATEBOARDS:
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to use rollerblades or operate
skateboards on the streets designated by the city as the business district.
   (B)   No person shall use rollerblades or operate skateboards on any street
located in the city during the period between one- half (1/2) hour before dusk
and one-half (1/2) hour after dawn.
   (C)   The streets designated by the city as the business district shall be
as follows:
100 block of W. River Street
100 and 200 blocks of E. River Street
100 block of W. Washington Street
100 and 200 blocks of E. Washington Street
100 block of E. Second Street
100 block of W. Second Street
Dixie Highway (River Street to Second Street)
Locust Street (River Street to Second Street)
(Ord. 443, 8-19-1996)
8-4-20: GOLF CARTS/UTILITY VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    GOLF CART: A motorized vehicle with three (3) or four (4) wheels that is
not designed to be operated at a speed of more than twenty five (25) miles per
hour, and whose purpose can include, but is not limited to, the playing of golf
and is generally designed to carry persons including the driver.
   STREET: The entire right of way width between the curb boundary lines,
shoulder, or swale of public property when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular travel including
parking. "Street" excludes roads owned and/or operated by the state or county.
   WORK/UTILITY VEHICLES: All-terrain vehicles used primarily for work and
utility functions and must include seats with seat belts, steering wheels and
other required equipment. Examples are: John Deere Gators, Kawasaki Mules,
Polaris Ranger, Yamaha Rhino, Honda Big Red, etc.
   (B)   Operation: The following use and operational restrictions are adopted
by the city for golf carts/utility vehicles:
      1.   Operators of golf carts/utility vehicles shall adhere to all rules
of the road applicable to motorized vehicles.
      2.   A golf cart/utility vehicle may be operated on a street by persons
who are at least sixteen (16) years of age and possess a valid driver's
license.
      3.   Golf carts/utility vehicles shall not be operated on a street in a
negligent manner. For the purposes of this subsection, "to operate in a
negligent manner" is defined as the operation of a golf cart/utility vehicle in
such a manner as to endanger any persons or property, or to obstruct, hinder,
or impede the lawful course of travel of any motor vehicle or the lawful use by
any pedestrian of public streets, sidewalks, paths, trails, walkways, or parks.
      4.   Golf carts/utility vehicles operation shall be permitted on all city
of Momence streets unless posted signage prohibits such use. Such prohibited
roadways include:
From the intersection of Route 1/17 and Industrial Drive in an easterly
direction to the city limits;
From the intersection of Route 1/17 and Route 114 in a northerly direction to
the city limits;
From the intersection of Route 1/17 and Route 114 in a southeasterly direction
to the city limits;
From the intersection of Route 1/17 and Second Street in a westerly direction
to the city limits.
      5.   All golf carts/utility vehicles shall have the following required
equipment:
         (a)   Brakes and a parking brake.
         (b)   Steering apparatus.
         (c)   Tires.
         (d)   Rearview mirror.
         (e)   Red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow
moving emblem on the rear of the golf cart/utility vehicle.
         (f)   Headlamps that emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front.
         (g)   Taillamps that emit a red light visible from a distance of at
least one hundred feet (100') from the rear.
         (h)   Front and rear turn signal lamps.
         (i)   Brake lights.
         (j)   When operated on a roadway, golf carts/utility vehicles shall
have their headlamps and taillamps lighted.
         (k)   A warning/caution flag not less than five feet (5') above the
rear frame. (Ord. 745, 10-1-2012)
         (l)   Recreational off highway vehicles are required to have a
nonstraddle seat.
         (m)   Recreational off highway vehicle height and weight compliance:
less than sixty four inches (64") wide and less than two thousand (2,000)
pounds. (Ord. 776, 4-7-2014)
   (C)   License; Registration: All golf cart/utility/off highway vehicles
shall be licensed annually, during designated times in the month of May, at the
police department. Requirements for registering vehicles include, showing proof
of ownership, proof of insurance, all municipal bills/fines paid, and all
appropriate forms completed. In the course of registration, the owner shall pay
a nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The annual license shall
be considered expired should the owner of a golf cart/utility/off highway
vehicle, not register said vehicle at the designated times in May. The expired
license registration nonrefundable fee will be fifty dollars ($50.00). The
nonrefundable registration fee will be twenty five dollars ($25.00) with a
dated, proof of purchase document, for any golf cart/utility/off highway
vehicles purchased during the fiscal year thereof. (Ord. 813, 4-4-2016)
   (D)   Penalty For Noncompliance: Any person who violates any provision of
this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in accordance with
the city of Momence approved fine list found in section
1-4-1 of this code. If an underage operator is found to be using or operating a
golf cart in violation of this section, the vehicle shall be impounded and the
fee to recover shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 680, 4-19-2010;
amd. Ord. 745, 10-1-2012)
CHAPTER 5
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Operation Restricted
8-5-3: Manner Of Operation
8-5-4: Parking For Recreational Vehicles And Multi-Purpose Utility Trailers
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
OPERATE: To ride in or on and to be in control of a recreational vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any three-wheeled vehicle, any motorbike not licensed for
use on public streets, any snowmobile or any other vehicle used strictly for
recreational purposes. (Ord. 223, 6-5-1978)
8-5-2: OPERATION RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate a recreational vehicle upon any portion of any public
property owned and operated by the city and no person shall operate such
recreational vehicle within the right of way for any street, avenue, alley or
sidewalk within the city except as follows:
   (A)   A recreational vehicle may make a direct crossing of a street or
highway provided the crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing, it is brought to a complete
stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway and the
driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an
immediate hazard.
   (B)   A snowmobile may be operated upon the streets and avenues within the
city in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow
upon the roadway renders travel by automobiles impractical.
   (C)   Recreational vehicles may be operated upon the alleys of the city for
purposes of going to and from the city limits and where no alley is available
for such purposes, they may be operated upon the boulevards of the city for
such purposes. (Ord. 223, 6-5-1978)
8-5-3: MANNER OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any recreational
vehicle in the following unsafe or harassing ways:
   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances;
   (B)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
   (C)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit
forming drugs;
   (D)   Without a lighted head and tail light when required for safety;
   (E)   In any park or other public area in a manner which will destroy trees,
shrubs, flowers or other plantings or property.
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 223, 6-5-1978)
8-5-4: PARKING FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND MULTI-PURPOSE UTILITY TRAILERS:
Multi-purpose utility trailers and recreational vehicles, including, but not
limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings,
tent trailers, boats, snowmobiles, trailers, dune buggies and other equipment
designated for recreational use, shall not be parked on any residential street
or parking lot, but may be parked in the residential front yard on a driveway,
clearing sidewalks with no visual or other type of hazard created. Recreational
vehicles that, due to size, will not fit in the driveway may be parked by
resident property owners or their guests on the street in front of their house
only for a period of forty eight (48) hours for loading, unloading or visiting
provided no visual or other type of hazard is created and after notification to
and approval by the police department. Recreational type vehicles may be parked
on owner's property to the rear or side of the principal building provided the
vehicle does not encroach into any neighbor's yard and no visual obstruction or
safety hazard is created. (Ord. 482, 12-6-1999)
CHAPTER 6
VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
8-6-1: Illinois Motor Vehicle Code Adopted; Exceptions And Penalties
8-6-1: ILLINOIS MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   For the purpose of regulating and controlling traffic on city streets,
there is hereby adopted, by reference, the provisions of the Illinois vehicle
code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, and all amendments from time to time made
therein, excepting any penalties therein and excepting any portions thereof
specifically superseded by this title. Not less than three (3) copies of such
vehicle code have been on file for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the
adoption of this section, are now on file in the office of the city clerk and
are available for public use, inspection and examination.
   (B)   When issuing a citation under any section of the Illinois vehicle code
which has been adopted by reference hereby, the police officer shall use the
vehicle code section number assigned to the section under which the citation is
written but shall prefix such number with the letter M followed by a hyphen:
"M-". All citations so issued shall be issued in the name of the city and
referred to in the uniform traffic ticket or complaint as a city ordinance
violation.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this title, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this title, shall be fined not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
or as amended and approved by the list of approved fines by the city council
found in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 714, 7-5-2011)
TITLE 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Intent And Purpose
9-1-3: Scope
9-1-4: Interpretation
9-1-5: Permits
9-1-6: Building Height, Bulk And Lot Coverage
9-1-7: Lot Dimension And Area
9-1-8: Location Of Buildings
9-1-9: Buildings Under Construction
9-1-10: Building On A Lot
9-1-11: Accessory Buildings
9-1-12: Rezoning Of Public And Semipublic Areas
9-1-13: Fees
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the MOMENCE ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and
general welfare of the people;
   (B)   To divide the city into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing
and other specified uses;
   (C)   To protect the character and the stability of the residential,
business and manufacturing areas within the city and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
   (D)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property;
   (E)   To regulate the intensity or use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and air and to protect the public health;
   (F)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
   (G)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein;
   (H)   To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within the specified zoning
districts;
   (I)   To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder;
   (J)   To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
   (K)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
   (L)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding
them;
   (M)   To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
city;
   (N)   To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value
of desirable development in each district; and
   (O)   To define and limit all the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided herein. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-3: SCOPE:
No buildings or structures shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed
or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose
other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is
located. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, said provisions
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety,
health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any
ordinances, rules or regulations previously adopted, and not in conflict with
any of the provisions of this title or which shall be adopted, pursuant to law
relating to the use of buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this title
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties, except that where this title imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of land, buildings or premises or upon the height of
buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by such
other ordinances or such other easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-5: PERMITS:
No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for a
certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the building inspector, and no
permit or license shall be issued by any other city department, which would
authorize the use or change in use of any land or building contrary to the
provisions of this title, or the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or
occupancy of any building designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a
manner contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-6: BUILDING HEIGHT, BULK AND LOT COVERAGE:
   (A)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally
altered so as to have a greater height or bulk, a higher percentage of lot
coverage or smaller open space about it than permissible under the limitations
set forth herein for the district in which such building is located; except,
that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, and necessary mechanical appurtenances
shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provision when erected in
accordance with all other regulations of the city.
   (B)   No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of
complying with the side, rear or front yard, or court, or other open space, or
lot area requirements of this title shall thereafter by reason of change in
ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the yard, court, open
space or lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group.
   (C)   An open terrace may occupy a front yard, provided the unoccupied
portion of the front yard has a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'). A
one story bay window may project into a front yard not more than three feet
(3').
   (D)   No usable open space or off street parking space or loading space
existing or provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced below the
minimum requirements hereinafter set forth for such usable open space, parking
space or loading space, nor further reduced if already less than said minimum
requirements. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-7: LOT DIMENSION AND AREA:
When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and
dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one
ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use upon application
and approval by the zoning board of appeals 1 . (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
9-1-8: LOCATION OF BUILDINGS:
Except as otherwise provided for in this title, every building shall be
constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public
street. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-9: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building upon which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and upon which building,
actual construction has been diligently carried; and provided further, that
such building shall be completed within one year from the effective date
hereof. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-10: BUILDING ON A LOT:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling
units, shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there
be more than one such building on one lot. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-1-11: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   (A)   An accessory building may not be located nearer to any interior lot
line than that permitted for the principal building, when any part of the
accessory building is on line with the principal building, if extended.
   (B)   An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment
or construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, or to which
it is intended to be accessory.
   (C)   No accessory building shall be located on a reversed corner lot beyond
the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer
than ten feet (10') to the side lot line of the adjacent lot. (Ord. 233, 7-3-
1978)
   (D)   No accessory or secondary building shall have side walls higher than
nine feet (9') in height when measured from ground level and no such accessory
or secondary building shall have a peak of more than eighteen feet (18');
provided, however, that, notwithstanding said height limitations, no such
accessory or secondary building shall have a higher peak than the principal
building on said property or the principal building on any contiguous property
to the property upon which the accessory or secondary building is to be
constructed. (Ord. 356, 10-3-1988)
9-1-12: REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC AREAS:
An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public
school site, cemetery or other similar open space, shall not be used for any
other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining
district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the city council within
three (3) months after the date of application filed for rezoning. (Ord. 233,
7-3-1978)
9-1-13: FEES:
Fees pertaining to petitions for zoning amendments, use permits, certificates
of compliance, variation and for appeals to the zoning board of appeals, shall
be established by action of the city council from time to time. Such fees shall
be paid to the city clerk, who shall give a receipt therefor and account for
same at regular intervals to the city council. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Definitions
9-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this
chapter shall be observed and applied, except when repugnant to the context of
any provision.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular;
the word "building" shall include the word "structure" and the word "lot" shall
include the word "plot", and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use which is located on
the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such
building or main use, when permitted by district regulations.
An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   (A)   A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse.
   (B)   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
   (C)   Any fixed or permanent structure used as an incinerator incidental to
residential use.
   (D)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with
any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
   (E)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities, on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
   (F)   Off street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities.
   (G)   Signs as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this
title.
   (H)   Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines,
their supports and incidental equipment.
   (I)   Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a
part of the wall of the main building or where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such
accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land which has not been subdivided and platted.
ALLEY: A public way, not more than twenty feet (20') wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen and plumbing facilities, permanently installed, must always be
included for each apartment.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or
damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor
service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under the
definition of Automobile Repair, Major.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of automobiles, are
offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and including minor
accessories and services for automobiles, but not including major automobile
repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower
or steam cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the
premises shall be classified as a public garage.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in
running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles or merchandise.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2)
of its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement
shall not be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets,
by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways or a corporate boundary line of the city.
BOARD: The board of zoning appeals of the city 1 .
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of
persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally
accessible for human use, such as gasholders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, and other similar structures are
not considered buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line
of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and sides of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set back from
the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: A legally existing building which fails to comply with
the regulations set forth in the chapter applicable to the district in which
such building is located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main use of the
zoning lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this title.
BULK: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings
and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of exterior
walls in relation to lot lines, to the centerline of streets, to other walls of
the same building, and to other buildings or structures; and to all open spaces
relating to the building or structure.
BUS LOT: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger
buses or motor coaches.
CARTAGE, LOCAL: Pick up and delivery of parcels, packages and freight by motor
truck within and not exceeding fifteen (15) miles of the city.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb
level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurements.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued by the building inspector
stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred
to therein complies with the provisions of this title.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: An establishment where patients are admitted
for special study and treatment by two (2) or more licensed physicians and
their professional associates, practicing medicine together.
CLUB: An association of persons for some common purpose which is jointly
supported and meets periodically, but not including groups organized primarily
to render service which is customarily carried on as a business.
COMMISSION: The Momence city plan commission 2 .
CONDOMINIUM: A single dwelling unit in a multi-unit dwelling or structure,
which is separately owned and which may be combined within an undivided
interest in the common areas and facilities of the property.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street,
the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
mean level of the land immediately adjacent to the building wall shall be
considered the "curb level".
DISTRICT OR ZONE: A section of the territorial jurisdictional area of the
Momence city plan commission for which uniform regulations governing the use,
height, area, size, and intensity of use of buildings and land, and open spaces
about buildings, are established by this title.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or
mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
one-family dwelling units, two- family dwelling units, and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy by
one family and entirely separated from any other dwelling by space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units
for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential structure or apartment hotel
designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior
college, college or university, other than trade or business schools, including
instructional recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms,
restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities, for students,
teachers and employees.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together and maintaining a common household, but not including sororities,
fraternities or other similar organizations.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of three
(3) or more passenger motorbuses, or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of
passenger automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care,
incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but
not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and commercial vehicles
exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, TRUCK: A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage
of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles exceeding one
and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GUESTHOUSE: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the
same premises with the principal building, for use by temporary guests of the
occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor
be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and
carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof; and provided, that no article is sold or offered for
sale except such as may be produced on the premises by members of the immediate
family. Offices, clinics, doctor's offices, hospitals, barbershops, beauty
parlors, dress shops, millinery shops, real estate offices, tearooms,
restaurants, tourist homes, animal hospitals, kennels, among others, shall not
be deemed to be home occupations. No home occupation, as defined herein, shall
be carried on in an accessory building.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution open to the public in which patients or
injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of
contagious diseases or incurable patients.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building in which more than five (5) rooms or suites are
reserved to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary guests,
and in which no provisions are made for cooking in any individual room or
suite.
HOUSEHOLDER: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee
thereof.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises on which two (2) or more domestic
animals are kept, boarded for compensation, or kept for veterinary medical
treatment.
LINE OF A BUILDING (For Measuring Yards): A line parallel to the nearest lot
line drawn through the point of a building or group of buildings nearest to
such lot line, exclusive of such features specified as being permitted to
extend into a yard.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open, hard surfaced area of land
other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. Such space
shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, forty five feet (45') in length
and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering
space.
LODGING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel, where lodging
for three (3) or more persons is provided for compensation pursuant to previous
arrangement.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in
this title, including one main building together with its accessory buildings,
open spaces required by this title and having its principal frontage upon a
street.
LOT, CORNER: A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two (2) or more
streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a
public street; for a corner lot, the owner may elect either street line as the
front lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most
remote from the front lot line. Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines
are side lot lines.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right
angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
MODULAR HOMES: A singlewide or doublewide modular home is a structure designed
for habitation as a dwelling unit for one or more persons. This type of housing
unit is prefabricated, is similar to a mobile home and includes all necessary
electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and other service systems and/
or connections, is built off site and is brought to the site on a chassis.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL, PRIVATE: A building in which freight brought to said
building by motor truck is assembled and sorted for routing in intrastate and
interstate shipment by motor truck.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
effective date hereof or at the effective date of any amendment hereto, which
does not conform after the effective date hereof or the effective dates of
amendments hereto, with the use regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
NURSERY, DAY: An institution providing care for three (3) or more children
under the age of four (4) years for periods of more than four (4) hours but not
exceeding twenty four (24) hours.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution providing daycare service for children from four
(4) to six (6) years of age.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged
or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not
including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries for surgical
care.
PARCEL DELIVERY STATION: A building in which commodities sold at retail within
the area and packaged by the retailer, are assembled and routed for delivery to
retail customers located within the area.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area of land, other than a street
or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private
passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which
the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one- half (11/2) tons' capacity, and
available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation
to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not
less than one hundred sixty two (162) square feet (81/2' x 19') exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas for the
storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-
half (11/2) tons' capacity.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation, to the public: electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations, train
sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, or water towers.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly, upon a building,
structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product,
place, activity, person, institution, organization or business but does not
include any official traffic control device, nor does it include the flag,
emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or
religious group. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a
"sign".
SPECIAL USE: Any use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted
herein, subject to the provisions of chapter 8 of this title.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a
story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an
additional story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the
wall plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, are not more
than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of such story. In
the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof
shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of this title. In the case of
multiple-family dwellings three (3) or more stories in height, a half story
shall be counted as a story.
STREET: A public thoroughfare dedicated for use as a street or highway and
having a minimum width of thirty feet (30').
STREET LINE: A line separating an abutting lot, piece or parcel from a street.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
TAVERN: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.
TERRACE, OPEN: A level and rather narrow plane or platform which for the
purpose of this title, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the
principal structure and which is constructed not more than four feet (4') in
height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
TITLE: Reference to "title" herein shall be construed as the zoning ordinance.
TOURIST COURTS, MOTOR LODGES, MOTELS: A group of attached or detached buildings
containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used
temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels,
motor lodges or other similar type uses.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for
transient guests.
TRAILER HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be
drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying
persons and property, including a trailer coach, house trailer or mobile home.
TRUCK PARKING AREA OR YARD: Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers and including commercial
vehicles, while not loading or unloading and which exceed one and one-half (11/
2) tons' capacity.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used cars, trailers or trucks are displayed
for sale or trade.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of
buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward,
except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of a building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the
principal building and a side lot line and extending from the required front
yard (or from the front lot line, if there is no required front yard) to the
required rear yard.
ZONING LOT: A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which is or may be
occupied by a use, building or buildings including the open spaces required by
this title.
ZONING MAPS: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part hereof.
(Ord. 646, 5-5-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
2 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
ZONING USE DISTRICTS, MAPS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Use Districts Designated
9-3-2: Zoning Maps
9-3-3: New Or Annexed Land
9-3-4: Zoning Of Public Ways
9-3-5: Boundary Lines
9-3-1: USE DISTRICTS DESIGNATED:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the city is
hereby divided into the following districts:
Residential Districts
 
 R-1  One-family dwelling district
 R-2  Two-family dwelling district
 R-3  Multiple-family dwelling district
 E-1  Estate district
Business Districts
 
 B-1  Business district, limited retail
 B-2  Business district, general retail and wholesale services
Manufacturing Districts
 
 M-1  Manufacturing district, limited
 M-2  Manufacturing district, general
Specialty Zoning Districts
 
 PUD  Planned unit developments
 A-1  Agricultural district
 OS-1 Open space district
 
(Ord. 616, 12-18-2006)
9-3-2: ZONING MAPS:
The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown upon
the zoning map which is hereby incorporated into this title. The zoning map,
together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon,
and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of this title and shall have the
same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and
described herein. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-3-3: NEW OR ANNEXED LAND:
Submerged land heretofore reclaimed or which may be reclaimed hereafter, and
land heretofore annexed or which may be annexed to the city hereafter, and
which is not shown on the zoning map made a part of this title, shall be
classified as A-1 until such time as the city council designates the permitted
use of the land as in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 617,
12-18-2006)
9-3-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same use district as the
property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and
railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public or
railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas,
unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as
that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-3-5: BOUNDARY LINES:
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown
on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar rights of way, they shall be construed as following the
centerlines thereof.
   (B)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   (C)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
city limits, they shall be construed as following city limits.
   (D)   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water, such
boundary lines shall be construed to follow such centerlines. (Ord. 233, 7-3-
1978)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purposes
9-4-2: R-1 One-Family Dwelling District
9-4-2-1: Permitted Uses
9-4-2-2: Height Of Buildings
9-4-2-3: Lot Sizes
9-4-2-4: Yard Areas
9-4-2-5: Permitted Obstructions
9-4-2-6: Modular Homes
9-4-3: R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District
9-4-3-1: Purpose
9-4-3-2: Policy
9-4-3-3: Permitted Uses
9-4-3-4: Special Uses
9-4-3-5: Temporary Uses
9-4-3-6: Accessory Uses
9-4-3-7: Prohibited Uses
9-4-3-8: Site And Structure Requirements
9-4-3-9: Special Provisions
9-4-4: R-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling District
9-4-4-1: Permitted Uses
9-4-4-2: Height Of Buildings
9-4-4-3: Lot Sizes
9-4-4-4: Yard Areas
9-4-4-5: Permitted Obstructions
9-4-4-6: Modular Homes
9-4-5: Antennas And Satellite Earth Stations
9-4-6: E-1 Estate District
9-4-6-1: Purpose
9-4-6-2: Policy
9-4-6-3: Permitted Uses
9-4-6-4: Special Uses
9-4-6-5: Temporary Uses
9-4-6-6: Accessory Uses
9-4-6-7: Prohibited Uses
9-4-1: PURPOSES:
The residential districts set forth herein are established in order to protect
public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes:
   (A)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare and other
objectionable factors.
   (B)   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in
each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through
traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off street parking.
   (C)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulation of the bulk of buildings.
   (D)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and windows thereof.
   (E)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same lot with residential development.
   (F)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
   (G)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character and desirable development and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the city. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-2: R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT:
9-4-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted:
Accessory buildings, as defined in section
9-2-1 of this title and regulated by section
9-1-11 of this title; provided, however, that no pole type building or metal
buildings, whether accessory or otherwise, shall be constructed within an R-
1 district; and further provided, however, that no accessory building shall be
constructed within five feet (5') of the rear lot line.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses, to be occupied by not more
than fifteen (15) persons.
Home occupations as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
Off street parking facilities as required or permitted by chapter 10 of this
title.
One-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed one year; provided, however, that said temporary buildings and uses
receive the prior approval of the plan commission 1 .
Transitional uses. Principal offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers,
architects, real estate brokers and other professional occupations, when
conducted in a residential structure used primarily as a home and when located
on lots having a side lot line adjoining a lot in a business or manufacturing
district; or in lots having a side lot line adjacent to a railroad right of way
or directly across a street or alley from a business or manufacturing district;
provided that:
   (A)   The lot on which the transitional use is located does not extend more
than seventy five feet (75') from the adjoining business or manufacturing
district or more than one hundred twenty feet (120') in depth from the street
line in cases where the lot does not adjoin but faces a B or M district.
   (B)   The home occupations are conducted in conjunction with the use of a
dwelling unit as a home by the occupant thereof, and that the residential
character of the exterior of the dwelling is not changed. Medical clinics are
not permitted or included.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses where no building is involved and
when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978;
amd. Ord. 361, 6-5-1989; Ord. 523, 7-1-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 4 of this code.
9-4-2-2: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
   (A)   One-family detached dwellings: Twenty five feet (25') and not over two
and one-half (21/2) stories.
   (B)   Church: Seventy five feet (75') for towers or steeples, but not more
than forty five feet (45') for the main structures. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-2-3: LOT SIZES:
   (A)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet and a width at the established building line of not
less than sixty feet (60').
   (B)   Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than seventy five feet
(75'). (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-2-4: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or
enlargement:
   (A)   Front Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a
front yard of not less than twenty five feet (25'). Where lots comprising forty
percent (40%) of the frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are
developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of more than
fifteen feet (15') in depth, the average of such front yards shall establish
the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case shall a front
yard of more than fifty feet (50') be required.
   (B)   Side Yard: On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed there
shall be a side yard on each side of not less than ten feet (10'). The combined
total of the side yards for interior lots shall not be less than fifteen feet
(15') and the combined total of the side yards for corner lots shall not be
less than fifteen feet (15'). On corner lots there shall be maintained a side
yard of not less than ten feet (10') on the side adjacent to the street which
intersects the street upon which the building or structure maintains frontage,
and in the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be maintained a setback
from the side street of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the front yard
required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such setback need not
exceed fifteen feet (15'). No accessory building on said reversed corner lot
shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear,
not be located nearer than five feet (5') to the side lot line of said adjacent
lot.
On lots upon which a church is constructed or extensions made to an existing
church, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') on each side
of the main structure and a combined total of side yards of not less than
twenty five feet (25').
   (C)   Rear Yard: Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is
constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). (Ord.
233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-2-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS:
The following shall not be considered as obstructions when located on or within
yards within residentially zoned areas:
Arbors and trellises.
Awnings and canopies.
Breezeways and open porches (rear yards only).
Chimneys, not exceeding two percent (2%) of the width of the yards.
Fences or walls not over six feet (6') in height (rear yard, and side yard from
the rear point of side wall of principal building establishing said side yard);
provided however, that the posts and wooden braces face the yard being
enclosed.
Open parking areas.
Open terraces.
Steps not over four feet (4') in height. (Ord. 739, 8-6-2012)
9-4-2-6: MODULAR HOMES:
No singlewide or doublewide modular home shall be permitted in any R-1 one-
family dwelling district. (Ord. 392, 8-17-1992)
9-4-3: R-2 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT:
9-4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The two-family attached residential district R-2 is hereby established to
provide for an environment of predominately two- family attached dwellings with
certain additional compatible uses which serve the residents living in the
district. The R-2 district is also established to implement the purpose and
intent for residential districts where provision for compatible community
facilities and services are available. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the R-2 two-family district, it shall be the policy
of the city of Momence to:
   (A)   So locate R-2 districts to other districts nearby or adjacent to
available municipal police and fire protection so as to protect these
residential areas from the danger of fire, explosion, or noxious fumes and the
irritations of offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, glares, or other
threats to health and well being.
   (B)   So locate R-2 districts where paved roads meeting current city
standards may serve the residents providing convenience and safety in
transportation where mobility is not impeded and where hazards and the
intensity or potential for accidents are avoided or minimized. (Ord. 529, 11-4-
2002)
9-4-3-3: PERMITTED USES:
   (A)   Residential Uses:
One-family detached dwellings.
Two-family attached dwellings. Any dwelling constructed for the purpose of or
with the potential to be subdivided for individual ownership shall complete the
process of subdividing the lot (as specified under city subdivision
regulations) prior to certificate of compliance being issued for either unit.
Such process shall be required even in the instance where one owner intends to
own and maintain the entire property and both units, whether owner occupied or
not. The lot shall be equally divided down the common wall by a single straight
line from the lot front to the lot rear property line.
   (B)   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
Churches and other places of worship.
Municipal buildings.
Public and parochial schools.
Public libraries.
Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings. (Ord.
529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
city council:
Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
Nursery schools and daycare centers, when accessory to the principal residence
on the premises.
One detached accessory shed, tool room or similar building or structure used
for domestic storage shall be permitted per each individual dwelling unit,
under the specifications and within the requirements as defined in chapter 1 of
this title.
Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Upon application to and issuance by the building inspector of a permit, the
following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real
property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than five (5) successive
periods at the same location. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry.
Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of residential
occupants of the premises, but only in the event that an attached garage has
not been provided.
Gardening, raising of plant material, fruits, and vegetables.
Home occupations.
Keeping of household pets exclusively for the use of personal enjoyment of
residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 9 of
this title.
Swimming pools, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests, and
in accordance with title 4, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-4-3-3 through
9-4-3-6 of this chapter, inclusively. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-8: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: A separate ground area of not less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet shall be designated, provided, and continuously
maintained for each parcel containing a permitted or special use. Attached two-
family lots that are subdivided for individual ownership shall provide half of
the lot area for each dwelling, but in no case shall this area be less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet per unit.
   (B)   Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100')
shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use. Corner
lots shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred twenty feet (120'). Attached
two-family lots that are subdivided for individual ownership shall divide the
width of the lot equally, but in no case shall this width be less than fifty
feet (50') per unit.
   (C)   Minimum Lot Depth: A minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty feet
(120') shall be provided for each parcel containing a permitted or special use.
Reverse corner or double frontage lots shall have a minimum lot depth of one
hundred fifty feet (150').
      1.   Angular lots in R-2 zones shall be a minimum of seventy feet (70')
measured at the building setback line.
   (D)   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard: All structures shall be set back at least twenty five
feet (25') from the front lot line. Maximum setback shall be twenty five feet
(25') plus ten percent (10%) of the average depth of the lot.
      2.   Side Yard: All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a
distance not less than ten feet (10') or ten percent (10%) of the lot width,
whichever is greater. Attached two-family dwellings that share a common wall
shall be interpreted to have an approved zero foot (0') side yard at the common
wall side of the principal building only.
      3.   Rear Yard: All principal structures shall be set in a distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') from the rear property line.
      4.   Accessory Building: No accessory building shall be built within five
feet (5') of the rear lot line.
   (E)   Maximum Height: No principal structure shall exceed thirty five feet
(35') in height, no detached garage shall exceed fifteen feet (15'), or the
height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
   (F)   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed fifty percent (50%).
   (G)   Minimum Size Of Dwelling: Each attached dwelling unit, and any other
structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes, shall contain
as least one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of livable floor area,
exclusive of garages and any story below grade. Each residential unit shall be
required to have an attached garage having space for storage of a minimum of
one passenger automobile. The maximum area of such attached garage may not
exceed three hundred (300) square feet or thirty three percent (33%) of the
total square footage of livable floor area, whichever is greater.
   (H)   Maximum Lot Coverage: Principal building not to exceed thirty percent
(30%). Accessory structures not to exceed ten percent (10%).
   (I)   Maximum Area Coverage: Including all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas or other hard surface not to exceed sixty percent (60%).
   (J)   Common Wall Construction: The common wall constructed to divide the
building and create separate dwelling units shall be a solid, UL approved fire
separation wall, extending from its footing below grade to the underside of
floor/roof, containing no plumbing or electrical work. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-3-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Parking Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations
set forth in title 8 of this code.
   (B)   Sign Regulations: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 9 of this title.
   (C)   Tents: Tents shall not be erected, used, or maintained on any lot,
except such tents that are customarily used for temporary recreational
purposes.
   (D)   Residential Driveways: Shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete and
meet the conditions set forth in chapter 10 of this title.
   (E)   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored
only in accordance with the requirements of section
8-5-4 of this code. (Ord. 529, 11-4-2002)
9-4-4: R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT:
9-4-4-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted:
Any use permitted in the R-2 two-family dwelling district.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Condominiums.
Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
Offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate brokers and
other professional occupations including funeral homes when conducted in a
residential structure providing the residential character of the building is
not altered extensively. (Ord. 647, 5-5-2008)
9-4-4-2: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed three
(3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45') in height. (Ord. 233, 7-
3-1978)
9-4-4-3: LOT SIZES:
No building hereafter erected or structurally altered in the R-3 multiple-
family dwelling district shall have a total lot area of less than eight
thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet, nor have a total lot width of less
than sixty feet (60'). Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered
as a multiple- family dwelling or more than two (2) dwelling units shall
provide a lot area per dwelling unit of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-4-4: YARD AREAS:
No building or structure or the enlargement of any building or structure shall
be hereafter erected or maintained unless the following yards and lot areas are
provided and maintained in connection with such structure or enlargement:
   (A)   Front Yard: For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a front yard
of not less than twenty feet (20'). For two-family dwellings and one-family
dwellings, the same regulations shall apply as required in the R-1 district.
   (B)   Side Yard:
      1.   Multiple-Family Dwellings: On interior lots there shall be a side
yard on each side of a principal building of not less than ten feet (10') and a
combined total of side yards of not less than twenty feet (20') for all
multiple-family dwellings of not more than two (2) stories in height. For each
additional story added above the two (2) stories, the side yard on each side of
the main building shall be increased two feet (2') in width. On corner lots,
the side yard on the intersecting street side shall be not less than ten feet
(10'), except in the case of a reversed corner lot of not less than fifty
percent (50%) of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner
lot. No accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the
front line required on the adjacent lot to the rear nor be located nearer than
five feet (5') to the side lot line of such adjacent lot.
      2.   One-Family Dwellings: The same regulations shall apply as required
in the R-1 district.
      3.   Two-Family Dwellings: The same regulations shall apply as required
in the R-1 district.
      4.   Converted Dwellings: The same regulations shall apply as required in
the R-1 district.
   (C)   Rear Yard: For multiple-family dwellings there shall be a rear yard of
not less than twenty five feet (25') for interior lots nor less than fifteen
feet (15') for corner lots. For other type dwellings, the same rear yard
regulation shall apply as required in the R-1 district. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-4-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS:
The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the R-1 district.
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-4-4-6: MODULAR HOMES:
No singlewide or doublewide modular home shall be permitted in any R-
3 multiple-family dwelling district. (Ord. 392, 8-17-1992)
9-4-5: ANTENNAS AND SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS:
Antennas accessory to permitted uses are hereby authorized as specified
hereunder. All antennas, whether authorized as a permitted or special use, are
subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   In any residential district, roof mounted accessory antennas may be
erected to a maximum height of thirty five feet (35') above the maximum
permissible height of the building on which it is located and one accessory
ground mounted satellite earth station may be erected to a maximum height of
twelve feet (12') above ground level, provided:
      1.   The diameter of the satellite earth station shall not exceed ten
feet (10').
      2.   The satellite earth station may only be located in a rear yard and
must comply with all setback requirements for the zoning district in which it
is located.
      3.   The satellite earth station shall be painted a solid neutral color,
shall exhibit no alphabetical information and shall be located on a cement pad
not less than four feet by four feet (4' x 4') in length and width.
   (B)   No satellite earth station or microwave relay antenna may be located
on any roof except as follows:
      1.   Satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas shall not be
clearly visible from any parcel lying along an adjoining street that is zoned
R-1, R-2 or R-3.
      2.   Roof mounted satellite earth stations or microwave relay antennas
shall not exceed four feet (4') in diameter.
      3.   Roof mounted satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas
and their accompanying support structures shall be painted a solid neutral
color and shall not exhibit any advertising.
      4.   Satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas which are
mounted on a roof surface shall require a building permit to ensure compliance
with the city's building code and to ensure the structural integrity of the
subject roof. (Ord. 384, 5-4-1992)
9-4-6: E-1 ESTATE DISTRICT:
9-4-6-1: PURPOSE:
The residential zoning district E-1 is hereby established to further the use of
lands optimally suited to neither prime agricultural nor high density urban
uses because of location, topography, soil characteristics, wetness,
vegetation, or other natural or man induced factors and where portions of the
land may be kept open to protect and conserve hilly areas, wetlands, prairies,
wooded regions and other unique areas for the public benefit and perpetuation
of the diversity of natural ecosystems.
   (A)   To provide lands for large lot single-family residential uses which
are the optimum use to topography, soils, natural characteristics, manmade
features, and/or location and existing uses.
   (B)   To provide the opportunity to keep horses, or other large animals, and
the right to practice in a limited manner agriculture, floriculture,
horticulture, cultivation of field or garden crops, and similar related
activities, but within the limits of smaller lots. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the residential E-1 estate district, it shall be the
policy of the city to:
   (A)   Foster uses where adequate police and fire protection are available.
   (B)   Allow a minimum of one acre lots and maximum five (5) acre lots for
single-family residential uses and other permitted compatible uses where each
domicile may be served by an on site sewage disposal system until such time as
municipal services are available.
   (C)   Zone E-1 lands least adaptable for sustained long term agriculture
uses and/or least suitable for dense urbanized development because of location,
topography, geology, soil types, hydrologic characteristics, or other natural
features of the land. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-3: PERMITTED USES:
No land shall be used or occupied and no building, structure, or premises shall
be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise provided
in this title for other than one or more of the following specified uses:
Agricultural uses:
Gardening and general farming, for private use only, but not including poultry
and livestock.
Greenhouses for private use only.
Nurseries for private use only.
Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
Churches and other places of worship.
Municipal buildings.
Public and parochial schools.
Public parks, public playgrounds and public community center buildings.
Residential uses:
Single-family detached dwellings. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
city council and the planning commission:
Cemeteries.
Clubhouses, country clubs, public or private golf courses, tennis clubs,
swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.
Horses, but not more than one per acre, and housed in a barn at least one
hundred feet (100') from any property line. Horses shall not be grazed in a
front or side yard, and overgrazing is prohibited. Approval of the construction
of said barn shall also be part of the special use application. Adequate
trailways or exercise facilities must be demonstrated.
Larger dimensions for the one allowed detached garage or portion of principal
building designed, arranged, used, or to be used for the storage of automobiles
of the occupants of the premises, per principal building with approval of the
planning commission and the city council.
Nursery schools, day schools, and childcare centers.
One detached accessory shed, toolroom or similar building or structure used for
domestic storage, per principal building with approval by the planning
commission and the city council.
Public utility buildings and structures. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Upon approval of an application by the planning commission and city council, a
permit may be issued for the following temporary uses:
Temporary building, trailer, or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of both building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Within any development, each such permit shall
be valid for a period of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for
more than one additional period.
Temporary office, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of real
property. Each permit shall specify the location of the office and the area of
permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than one year and shall not be renewed for more than two (2) successive periods
at the same location. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and
commonly associated with a principal or conditioned permitted use may be
permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership
and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any
business, trade, or industry.
Garages, carports, or other parking areas for the exclusive use of the resident
occupants of the premises, but subject to the requirements of section
9-1-11 of this title.
Gardening, greenhouse, and other facilities for raising of plant materials,
fruits, and vegetables.
Real estate signs in accordance with the applicable regulations of chapter 9 of
this title.
Swimming pools, in accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in
title 4, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
9-4-6-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-4-6-3 through
9-4-6-6 of this chapter are prohibited. (Ord. 620, 12-18-2006)
CHAPTER 5
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Purposes
9-5-2: B-1 Business District, Limited Retail
9-5-2-1: Permitted Uses
9-5-2-2: Height Of Buildings
9-5-2-3: Yard Areas
9-5-3: B-2 Business District, General Retail And Wholesale Services
9-5-3-1: Permitted Uses
9-5-3-2: Height Of Buildings
9-5-3-3: Yard Areas
9-5-3-4: Permitted Accessory Structures
9-5-1: PURPOSES:
The business districts set forth herein are established to protect public
health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare,
and to protect the economic base of the city and the value of the following
specific objectives:
   (A)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well
considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate locations for
the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the
economic base of the city.
   (B)   To place in separate districts, those businesses which may create
noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate excessive traffic.
   (C)   To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to or
inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or
convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantage.
   (D)   To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible
business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable
and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the
alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.
   (E)   To provide for the establishment of off street parking facilities,
permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-5-2: B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT, LIMITED RETAIL:
9-5-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
Restricted limited retail:
Candy and ice cream shops.
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments, when employing facilities for the
cleaning and pressing of not more than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750)
pounds of dry goods per day, and when using carbon tetrachloride,
perchloroethylene or other similar nonflammable solvents approved by the fire
department.
Food and fruit stores.
Frozen food stores.
Garden supplies and seed stores.
Launderette and laundromat.
Liquor stores, package goods only.
Meat markets.
Restaurant, tearoom or cafe, when the establishment is not of the drive-in type
where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles.
Sidewalk dining only upon property located within the downtown district and in
compliance with title 3, chapter 10 of this code.
Variety stores.
Any other similar type retail store not specifically listed herein and which
has the economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining
properties.
Limited retail:
Art and school supply stores.
Auto accessory store, where there is no driveway entrance across the sidewalk
into the principal building.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products, when
prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barbershop, beauty shop, chiropody, massage or similar personal service shop.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sale.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Currency exchange.
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair when conducted for
retail sales on the premises only.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry goods stores.
Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and above a
permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the ground
floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on the
ground floor.
Electrical appliance store and repair but not including appliance assembly or
manufacturing.
Florist shop and conservatory for retail trade on the premises only.
Furniture store and upholstery, when conducted as part of the retail operations
and secondary to the main use.
Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
Gift shops.
Haberdashery.
Hardware shops.
Hobby shops.
Hotels, including dining and meeting rooms when business uses occupy the street
frontage except for an entranceway to the hotel lobby.
Household appliance stores.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies,
slipcovers and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary to the main use.
Jewelry stores and watch repair.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Loan offices.
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
Newsstands.
Notions stores.
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.
Optician, optometrist.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures when
conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
Plumbing showroom without shop or repair facilities.
Postal substations (finance stations and contract stations).
Public utility collection offices.
Savings and loan associations.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe stores.
Signs, as defined and regulated in chapters 2 and 9 of this title.
Sporting goods stores.
Stationery stores.
Telegraph offices.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices.
Typewriter and adding machine sales and services.
Wearing apparel shops.
Any other similar type retail store not specifically listed herein, and which
has the economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining
properties subject to approval of the plan commission.
All activities, except for automobile off street parking facilities as
permitted or required in this B-1 district, shall be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978; amd. Ord. 797, 7-20-2015)
9-5-2-2: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height, except in the area bounded on the north by the centerline of Third
Street east to the alley between Dixie Highway and Locust, centerline of the
alley south one-half (1/2) block east along the lot line to centerline of
Locust, south to centerline of Second Street, east to alley then south one-half
(1/2) block east along the lot line to centerline of Walnut, then south to
River Street, west along centerline to Township Hall, follow east property line
south to river, west along the alley centerline to Washington Street, east
along Washington to Pine, north on Pine to center of the block, east along
property line to alley west of Dixie Highway, and north along alley to Third
Street, wherein the buildings may be erected or structurally altered to a
height not to exceed one hundred seventy feet (170'). Parapet walls, chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, stacks and necessary mechanical
appurtenances may be erected over and above the maximum height of one hundred
seventy feet (170'); provided, they are constructed in accordance with all
other regulations of the city. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-5-2-3: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building:
   (A)   Front Yard: No front yard shall be required when all frontage between
two (2) intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots
within this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R district, all
of which front upon the same street between two (2) intersecting streets, there
shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has
been established in the R district.
Exception: When existing buildings located in this district have already
established a building line at the street line or at a less depth than required
herein, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line, except
for the first fifty feet (50') of B-1 district frontage adjacent to the R
district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than
ten feet (10').
   (B)   Side Yard: No side yard is required, except for a corner lot whose
rear lot line abuts upon an R district or upon an alley separating this
district from an R district. There shall then be provided a side yard equal to
one-half (1/2) the front yard required in the abutting R district, but in no
case more than ten feet (10'). The setback shall also apply if the business
building fronts the intersecting street, commonly referred to as the side
street.
   (C)   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet
(20'); provided, however, that a one story accessory building may be located
thereon, except for the side adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or
alley line, for the storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and loading of
vehicles under roof, as provided in chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 233, 7-3-
1978)
9-5-3: B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT, GENERAL RETAIL AND WHOLESALE SERVICES:
9-5-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted:
Any use permitted in the B-1 district.
Agricultural implement sales and services when conducted wholly within an
enclosed building.
Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
Antique shops.
Art galleries and studios.
Automobile and truck (under 11/2 tons' capacity) minor motor repair and service
shop, but not including body repair and rebuilding or painting.
Automobile sales and service, but not including automobile body repair and
rebuilding or painting of automobiles.
Automobile service stations.
Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors, blowers and
steam cleaning.
Battery and tire service stations.
Beverage, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing.
Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
Billiard and pool rooms.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Boat showrooms.
Bookbinding.
Building material sales, when conducted wholly within a building.
Catering establishments.
Clubs and fraternal organizations.
Contractors' offices and shops, where no fabricating is done on the premises
and where all storage of material is within a building.
Costume rental shops.
Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and above a
permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the ground
floor of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on the
ground floor.
Employment agencies.
Exterminating shops.
Feed and seed stores, wholesale.
Garages, public, for storage of private, passenger automobiles and commercial
vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
Glass cutting and glazing establishments.
Greenhouse, wholesale growers.
Household appliance repair shops.
Laboratories, commercial (medical, dental only).
Locksmiths.
Mirror and glazing shops.
Motels.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the assembly or
manufacture of such articles.
Parcel delivery stations.
Pawnshops.
Pet shops.
Photograph developing and processing.
Picture framing when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
Plumbing showrooms, heating and roofing supply shops.
Printing, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, stationery
and other reading matter.
Processing or assembly limited to the following; provided, that space occupied
in a building does not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet of total floor
and basement space, not including stairwells or elevator shafts; and provided,
such processing or assembly can be conducted without noise, vibration, odor,
dust or any other condition which might be disturbing to occupants of adjacent
buildings. When manufacturing operations of the same or similar products demand
space exceeding six thousand (6,000) square feet, they shall then be located in
the M-1 manufacturing district:
Advertising displays.
Awnings, venetian blinds and window shades.
Bakeries, wholesale.
Brushes and brooms.
Cosmetics, drugs and perfumes.
Electrical equipment appliances.
Food processing, packaging and distribution.
Jewelry.
Medical and dental supplies.
Optical goods and equipment.
Pattern making.
Products from finished materials such as plastic, bone, cloth, cork, feathers,
felt, fibre, paper, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, precious or semiprecious
stone, rubber, shell or yarn.
Scientific and precision instruments.
Public auction rooms.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Recreation places, including bowling alleys, dance halls, gymnasiums, skating
rinks, archery ranges, golf practicing ranges, miniature golf courses or other
similar places of amusement or entertainment when operated for pecuniary
profit.
Restaurants, drive-ins or car service.
Riding academies.
Schools; music, dance, business, commercial or trade.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Silver plating and repair shops.
Smoking and processing of meat products.
Taverns.
Theaters, indoor.
Trailer sales or rental (house trailers or mobile homes) on an open lot or
within a building.
Undertaking establishments.
Used passenger automobile sales (used car lot) on an open lot or within a
building.
Warehouses for storage where no fabricating is done on the premises and having
not more than two (2) loading docks not more than eleven feet (11') in width.
Wholesale businesses, excluding a building, the principal use of which is for a
storage area. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-5-3-2: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of six (6) stories nor shall it exceed sixty five feet (65') in height.
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-5-3-3: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following yards are
provided and maintained in connection with such building:
   (A)   Front Yard: No front yard shall be required when all frontage between
two (2) intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots
within this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in an R district, all
of which front upon the same street between two (2) intersecting streets, there
shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has
been established in the R district.
Exception: When existing buildings located in this district have already
established a building line at the street line or at a lesser depth than
required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line,
except for the fifty feet (50') of B-2 district frontage adjacent to the R
district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than
ten feet (10').
   (B)   Side Yard: The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted
in the B-1 business district, limited retail.
   (C)   Rear Yard: The same rear yard regulations shall apply as required or
permitted in the B-1 business district, limited retail. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-5-3-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Temporary storage containers used during an active construction project is
permitted in business zoned districts for a six (6) month period after majority
consent of the city council. Should more time be needed, an extension must be
approved by a majority of the city council. (Ord. 887, 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 6
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Purposes
9-6-2: M-1 Manufacturing District, Limited
9-6-2-1: Permitted Uses
9-6-2-2: Height Of Buildings
9-6-2-3: Yard Areas
9-6-2-4: Permitted Accessory Structures
9-6-3: M-2 Manufacturing District, General
9-6-3-1: Permitted Uses
9-6-3-2: Conditional Permitted Uses
9-6-3-3: Height Of Buildings
9-6-3-4: Yard Areas
9-6-4: Satellite Earth Stations And Microwave Relay Towers
9-6-1: PURPOSES:
The manufacturing districts set forth herein are established to protect public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare, and to protect
the economic base of the city as well as the value of real estate by regulating
manufacturing development in appropriate locations. These general objectives
include, among others, the following specific objectives:
   (A)   To protect established residential areas, and the health of families
living therein, by restricting those nearby manufacturing activities which may
create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire
hazards and other objectionable influences, to those areas which are
appropriate therefor.
   (B)   To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for all types of
manufacturing and related activities so that economic structure of the
community may be strengthened, and that employment opportunities may be found
in the interest of public prosperity and welfare.
   (C)   To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations
accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw materials,
finished products and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a
minimum of danger to public life and property.
   (D)   To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict
obnoxious manufacturing activities while at the same time encourage and permit
the manufacturing activities which have adopted facilities for the processing
of finished products without adversely affecting the health, happiness, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas.
   (E)   To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land by
prohibiting the use of such space for new residential development, thereby
preserving the land for a more appropriate use in accordance with the plans for
city improvement and development.
   (F)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well
considered plan of land use for all of the city, to conserve the use of
property, to promote stability of manufacturing activities and related
development, and to protect the character and established development in each
area of the community, to enhance and stabilize the value of land and to
protect the tax base of the city. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-2: M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT, LIMITED:
9-6-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
Since most uses permitted in this district will be in close proximity to
residential districts, it is hereby declared that performance standards shall
be high, and that all manufacturing, processing or assembly of materials and
products must be carried on in a manner not injurious or offensive to the
occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission of odors, fumes, or
gases, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or fire hazards. Permitted uses are:
Any use permitted in a B district, but not including residences or apartments,
except such dwelling accommodations as may be needed to house a caretaker or
watchman employed on the premises, and their families.
Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
Artificial limb manufacture.
Automobile and truck repair (major), painting, upholstering, reconditioning,
and body and fender repairing when done within the confines of a structure.
Batteries, manufacture and rebuilding.
Bedspring and mattress manufacture.
Belting manufacture.
Bicycle manufacture.
Boat building and repair.
Brooms and brushes manufacture.
Building equipment yards; yards for building materials; lumber, coal, sand and
gravel yard; and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating
equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or equipment of
similar nature.
Bus line shops and garages.
Canning and preserving.
Canvas and canvas products manufacture.
Carpet and rug cleaning.
Carpet manufacture.
Cartage (local), express hauling or storage yards.
Cement block manufacture.
Ceramic products, pottery and glazed tile manufacture.
Chick hatcheries.
Cigarette and cigar manufacture.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments when employing facilities for handling more
than one thousand (1,000) pounds of dry goods per day.
Coated fabrics, except rubberized, manufacture.
Cork and cork products manufacture.
Creameries and dairies.
Drapery and bedding manufacture.
Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacture.
Electric motor and generators manufacture.
Engraving.
Felt manufacture.
Fur goods, not including tanning or dyeing, manufacture.
Glass products, from previously manufactured glass.
Heating appliances and sheet metal products, including stoves and ranges,
manufacture.
Hosiery manufacture.
Ice cream and ice manufacture.
Kennel with outdoor pens and runs.
Laundries, more than one thousand (1,000) pounds' daily capacity.
Machine shops and metal products manufacture, when not equipped with heavy
(exceeding 50 ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and grinding
machines or any other equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke,
odors, heat, glare or fire hazards.
Metal polishing and plating.
Motor freight terminal, private.
Musical instruments manufacture.
Perfumes and cosmetics manufacture.
Pianos and organs manufacture.
Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw materials,
manufacture.
Public utility electric substations, and distribution centers, gas regulation
centers and underground gas holder stations.
Rubber products (small), such as washers, gloves, footwear and bathing caps,
but excluding rubber and synthetic rubber processing, manufacture.
Shoes and boots manufacture.
Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture.
Stone, marble and granite grinding and cutting.
Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements, and other similar equipment on
an open lot.
Storage of household goods.
Textiles; spinning, weaving, dyeing and printing.
Tool and die shops.
Tools and hardware, such as hand tools, bolts, nuts, screws, cutlery, house
hardware, locks and plumbing appliances, manufacture.
Toys and children's vehicles, manufacture.
Truck terminal, including exchange and handling of freight.
Truck, tractor or bus storage of parking yard, lot or garage.
Wire brush manufacture.
Any other manufacturing establishment that can be operated in compliance with
the requirements of this section, without creating objectionable noises, odor,
dust, smoke, gas, fumes or vapor, and that is a use compatible with the use and
occupancy of adjoining properties. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-2-2: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of four (4) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45') in height,
except as provided in section
9-1-6 of this title. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-2-3: YARD AREAS:
The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall be not more than sixty
percent (60%) of the area of the lot or tract on which a building permit has
been issued.
   (A)   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less
than twenty five feet (25') wherein there shall be no structure of any kind,
open storage of materials or equipment, or the parking of vehicles; where
established building line is less, the established building line governs the
front yard.
   (B)   Side Yard: There shall be a minimum side yard of not less than fifteen
feet (15') on both sides of the building or buildings, but where the property
is adjacent to an R district, there shall be a side yard of not less than
twenty five feet (25') on the side nearest to residential lots. The parking of
private automobiles may be permitted within the side yard areas, but not closer
than five feet (5') to any lot zoned for residential use.
   (C)   Rear Yard: A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts upon
an R district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty
feet (30'), and no storage of materials or equipment or the parking of
automobiles shall take place within the ten feet (10') closest to any
residential lot or lots. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-2-4: PERMITTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Storage containers are permitted in manufacturing zoned districts with a
majority consent of the city council. (Ord. 887, 5-6-2024)
9-6-3: M-2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT, GENERAL:
9-6-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
The uses permitted in this district generally include those manufacturing and
industrial activities which cannot be operated economically without creating
some conditions which may be obnoxious or objectionable to the occupants of
adjoining properties and for that reason, must be grouped in areas where
similar industrial uses are now located or where the permitted uses will be
best located in accordance with the comprehensive land use plan of the city,
which is designed to protect the welfare of the community. The permitted uses
are:
Any use permitted in the M-1 district.
Aircraft, assembly and testing of fuselage and motors.
Alcoholic beverages, manufacture.
Automobiles, trucks and trailers, manufacture.
Blacksmith shops.
Boiler works.
Box and crate manufacture.
Brick, tile and terra cotta manufacture.
Building materials, such as prefabricated houses, composition wallboards,
partitions and panels.
Cement products.
Chalk manufacture.
Chemicals, not including those which may be inflammable or explosive.
Coffin manufacture.
Cooperage works.
Corrugated metal products.
Cottonseed oil manufacture.
Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and others, manufacture.
Feed milling and processing.
Gelatin, vegetable and animal.
Glass blowing and manufacture.
Grain elevators.
Graphite and graphite products, manufacture.
Hemp products, manufacture.
Ink from primary raw materials, including colors and pigments.
Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards.
Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing mills.
Machinery, heavy manufacturing and repair, including electrical, construction,
mining and agriculture, manufacture.
Meat and fish products, packing and processing of, but not including,
slaughtering and glue and size manufacture.
Metal stamping and extrusion of metal products.
Motor testing or internal combustion motors, manufacture.
Porcelain products, such as bathroom and kitchen equipment, manufacture.
Railroad equipment, such as railroad car and locomotive manufacture.
Rubber products, including tires and tubes manufacture and tire recapping.
Wax products, manufacture from paraffin. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-3-2: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
In addition to the preceding uses, the following uses may be permitted if
located more than five hundred feet (500') from any part of an R district, and
also no closer than five hundred feet (500') from any school, public or
private; nursing homes or residential care centers; daycare centers for
seniors, disabled persons, or children; churches and public parks, and subject
to all applicable licensing requirements now in place or hereafter enacted; and
subject to the approval of the city council by virtue of compliance with the
requirements as established herein, and then only after receiving a
recommendation for approval from the plan commission indicating that the
proposed application is in compliance with the requirements herein. Said report
from the plan commission shall be made within thirty (30) days after the use
application has been referred to it by the zoning administrator. There shall be
no conditional permitted uses without the express approval of the plan
commission.
Adult use establishment (defined under section
3-3-8 of this code). (Ord. 662, 9-21-2009)
9-6-3-3: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to
exceed a height of six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'), except as
provided in section
9-1-6 of this title. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-3-4: YARD AREAS:
   (A)   Front Yard: No front yard shall be required when all of the frontage
on one side of the street between the intersecting streets, a public area of a
railroad right of way is located in an M-2 manufacturing district. Where the
frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is
located partially in some other use district, the front yard requirements of
the other use district shall apply to the M-2 district.
   (B)   Side Yards: The same regulations shall apply as required in the M-
1 manufacturing district.
   (C)   Rear Yards: The same regulations shall apply as required in the M-
1 manufacturing district. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-6-4: SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS AND MICROWAVE RELAY TOWERS:
   (A)   Ground mounted satellite earth stations and microwave relay towers may
be erected in industrial districts to the maximum building height applicable in
the underlying zoning districts, provided:
      1.   They are not located within the front yard.
      2.   The visual impact of the satellite earth stations and microwave
relay towers is reduced by landscaping or opaque fencing.
      3.   If the subject parcel abuts upon a residential district, all
antennas shall be placed a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line, and be
effectively screened by a solid fence, wall, or dense screening hedge to a
minimum height of six feet (6'). Such fence, wall or hedge shall be located on
or near the lot line abutting the residential district and shall otherwise
comply with the applicable zoning requirements governing its location.
      4.   The satellite earth station shall be painted a solid neutral color,
shall exhibit no alphabetical information and shall be located on a cement pad
not less than four feet by four feet (4' x 4') in length and width.
   (B)   No satellite earth station or microwave relay antenna may be located
on any roof except as follows:
      1.   Satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas shall not be
clearly visible from any parcel lying along an enjoining street that is zoned
R-1, R-2 or R-3.
      2.   Roof mounted satellite earth stations or microwave relay antennas
shall not exceed four feet (4') in diameter.
      3.   Roof mounted satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas
and their accompanying support structures shall be painted a solid neutral
color and shall not exhibit any advertising.
      4.   Satellite earth stations and microwave relay antennas which are
mounted on a roof surface shall require a building permit to ensure compliance
with the city's building code and to ensure the structural integrity of the
subject roof. (Ord. 384, 5-4-1992)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Continuance Of Use
9-7-2: Discontinuance Of Use
9-7-3: Change Of Use
9-7-4: Termination And Removal Of Nonconforming Uses
9-7-5: Repairs And Alterations
9-7-6: Damage And Destruction
9-7-7: Additions And Enlargements
9-7-8: Use District Changes
9-7-9: Exceptions
9-7-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, established prior
to the effective date hereof, or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to
the use regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to
be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (B)   Any legal nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date hereof or of amendments hereto, may be completed in accordance
with the approved plans; provided, construction is started within six (6)
months after the date of the permit and diligently prosecuted to completion.
Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building. (Ord.
233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
   (A)   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by any nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   (B)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part
thereof, has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months if the building was originally
designed and constructed for a nonresidential use, such use shall not, after
being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the use of the premises
thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
   (C)   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment.
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-3: CHANGE OF USE:
A nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, may be changed
to a use of the same or of a more restricted character but may not thereafter
be changed to any less restricted use. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-4: TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING USES:
   (A)   The period of time during which the following nonconforming uses of
buildings, structures or land may continue or remain, shall be limited to two
(2) years from the effective hereof, or of any amendment hereto, which causes
the use to be nonconforming. Every such nonconforming use shall be completely
removed from the premises at the expiration of the two (2) year period:
      1.   Any nonconforming building or structure having an assessed valuation
not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the effective date hereof.
      2.   All nonconforming billboards and outdoor advertising structures not
attached to a building lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof.
      3.   Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is
involved, or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to
such use, or where such use is maintained in connection with a nonconforming
building other than automobile wrecking yards and junkyards. This provision
shall not include public or private parking lots established prior to the
effective date hereof.
   (B)   No junk or automobile wrecking yard not within an M-2 general
manufacturing district shall be operated or maintained for more than twelve
(12) months after a zoning change to a use district within which such use is
not permitted, except that in an M-1 limited manufacturing district, the zoning
board of appeals may permit, for a specified time, the continued use of an area
containing an automobile wrecking yard or junkyard; provided, that a seven foot
(7') high solid wall or substantial sightly fence be constructed around such
area. (Ord. 246, 1-2-1979)
9-7-5: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   (A)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   (B)   No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law.
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in elimination of the
nonconforming use.
      3.   When a building containing residential nonconforming uses may be
altered in any way to improve livability, provided no structural alteration
shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of
the building. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-6: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or
destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at the time, the building or other structure may be rebuilt
or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district. In the event the damage or destruction is less than
fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the
extent of the damage shall be established by estimates made by the building
inspector. Any appeals from the decision of the building inspector may be taken
by the owner or agent as outlined in chapter 12 of this title and title 2,
chapter 5 of this code. The building may then be restored to its original
condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which
existed at the time of such partial destruction. In either event, restoration
or repair of the building or other structure may be started within a period of
one year and diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-7: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
   (A)   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use and is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use.
   (C)   No nonconforming building in any residential district shall be so
altered as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (D)   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed at the effective date hereof, or to displace any
conforming use in the same building or in the same parcel. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-8: USE DISTRICT CHANGES:
Whenever the boundaries of a use district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one use district to another use district of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming
use existing therein. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-7-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to
the use regulations of this title but is nonconforming only in the particular
manner hereinafter specified, building and use thereof shall be exempt from the
requirements of sections
9-7-4 and
9-7-5 of this chapter.
   (A)   In any R district, where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the
number of dwelling units it contains; provided no such building shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (B)   In any R-3 district where a use permitted in the B-1 district occupies
ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a corner lot.
   (C)   In any B or M district where the use is less distant from an R
district than that specified in the regulations for the district in which it is
located. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 8
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Purpose
9-8-2: Permitted Special Uses
9-8-3: Conditions Of Approval
9-8-4: Procedure
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The principal objective of this comprehensive zoning title is to provide for an
orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for the proper
location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of
the city. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is classified
as permitted in one or more of the various districts established by this title.
However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in
each district, there are certain additional uses which it may be necessary to
allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they provide the
public. These "special uses" require particular consideration as to their
proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the
planned development of the community. The conditions controlling the location
and operation of such "special uses" are established by the following
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-8-2: PERMITTED SPECIAL USES:
The city council of the city shall have authority to permit by special
ordinance, the following uses of land or structures, or both, subject to
conditions contained herein if it finds that the proposed location and
establishment of any such use will be desirable or necessary to the public
convenience or welfare and will be harmonious and compatible with other uses
adjacent to and in the vicinity of the selected site or sites:
Airport, land field, or land strip in any use district subject to the civil
aeronautics administration certifying that a new or reoriented runway will not
interfere with the flight pattern of any established airport, landing field or
landing strip.
Areas for the dumping or disposal of trash or garbage, in any use district;
provided, the sanitary landfill method is used.
Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium, and other similar places for
public events, in any B or M district.
Bus terminal, railroad passenger station, freight terminal or any other public
transportation terminal facilities in any use district.
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums, in any use district.
Clinic or medical center in any use district.
Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials, in any district.
Golf courses, public or private, in any use district.
Hospitals or sanitariums, public or private, in any use district other than an
M district.
Institutions for the cure of the insane or feeble minded, public or private, in
any use district other than an M district.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, in any
use district.
Nursery school or day nursery, in any R-3 or B-1 district.
Off street parking areas and garages, in any R-3 district; provided, there is a
need for this facility and that no appropriate site is available in nearby
business or manufacturing districts.
Penal or correctional institutions, in any use district.
Police station or fire station, in any use district.
Public buildings including art galleries, post offices, libraries, museums, or
similar structures, in any R-3 or B-2 district.
Public or private park or playground, in any use district.
Public or privately owned and operated fairgrounds, permanent carnivals,
"kiddie parks", or other similar amusement centers, in any B-2 or M district.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plants, water reservoirs or pumping
stations, heat or power plants, transformer stations, and other similar
facilities, in any use district other than the B-2 or M districts where such
facilities are permissive uses.
Radio and television transmitting or antenna towers (commercial) and other
electronic equipment requiring outdoor structures, and including antenna towers
used for the sending of private messages, but not including private receiving
aerials or antennas, in a B or M district.
Railroad right of way, in any use district.
Rest homes and nursing homes in any R-3 or B district; provided, that when
located in a business district, such uses shall be established above the first
floor when located in a building constructed for a business use. A building
originally constructed for residential use may be used in whole or in part.
Schools; elementary, high and college, public or private, in any R district,
but not including trade or commercial schools operated for profit.
Stable, livery, in any B-2 or M district.
Storage buildings incidental to a grain storage facility in a district zoned
"manufacturing". As a condition of approving any such special use, the city may
require the applicant to complete any and all public works improvements on said
property as the city council deems necessary for the public safety and welfare.
Telephone exchange, antenna towers, and other outdoor equipment essential to
the operation of the exchange in any R-3 district in addition to the B and M
districts where such facilities are permissive uses.
Trailer camps (house trailers or mobile homes) or trailer parks, in any R-3, B-
2 or M district. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978; amd. Ord. 344, 9-15-1987)
9-8-3: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The plan commission may recommend, and the city council may impose, such
restrictions upon the height, bulk and area of lot coverage of any structure so
approved for special use as may be reasonable under the particular
circumstances; provided, that such restrictions and stipulations shall not be
more restrictive than the requirements established for the district in which
such structure is proposed to be located, or as may be required in any other
municipal code. Off street parking facilities as well as off street loading and
unloading spaces may also be stipulated in the order permitting the special
use. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-8-4: PROCEDURE:
The procedure to be followed in considering applications for special uses shall
be as follows:
   (A)   Application: An application verified by the owner or authorized agent
of the owner of the property involved shall be filed with the city clerk for
the attention of the plan commission, upon a form prescribed therefor, which
shall contain or be accompanied by all required information.
   (B)   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of such verified application the city
clerk shall notify the chairman of the plan commission, or in his absence, the
vice chairman, who shall give notice of a public hearing in the same manner as
provided for hearings on the reclassification of property, as contained in
chapter 11 of this title and title 2, chapter 5 of this code. A record of
pertinent information presented at the public hearing shall be made and
maintained by the plan commission as part of the permanent record relative to
the application.
   (C)   Determination: The plan commission shall then make its findings and
recommendations to the city council within thirty (30) days following the date
of public hearing on each application. The city council may then authorize a
special use as defined herein by specific ordinance; provided, the evidence
that is presented is such as to establish beyond a reasonable doubt:
      1.   The proposed use at the particular location requested is necessary
or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of
public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the
neighborhood or community;
      2.   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property values or
improvement in the vicinity; and
      3.   The proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in this title for such use, and with the stipulations and conditions
made a part of the authorization granted by the city council. (Ord. 233, 7-3-
1978)
CHAPTER 9
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Scope Of Regulations
9-9-2: R District
9-9-3: B District
9-9-4: M District
9-9-5: Conditions For All Districts
9-9-6: Building Permits, Fees Required
9-9-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The area bordered by River Street, Second Street, Pine Street, and
Walnut Street shall be defined by the term, "downtown historical district".
   (B)   Any publicly displayed sign, symbol, or notice on premises to
advertise the business therein transacted, or name of person conducting said
business on premises, or directing to some other locale, requires a building
permit, and shall be regulated, when appropriate, by a design review committee.
(Ord. 816, 6-20-2016)
9-9-2: R DISTRICT:
In an R district, the following signs shall be permitted:
   (A)   For each dwelling unit, one unlighted nameplate not exceeding one
square foot in area, indicating the name of occupant.
   (B)   For a structure other than a dwelling unit, one identification sign
not exceeding ten (10) square feet, except a church bulletin board which shall
not exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
   (C)   For purpose of orientation, directional signs when established by the
city. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-9-3: B DISTRICT:
In a B district, the following signs shall be permitted:
   (A)   Signs relating to the name and use of buildings or premises upon which
they are placed shall not state or otherwise indicate any product by a trade
name unless such product or trade name company purchased and/or provided the
sign advertising the local business. Outdoor billboards or signs advertising
products or matters not related to the occupancy of the premises shall not be
permitted. (Ord. 317, 11-18-1985)
   (B)   No sign shall be attached to a building or buildings, unless it is
attached in a manner as provided hereafter, and conforms to the requirements
hereinafter set forth. Such attachments shall either take the form of:
      1.   If the sign is proposed to be erected parallel to the vertical wall
surface, then it shall not project more than one foot (1') from the wall upon
which it is attached, nor project beyond the end or top of the wall to which it
is attached, nor have an area of more than sixty four (64) square feet. This
may include signs attached to parapet walls.
      2.   Signs may be attached to a building and hung perpendicular therefrom
by supports, but may not have an area of more than sixteen (16) square feet and
such perpendicular sign shall be hung so that the sign commences no more than
one foot (1') from the side of the building, nor extend closer than one foot
(1') to the beginning of the street, nor shall the bottom line of such sign be
closer than eight feet (8') above the ground.
      3.   No perpendicular signs in the downtown historical district shall
have internal illumination.
      4.   Historically inappropriate change letter boards and digital sign
boards (jumbotron, LED chase letters, flashing signs) are not permissible in
the downtown historical district.
      5.   Window signs shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of total window
area.
         (b)   Window signs are not part of the permitted exterior wall sign
area.
         (c)   Illuminated window signs (open for business sign) shall not
exceed six (6) square feet per sign.
      6.   Signs on awnings or canopies are permitted, subject to issuance of a
building permit, and the following standards:
         (a)   Awning and canopy sign area shall count toward permitted wall
sign area for the business.
         (b)   Signs shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the width and
height of the awning or canopy.
         (c)   Letters on a valance shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of
the width and height of the valance.
         (d)   A translucent canopy or awning shall not be permitted. (Ord.
816, 6-20-2016)
   (C)   No sign shall be permitted on any wall, fence or standard facing the
side of any adjoining lot in any residential district.
   (D)   Signs attached to or hung from a marquee or canopy shall be completely
within the borderline of the outer edge of the marquee or canopy and shall in
no instance be lower than eight feet (8') above the ground or surface over
which the marquee or canopy is constructed.
   (E)   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices otherwise permitted by this
code erected upon standards or separate supports shall be placed so that the
support is entirely within the property line of the premises upon which it is
located; provided, however, that the sign itself shall be allowed to extend
over into the parkway or sidewalk area so long as the bottom of the sign is
more than twelve feet (12') above the ground and no part of the sign or
standard shall have a total height greater than thirty feet (30') above the
level of the street upon which the sign faces nor shall the surface of any sign
exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet.
   (F)   No illuminated sign shall be of the flashing or intermittent type.
   (G)   Traffic or directional signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use of parking facilities accessory to the main use of the
premises may be maintained; provided they are located within the property lines
of the subject lot.
   (H)   Signs, clocks or other advertising devices may be placed upon
standards or separate supports with said standards or separate supports to be
entirely within the parkway if the following criteria are met:
      1.   The parkway upon which the standard is placed is contiguous to the
premises advertised, promoted or displayed on the sign.
      2.   The support and sign shall conform in all respect with the building
code 1  of the city regarding materials used and supports provided.
      3.   The sign or support does not impair the vision of drivers of motor
vehicles traveling in either direction.
      4.   No part of the sign shall have a total height greater than twenty
feet (20') above the level of the street nor lower than twelve feet (12') above
the level of any street nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed one
hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   (I)   In the event that any business ceases to use the premises upon which a
sign is located and such business becomes abandoned or otherwise stops and such
abandonment continues for ninety (90) days or more, then upon the expiration of
the ninety (90) day period, the sign shall be removed at the sole cost of the
owner or occupant, as the case may be, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed or required to necessitate the removal of any such sign upon any
business changing ownership so long as the business continues.
   (J)   In the event that any such sign so erected becomes a hazard to
pedestrians or motor vehicle traffic from any cause and in the opinion of the
building inspector is in danger of falling or is otherwise unsafe, the building
inspector shall have the right to notify the owner or occupant of the property
by registered letter specifying the unsafe condition of the sign and requiring
its restoration to a safe condition within seven (7) days from the date
thereof. In the event that any such sign is not rendered safe, the building
inspector shall have the right to remove such sign or to render such sign
otherwise safe and any costs incurred by the city in the removing of such sign
or the rendering of such sign safe shall become the obligation of the property
owner and the city may sue to recover the obligation or shall be entitled to
place a lien upon the owner's property. (Ord. 317, 11-18-1985)
   (K)   No vinyl sign shall be permitted on any exterior wall in the downtown
historical district, as defined by the national registry.
   (L)   Temporary signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Banners and advertising flags are permitted once during the first
year of operation of a use for a period not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive
calendar days and commencing not earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the
first day of operation of the use. Such banners and flags shall be located on
the exterior building wall of the tenant space to which they are appurtenant
and shall not exceed a total area of:
         (a)   Twenty four (24) square feet for occupancies up to five thousand
(5,000) square feet;
         (b)   Thirty two (32) square feet for occupancies greater than five
thousand (5,000) square feet up to twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet;
or
         (c)   Sixty four (64) square feet for occupancies greater than twenty
five thousand (25,000) square feet.
   (M)   Banners and advertising flags are permitted once per calendar quarter
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. Banners and
advertising flags shall be displayed no earlier than fourteen (14) days before
the event, and shall be removed no later than three (3) days after the event
ends. Such banners and flags may be mounted on freestanding signs or posts
adjacent to streets, no closer than five feet (5') from the right of way, and
shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. Banners and advertising flags shall
not exceed a total area of twenty (20) square feet. (Ord. 816, 6-20-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
9-9-4: M DISTRICT:
In an M district, the following signs shall be permitted:
   (A)   Signs identifying the occupant of a building or buildings.
   (B)   Billboards when located not less than one hundred feet (100') from any
adjoining lot in a residential district.
   (C)   Directional signs permitted in an R district. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-9-5: CONDITIONS FOR ALL DISTRICTS:
The following conditions shall be observed in all of the use districts:
   (A)   No signs shall be placed in a required front yard, except for the
purpose of selling or renting the premises, such signs shall not exceed twenty
(20) square feet.
   (B)   For the purpose of selling or renting any lot or group of lots, or for
any existing or proposed building or group of buildings (structures or group of
structures), a billboard may be erected on approval of location, size and
necessity, by the zoning board of appeals 1  for a period of six (6) months
upon a showing of necessity by the proprietor. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
9-9-6: BUILDING PERMITS, FEES REQUIRED:
   (A)   Permit Required: No sign shall be erected until such time as a
building permit has been issued for the erection of said sign by the Momence
building inspector. The Momence building inspector shall prepare and require
the submission of information requesting said permit so as to be able to
determine that the proposed sign complies with the terms, conditions and
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Fees: The fee which shall accompany the application for said building
permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the sign proposed is a sign
defined in the terms of subsection
9-9-3(B)1 through (B)6, (C), (D) or (E) of this chapter. In the event that such
sign proposed is defined within the provisions of subsection
9-9-3(H) of this chapter, the building permit fee accompanying the application
for issuance thereof shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee as herein
described shall be the sole and exclusive fee required or paid to the city and
any other general building permit fee is hereby excused. (Ord. 317, 11-18-1985)
   (C)   No Fees: No fee shall accompany the application for said building
permit for a temporary sign defined in the terms of subsections
9-9-3(L) and (M) of this chapter. (Ord. 816, 6-20-2016)
CHAPTER 10
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-10-1: Purpose
9-10-2: General Parking And Loading Provisions
9-10-3: Additional Regulations
9-10-3-1: Parking Facilities
9-10-3-2: Design Regulations For Loading Berths
9-10-4: Location Of Parking Areas
9-10-5: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
9-10-6: Off Street Loading And Unloading Facilities
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public, by establishing
minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and unloading of
motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put. (Ord. 233,
7-3-1978)
9-10-2: GENERAL PARKING AND LOADING PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Procedure: An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged
building, structure or use shall include therewith a plat plan, drawn to scale
and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided
in compliance with the requirements of this title.
   (B)   Extent Of Control: The off street parking and loading requirements of
this chapter shall apply as follows:
      1.   All buildings and structures erected or enlarged and land uses
initiated after the effective date hereof shall provide accessory off street
parking or loading facilities as required hereinafter for the use thereof,
except that a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date hereof shall not be required to furnish parking or
loading facilities if construction is begun thereon within six (6) months of
the effective date of the building permit and diligently prosecuted to
completion.
      2.   When a building or structure erected or enlarged prior to or after
the effective date hereof shall undergo a decrease in number of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities,
and further, when said decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total
parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this chapter
to the entire building or structure as modified.
      3.   When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in number of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities,
and further, when said increase would result in a requirement for additional
total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this
chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities may be increased accordingly;
provided, that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so increased so
that the facilities would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading
requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to
the entire building or structure as modified.
   (C)   Existing Parking And Loading Spaces: Accessory off street parking and
loading spaces in existence on the effective date hereof may not be reduced in
number unless already exceeding the requirements of this chapter for equivalent
new construction; in which event, said spaces shall not be reduced below the
number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
   (D)   Permissive Parking And Loading Spaces: Nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the establishment of off street automobile parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; except that off street parking
areas accessory to existing multiple-family structures cannot be located off
the premises containing the principal use, unless on a lot adjacent thereto,
without special authorization by the city council.
   (E)   Damage Or Destruction: Any building, structure or use which is in
existence and is a conforming use on the effective date hereof and which
subsequently shall be damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause may be reconstructed, reestablished or repaired with or without off
street parking or loading facilities; except, that parking or loading
facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, it shall not
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of
those required by this chapter for equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Floor Area: The term "floor area" as employed in this chapter in the
case of office, merchandising or service types of use shall mean the gross
floor area of a building or structure used or intended to be used for service
to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or tenants, including
areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of
merchandise. "Floor area" for the purposes of this chapter shall not include
any area used for:
      1.   Storage accessory to the principal use of a building;
      2.   Incidental repairs;
      3.   Processing or packaging of merchandise;
      4.   Show windows, or offices incidental to the management or maintenance
of a store or building;
      5.   Restrooms;
      6.   Utilities; or
      7.   Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-10-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
9-10-3-1: PARKING FACILITIES:
   (A)   Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles or commercial vehicles weighing less than twenty thousand
(20,000) pounds owned or operated by occupants of the dwelling structures to
which such facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no
circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential
structures be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or trailers or for
the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants,
visitors or customers of business or manufacturing establishments, except as
permitted in subsection (E) of this section. No diesel commercial vehicle
weighing less than twenty thousand (20,000) pounds shall be parked and left
running for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes. (Ord. 448, 10-21-1996)
   (B)   Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures or uses or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively
in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each
constituent use would be permitted; provided, that the total number of spaces
so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements
for each use.
   (C)   Control Of Off Site Facilities: When required accessory off street
parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the
principal use served is located, they shall be in the same possession, either
by deed or long term lease, as the property occupied by such principal use, and
the owner shall be bound by covenants filed of record in the office of the
recorder of deeds or the registrar of titles of Kankakee County requiring the
owner and his heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking
spaces during the existence of said principal use.
   (D)   Permitted Districts For Accessory Parking: Accessory parking
facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the principal
use served in accordance with section
9-10-5 of this chapter may be located in any zoning district except as follows:
      1.   No parking facilities accessory to a multiple-family use shall be
located in an R-1 or R-2 district.
      2.   No parking facilities accessory to a business or manufacturing use
shall be located in a residential district, except when authorized by the city
council as prescribed hereinafter.
      3.   No parking facilities accessory to a manufacturing use shall be
permitted in a B-1 district.
   (E)   Nonresidential Parking In Residential Districts: Accessory off street
parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be permitted in
an R-3 district when authorized by the city council, subject to the following
requirements in addition to all other relevant requirements of this chapter:
      1.   The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection
with, one or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining districts,
or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office
buildings or institutions.
      2.   Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
      3.   No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted
on said parking lot.
      4.   No sign of any kind other than signs designating entrances, exits,
and conditions of use shall be maintained on said parking lot.
      5.   Each entrance to and exit from said parking lot shall be at least
twenty feet (20') distant from any adjacent property located in any residential
district; except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is provided from
public alley or public way separating the residential areas from the proposed
parking lot.
      6.   In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed by the
city council for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the vicinity
of the proposed parking lot.
   (F)   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Parking Space Regulations: A required off street parking space shall
be an area of not less than one hundred sixty two (162) square feet nor less
than eight and one-half feet wide by nineteen feet long (81/2' x 19'),
exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas,
accessible from streets or alleys or from private driveways or aisles leading
to streets or alleys and to be used for the storage or parking of passenger
automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one- half (11/2) ton capacity
where permitted under this title. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall
not be less than twelve feet (12') in width when serving automobiles parked at
a forty five degree (45°) angle in one direction, nor less than twenty feet
(20') in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicular to the aisles and
accommodating two-way traffic.
      2.   Measurement Of Space: When determination of the number of required
off street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and fractions
over one-half (1/2) shall be interpreted as one parking space.
      3.   Open And Enclosed Spaces: Parking areas may be open or enclosed
except that when parking facilities accessory to a multiple dwelling are
located in an R, B-1 or B-2 district elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with
the principal use served, such parking facilities shall be open to the sky.
      4.   Access: Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means
of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least
interfere with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any district
shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in width.
      5.   Signs: No signs shall be displayed in any parking area within any
residential district, except such as may be necessary for the orderly use of
the parking facilities.
      6.   Required Setbacks: No parking space or portion thereof established
on the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a required front
yard. No parking space or portion thereof established on a zoning lot without a
building shall be located closer to any street line than the established
building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard setback
required for the district in which the parking lot is located.
Further, any wall, fence or hedge developed around any parking area shall be
subject to the front yard setback requirements of this title in the same manner
as a building or structure.
      7.   Surfacing: All open off street parking areas, except those accessory
to single-family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted macadam base,
not less than four inches (4") thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete or
constructed to some comparable specification.
      8.   Screening And Landscaping: All open off street parking areas for six
(6) or more cars shall be effectively screened by a wall, a solid fence or a
densely planted compact hedge along any side which adjoins or is directly
across a street or alley from a property in a residential district or an
institutional property. Such wall, fence or hedge shall be at least four feet
(4'), but not more than seven feet (7') in height and shall be maintained in
good condition.
      9.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties.
      10.   Special Use Public Parking Areas: Any automobile parking area
developed for transient trade and not accessory to specific principal uses or
groups of uses for which parking is required by this title, shall be treated as
a special use as defined in section
9-8-1 of this title and as allowed in accordance with the provisions of section
9-8-3 of this title by the city council. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-10-3-2: DESIGN REGULATIONS FOR LOADING BERTHS:
   (A)   Description: An off street loading berth shall be a hard surfaced area
of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or a public way, used
principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors
and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets
and alleys. A required loading space shall not be less than ten feet (10') in
width, forty five feet (45') in length and fourteen feet (14') in height,
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as otherwise
specifically dimensioned hereafter.
   (B)   Location: No permitted or required loading berth shall be closer than
fifty feet (50') to any property in a residential district unless completely
enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any
combination thereof not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or
required loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the
nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. Loading berths open to
the sky may be located in any required yards.
   (C)   Measurement Of Berth: When determination of the number of required off
street loading berths results in a requirement of a fractional berth, any
fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and fractions
over one-half (1/2) shall be interpreted as one loading berth.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some comparable
construction material. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-10-4: LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS:
Off street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter
specified. Where a distance is specified, such a distance shall be walking
distance measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest
entrance of the building that said parking area is required to serve.
   (A)   For one- and two-family dwellings: On the same lot with the building
they are required to serve.
   (B)   For three- and four-family dwellings not over two (2) stories in
height: On the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to
serve. For the purpose of this requirement a group of such uses constructed and
maintained under single ownership or management shall be assumed to be in a
single lot or parcel of land.
   (C)   For apartment houses containing four (4) or more dwelling units on the
same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, or on a
separate lot or parcel of land not more than three hundred feet (300') from the
nearest entrance to the principal building being serviced; provided the lot or
parcel of land selected for the parking facilities is located in an apartment
district or a less restricted district.
   (D)   For rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, hospitals, sanitariums,
orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, dormitories, sorority and
fraternity houses, and for the similar uses, the off street parking facilities
required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building
or buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the zoning lot upon
which is located the building or buildings they are intended to serve.
   (E)   For uses other than those specified above, off street parking
facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal
building being served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over one
thousand feet (1,000') from the entrance of the principal building, measured
from the nearest point of the parking area; provided, the separate lot or
parcel of land intended for the parking facilities is located in the same
district as the principal permitted use or in a less restricted district. (Ord.
233, 7-3-1978)
9-10-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
                                        (Special uses: Such parking space as
Airports, railroad passenger stations,  the city council, subject to the
bus depots or other passenger terminal  recommendations of the plan commission,
facilities                              shall deem to be adequate for
                                        employees, passengers, spectators,
                                        visitors and others.)
Banks, business or professional offices 1 parking space for each 400 square
or public administration buildings      feet of floor area.
                                        2 parking spaces for each alley plus
                                        such additional spaces as may be
Bowling alleys                          determined by the building inspector
                                        for affiliated uses such as bars,
                                        restaurants and the like.
Church, Sunday school, college and      1 parking space for each 12 seats
university auditoriums                  provided in said buildings or
                                        structures.
Convention halls, dance halls, skating  1 parking space for each 100 square
rinks, assembly halls, exhibition halls feet of floor area used for the
or other places of assembly             assembly.
Establishments handling the sale and
consumption on the premises of
alcoholic                               1 parking space for each 300 square
beverages, food or refreshments having  feet of floor area over 1,500 square
more than 1,500 square feet of floor    feet.
area
under 1 roof devoted to such use or
uses
Furniture and appliance stores, motor
vehicle sales, wholesale stores, house-
hold equipment or furniture repair      1 parking space for each 600 square
shops,                                  feet of floor area over and above 2,000
or machinery sales, having more than    square feet.
2,000 square feet of floor area under
1 roof (individual stores or groups of
stores in 1 building)
                                        1 parking space for each 3 hospital
                                        beds, plus 1 parking space for each
Hospitals                               1,500 square feet gross floor area in
                                        residents' quarters, plus 1 additional
                                        space for each staff or visiting
                                        doctor.
                                        1 parking space for each 6 guests or
                                        sleeping rooms and suites, plus 1
                                        parking space for each 300 square feet
Hotels and clubs                        of floor area devoted to supplementary
                                        parking; generative activities such as
                                        bars, ballrooms, dining rooms,
                                        nightclub facilities and the like.
Manufacturing and industrial uses,
research and testing laboratories,
laundry and dry cleaning plants,        1 parking space for each 4 employees,
printing,                               based upon the maximum number of
binding, publishing and issuing of      persons to be employed at any work
news-                                   period during the day or night, plus
papers, periodicals, books, and other   such additional parking facilities as
reading matter, telephone exchanges,    shall be required for all vehicles used
warehouses and storage buildings,       in the conduct of the enterprise.
engraving shops, assembly of materials
and products, and other similar uses
Medical or dental clinics               3 parking spaces per doctor engaged at
                                        clinic.
                                        The parking facilities required shall
                                        be the sum of the requirements for the
                                        various individual uses, computed
                                        separately in accordance with this
Mixed uses                              chapter; parking facilities for 1 use
                                        shall not be considered as providing
                                        the required parking facilities for any
                                        other use in the same building or on
                                        the same lot.
                                        5 parking spaces for each room used as
                                        a chapel or parlor, plus 1 space for
Mortuaries or funeral parlors           each funeral vehicle maintained on the
                                        premises, plus 1 space for each family
                                        residing on the premises.
One- and two-family dwellings           1 parking space for each family
                                        dwelling unit.
Private clubs or lodges (without        Parking spaces equal in number to 25
sleeping rooms)                         percent of the total membership.
Retail stores and service shops (indi-
vidual or in groups) under 1 roof       1 parking space for each 300 square
having                                  feet of retail floor area over and
a total floor area of 2,000 square feet above 2,000 square feet.
devoted to retail sales
Sanitariums, convalescent homes,        1 space for each 4 patient beds, plus 1
nursing homes or homes for the aged     additional space for each staff or
                                        visiting doctor.
Stadiums, sports arenas, auditoriums
and gymnasiums (other than incidental   1 parking space for each 8 seats.
to a school)
                                        Indoor: 1 parking space for each 10
                                        seats up to 500, plus 1 parking space
Theaters                                for each 5 seats above 500.
                                         
                                        Outdoor: Reservoir space equal to 10
                                        percent of the capacity.
3 or more family dwellings              11/2 parking spaces for each family
                                        dwelling unit.
                                        Parking space for each guest or
Tourist homes, cabins or motels         sleeping room or suite, plus 1
                                        additional space for the owner or
                                        manager on the premises.
 
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-10-6: OFF STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES:
In all districts where property uses include the loading and unloading of
materials or merchandise from vehicles, off street loading and unloading
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
 
Banks, business or professional offices
or
public administration buildings         1 off street loading and unloading
containing                              space.
20,000 square feet or more of gross
floor
space
Buildings containing bowling alleys,
taverns,
restaurants, or any retail shops and    1 off street loading and unloading
having                                  space.
10,000 or more square feet of gross
floor
area
Buildings containing manufacturing
uses,
research and testing laboratories,
laundry
and dry cleaning establishments,
printing,
binding, publishing and issuing of
news-
papers, periodicals, books and other    1 off street loading and unloading
reading matter, warehouse and storage   space, plus 1 additional such space for
facilities, engraving shops, assembly   each additional 60,000 square feet of
of                                      gross floor area in excess of 40,000
materials and products, processing and  square feet.
distribution of materials and products,
and
other similar uses, having more than
8,000
square feet of gross floor area,
exclusive
of basement area, and less than 40,000
square feet of gross floor area
Hospitals or sanitariums containing     1 off street loading and unloading
40,000                                  space, plus 1 additional such space for
to 100,000 square feet of gross floor   each additional 100,000 square feet of
area                                    gross floor area or fraction thereof in
                                        excess of 100,000 square feet.
 
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-11-1: Enforcing Officer
9-11-2: Building Use Permits; Certificates Of Compliance, Occupancy
9-11-3: Appeals
9-11-4: Penalty For Violation
9-11-1: ENFORCING OFFICER:
   (A)   Building Inspector: The administrator of this zoning title for the
city is designated as the building inspector. The building inspector shall be
responsible for enforcing this zoning title. In the event the building
inspector is unable or unwilling to perform his duties, an alternate inspector
shall be chosen by the mayor to carry on the duties of building inspector.
   (B)   Salary: The building inspector shall be paid at the rate of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per annum and in addition thereto shall receive
forty percent (40%) of all building permit fees. (Ord. 430, 7-17-1995)
   (C)   Building Permit Fee: (Rep. by Ord. 659, 7-20-2009)
   (D)   Coinspector: In the event the building inspector is required to retain
the services of a coinspector, the total cost for the coinspector shall be
borne by the permit applicant in addition to the building inspector's fees;
provided, however, the permit applicant shall be given an estimate for charges
for the coinspector prior to the time the permit is issued. (Ord. 430, 7-17-
1995)
9-11-2: BUILDING USE PERMITS; CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE, OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   Building Permit: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected
or structurally altered until a building permit shall be issued by the building
inspector stating that the building or structure and use of land comply with
the regulations of this title and all building and health laws and regulations
of the city 1 .
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be
built upon, the size of the building or structure to be erected or structurally
altered, its location on the lot or lots and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record
of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building
inspector.
Architectural plans are to be provided for all new commercial construction and
new residential buildings and condominiums. Such plans are subject to review by
the planning commission. Remodeling not involving life safety or structural
alterations on existing residential buildings are exempt from the need to
provide architectural plans.
   (B)   Certificate Of Compliance: No building or structure hereafter erected
or structurally altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the building inspector. The certificate of
compliance shall be issued only after the building inspector makes a finding
that the building or a structure has been erected or structurally altered in
conformance with the provisions of this title and other health and building
laws and in accordance with a building permit.
Certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application
for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
erection and alteration of such building shall have been satisfactorily
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the building inspector and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person
having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
   (C)   Certificate For Continued Occupancy Of Nonconforming Uses:
Certificates for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing at the
effective date hereof shall be issued by the building inspector and the
certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming one and does not
conform with the provisions of this title. The building inspector shall notify
the owners of the property being used as a nonconforming use and shall furnish
said owner with a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use.
   (D)   Use Permit: No change shall be made in the use of a building or part
thereof now or hereafter erected or structurally altered, or in the use of land
now or hereafter occupied, without a use permit having first been issued by the
building inspector. No such use permit shall be issued to make such change
unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this title and amendments
hereto, hereafter duly enacted 2 .
   (E)   Continuance Of Existing Uses: Nothing in this title shall prevent the
continuance of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building or
zoning lot, except as may be necessary for the safety of life and property and
except as provided in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 669, 1-19-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See titles 4 and 6 respectively of this code.
2 1. See chapter 12 of this title.
9-11-3: APPEALS:
   (A)   Appeal Procedure: Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the building
inspector charged with the enforcement of this title or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the city concerning the interpretation of this
title may take an appeal to the zoning board of appeals 1 .
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
zoning board of appeals by general rules adopted by it, and shall be taken by
filing with the city clerk and with the zoning board of appeals a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with such plats and exhibits as
are reasonably necessary. Such appeal shall be taken upon forms provided by the
zoning board of appeals. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the board
all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was
taken.
   (B)   Stay Of Proceedings: The appeal shall stay all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector
certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in
his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property; in which case, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by court of record on application,
with notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and all due causes
shown.
   (C)   Hearing: The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and
place for the hearing of appeals and shall give notice thereof to the persons
appealing and to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. It shall hear and
decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, parties of interest
may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
   (D)   Administrative Decision: All final administrative decisions of the
board under this chapter shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the
provisions of the "administrative review act 2 " of the state of Illinois,
approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term "administrative decision" is defined
as in section 1 of the "administrative review act". (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
2 2. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-11-4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 12
ZONING AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Petition For Amendment
9-12-2: Review Of Petition
9-12-3: Notice Of Public Hearings
9-12-4: Written Protest
9-12-5: Final Decision
9-12-1: PETITION FOR AMENDMENT:
The city council, the plan commission, other governmental bodies and any
private petitioner may apply for an amendment in the text of this title, and in
the zoning map made a part hereof by reference. Any petition for an amendment
by a private party shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00), which fee shall be deposited with the city treasurer within fifteen
(15) days after the receipt thereof and no part shall be returnable to the
petitioner. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-12-2: REVIEW OF PETITION:
The regulations imposed and the zoning districts erected under this title may
be amended by ordinance, but no such amendment shall be made by the city
council without public notice and without a public hearing before the plan
commission of the city. The plan commission shall hold the public hearing and
forward its recommendations to the city council within forty five (45) days of
the date the petition was submitted to the plan commission, unless it is
withdrawn by the petitioner. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-12-3: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
The plan commission of the city shall cause notice of public hearing of
petitioner's application to be given in the following manner:
   (A)   By publishing notice of the time and place of such hearing in a paper
of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing;
   (B)   By causing said notice to contain the particular location for which
the amendment is requested, as well as a brief statement describing the
proposed amendment; and
   (C)   By notifying such property owners, groups or organizations as it deems
desirable of the proposal. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-12-4: WRITTEN PROTEST:
In the event of written protest against the proposed amendment signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across the alley or rear line therefrom, or by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage
proposed to be altered as to such regulations or zoning district, filed with
the city clerk, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council of the city.
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-12-5: FINAL DECISION:
The city council, without further public hearing, may adopt or deny the report
of the plan commission for any proposed amendment, or may refer the petition
back to the plan commission for further consideration. Any proposed amendment
which fails to receive the approval of a majority of the plan commission
members, and is so reported, shall not be passed by the city council except by
the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the elected members of the
city council. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 13
TRAILER COACH PARKS
SECTION:
9-13-1: Definitions
9-13-2: Use Prohibited
9-13-3: Exceptions
9-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
herein:
TRAILER COACH: Any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed so as to
permit its being used as a conveyance on a public street and so as to permit
the occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH PARK: An area of land on which two (2) or more occupied trailer
coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, together with any
building structure or enclosure used as part of the equipment of such park.
(Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-13-2: USE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate any trailer coach park
in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other
transporting device from any trailer coach or otherwise to affix said trailer
coach permanently to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of such trailer
coach. It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence purposes
any trailer coach which has been rendered immobile by the removal of wheels, or
placing the same on a foundation. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
9-13-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the storage of any
trailer coach for any length of time not exceeding thirty (30) days when said
trailer coach is not used for living or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 233, 7-3-1978)
CHAPTER 14
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
9-14-1: Purpose
9-14-2: Definitions
9-14-3: Flood Insurance Study Adopted
9-14-4: Permit Required
9-14-5: Application For Permit
9-14-6: Base Flood Elevation
9-14-7: New Construction And Improvement Standards
9-14-8: Mobile Home Standards
9-14-9: Utility Standards
9-14-10: Subdivision, Development Standards
9-14-11: Floodway Restrictions
9-14-12: Watercourse Standards
9-14-13: Reports And Records
9-14-14: Variances
9-14-15: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-14-16: Penalty For Violation
9-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to avoid the hazards to persons and damage to
property resulting from flooding and to comply with the rules and regulations
of the national flood insurance program as promulgated by the United States
department of housing and urban development, federal insurance administration
as provided in the rules and regulations of the federal register, vol. 41, no.
207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, as amended, and which are hereby adopted by
reference and filed in the office of the clerk. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest
of the base flood.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, construction of or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures, the placement of mobile homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters, or
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For the purpose of this
chapter it does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MUNICIPALITY: City of Momence, having jurisdiction under this chapter.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a mobile home and a prefabricated
building.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started, or if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include either: a) any project
for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure or site documented
as deserving preservation by the Illinois department of conservation or listed
on the National Register of Historic Places. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-3: FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY ADOPTED:
The flood insurance study and amendments thereto, of the municipality, prepared
by Carl C. Crane, Inc., and published by the United States department of
housing and urban development, federal insurance administration, is hereby
adopted for the purpose of this chapter and filed in the office of the clerk.
The flood insurance study includes the flood boundary and floodway map which
delineates A zones as areas that are susceptible to the base flood, and
delineates the floodway, which is the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas required to store and convey the floodwater of the
base flood with no significant increase in the height of the base flood. The
flood insurance study data shall take precedence over other base flood
elevation data for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence any construction, substantial improvement, subdivision
of land, placement of mobile homes or other substantial development in areas
located in an A zone without first obtaining a permit from the building
inspector. No permit shall be required for normal agricultural pursuits such as
the tilling of the soil, plowing, or cultivating, nor for such similar
landscaping activities which will, when taken as a whole, not increase the base
flood elevation. The building inspector shall not issue such permit for any
construction, substantial improvement, or other substantial development that
does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or that has been denied a
permit required by the federal or state law including section 404 of the
federal water pollution control act, 1972, 33 USC 1334. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   Within areas designated as A zones each application for development
shall be accompanied by elevations, in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest habitable floor measured at the top of the floor, including basement,
and in the case of floodproofed structures, the elevation to which it will be
floodproofed.
   (B)   The building inspector shall require certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect that floodproofing methods are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood.
   (C)   The application shall also contain information or certification as
reasonably may be required by the building inspector in order to determine
eligibility for permits or to enforce the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   The building inspector shall review applications for permit and
determine before issuing a permit that the development activity would be
reasonably safe from flood damage. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-6: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
   (A)   The base flood elevation at any particular location shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profile in the flood insurance study.
   (B)   The municipality shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize base
flood elevation data available from federal, state or other sources until such
time as such data has been received from the federal insurance administration.
Base flood data received from the federal insurance administration shall take
precedence over data from other sources. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-7: NEW CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   (A)   For residential structures the lowest floor, including basement, shall
be elevated to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, measured at the
top of the floor.
   (B)   For nonresidential structures the lowest floor, including basement,
shall be elevated or floodproofed to one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation, measured at the top of the floor.
   (C)   New construction and improvements shall be designed or modified and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
   (D)   New construction and improvements shall be constructed with materials
and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (E)   New construction and improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage to other properties.
   (F)   New construction and improvements shall have all structural components
below the base flood elevation designed to be watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and such structural
components shall be designed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-8: MOBILE HOME STANDARDS:
   (A)   All mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions located in an A
zone shall file evacuation plans indicating vehicular access and escape routes,
including mobile home hauler routes, with the appropriate disaster preparedness
authorities.
   (B)   All mobile homes to be placed on a site located in an A zone shall:
      1.   Have the lowest floor elevated one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation, measured at the top of the floor.
      2.   In the instance of elevation on pilings, have all piling foundations
placed in stable soil no more than ten feet (10') apart, and reinforcement
shall be provided for piers more than six feet (6') aboveground.
      3.   Have lots large enough to permit steps to the mobile home, and have
adequate surface drainage on all sides of the structure.
      4.   Be placed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure due to flooding.
      5.   Be anchored according to the following specifications:
         (a)   Over the top ties shall be provided at each of the four (4)
corners of the mobile home, with two (2) additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, and mobile homes less than fifty feet (50') long shall
require one additional tie per side;
         (b)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home
with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes
less than fifty feet (50') long shall require four (4) additional ties per
side;
         (c)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and
         (d)   Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored.
   (C)   Mobile homes excluded by other city regulations shall not be allowed
as a result of adoption of the provisions of this chapter 1 . (Ord. 198, 10-3-
1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 13 of this title.
9-14-9: UTILITY STANDARDS:
All new construction and substantial improvements to utilities located in an A
zone shall provide that:
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
   (B)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into the floodwaters.
   (C)   All new and replacement on site waste disposal systems shall be
located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
The following design standards should be applied:
      1.   There should be no pipe or opening to the ground surface;
      2.   Holding tanks should be required for those locations that will be
used or occupied during a flood. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-10: SUBDIVISION, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All subdivisions and other developments located in an A zone shall provide
that:
   (A)   All subdivision and other development proposals shall be designed to
minimize flood damage to the proposed subdivision or development site as well
as to other properties.
   (B)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems shall be located, elevated and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
   (C)   Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (D)   For any proposed subdivision or new development requiring a survey and
a plat thereof, as specified in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, the applicant
shall show the following:
      1.   Base flood elevation data at some point on each lot or platted
parcel; provided, that if the base flood elevation data is not available the
applicant shall compute and provide this information for each lot or platted
parcel.
      2.   The applicant shall show the base flood area on the plat.
   (E)   New mobile home parks and subdivisions, expansions to existing mobile
home parks and subdivisions and existing mobile home parks and subdivisions
where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and
pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has
commenced, shall:
      1.   Have stands or lots elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that
the lowest floor of the mobile home will be one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation;
      2.   Have adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler provided; and
      3.   In the instance of elevation on pilings, have:
         (a)   Lots large enough to permit steps;
         (b)   Piling foundations placed in a stable soil no more than ten feet
(10') apart; and
         (c)   Reinforcement provided for pilings more than six feet (6') above
the ground level. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-11: FLOODWAY RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   All new construction, substantial improvement, subdivision of land,
placement of mobile homes except in an existing mobile home park, construction
of utilities, or other development that would result in any increase in the
level of the base flood shall be prohibited in the floodway.
   (B)   Allowable activities in the floodway, if permitted by this title,
include:
      1.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming and wild crop harvesting.
      2.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas,
airport landing strips, structural support members and underground utilities.
      3.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, target ranges, trap and
skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
      4.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas.
      5.   Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement enterprises.
   (C)   Allowable activities in the floodway requiring a variance are:
      1.   Uses or structures accessory to open space of variance uses.
      2.   Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and
billboards.
      3.   Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
      4.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
      5.   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and
pipelines.
      6.   Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
      7.   Other uses similar in nature to uses described in this subsection
and subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-12: WATERCOURSE STANDARDS:
The building inspector shall notify adjacent communities and the Illinois
department of transportation, division of water resources and the federal
insurance administration prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse. The flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-13: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
   (A)   The building inspector shall provide the municipality, the Illinois
department of transportation, division of water resources and the federal
insurance administration with an annual report on forms as provided the
municipality by the federal insurance administration.
   (B)   The building inspector shall maintain the records of the first floor
elevations, floodproofing certifications, all variance documents required by
section 1910.6(A)(5) and (6) of the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program, permit applications and all other records required by the
federal insurance administration. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-14: VARIANCES:
Upon written application, the municipality may grant a variance of this chapter
subject to compliance with the provisions of section 1910.6(A) of the rules and
regulations of the national flood insurance program and such other conditions
as the municipality deems necessary to comply with the intent of this chapter.
No variance shall be granted except in a specific case and after a public
hearing before the zoning board of appeals 1 , of which there shall be a notice
of the time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than
thirty (30) or less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more
newspapers published in the municipality, or, if no newspaper is published
therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the
municipality.
Any variation of the provisions of this chapter granted in an annexation
agreement should be treated as a variance. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
9-14-15: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height
may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
development either inside or outside of areas designated as an A zone will be
free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
9-14-16: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
litigation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 198, 10-3-1977)
CHAPTER 15
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
9-15-1: Intent
9-15-2: Purpose
9-15-3: Application Procedure
9-15-4: Sketch Development Plan
9-15-5: Preliminary Development Plan
9-15-6: Final Development Plan
9-15-7: Standards
9-15-8: Legal Status Of Plans And Covenants; Changes
9-15-9: Use Exceptions
9-15-10: Bulk Regulation; Exceptions
9-15-11: Minimum Lot Area In Residential Planned Developments
9-15-12: Spacing Between Detached Residential Buildings
9-15-13: Designation Of Recreational Space And Permanent Common Open Space
9-15-14: Permits
9-15-15: Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use
9-15-1: INTENT:
This chapter is intended to provide the means and the guidelines through which
tracts of land may be developed through an overall approach, rather than the
traditional lot by lot treatment afforded by other districts in this title. It
is intended to provide a maximum of design freedom by permitting the developer
an opportunity to more fully utilize the physical characteristics of the site
through the reduction of lot sizes, yard, height and bulk restrictions and the
planned mixing of uses. Through the requirements of a development plan, it is
the intent that property under this chapter will be developed through a unified
design providing continuity between the various elements and ultimately leading
to a better environment. Increased residential densities may be permitted under
this chapter if such increases can be substantiated on the basis that the
superior design makes greater densities possible with no reduction of
amenities. This chapter is not intended as a panacea, and should not be
utilized as a device for making increased densities more palatable, or as a
means of circumventing the city's development regulations. This chapter should
only be employed in instances where there is truly some benefit for the
community to be derived from its use. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-2: PURPOSE:
In addition to the general purpose of this chapter, the purpose of this section
is to establish standards and procedures for planned unit developments, in
order that the following objectives may be obtained:
   (A)   Variety and flexibility in land development that is necessary to meet
with the best interests of the entire city.
   (B)   The allocation, maintenance, and permanent preservation of common open
space, recreation areas and facilities; to offer recreational opportunities
close to home, to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the conservation
of natural resources.
   (C)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public
by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this chapter, as well as the subdivision
regulations.
   (D)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic
and geologic features, air and water quality, and other natural resources and
amenities.
   (E)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that results in better development and design, and the construction of
aesthetic amenities.
   (F)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other facilities.
   (G)   Land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort and
welfare.
   (H)   Innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development so
that growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type,
design, and layout of space ancillary to said buildings. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Confer With Planning Commission: A planned development shall be
granted as a special use permit, in accordance with standards and procedures of
the Momence zoning ordinance, and may depart from the normal procedures and
requirements of this chapter and the subdivision regulations. Applications
shall be accompanied by the required plats, documents, and other data. Before
submitting an application for a planned unit development, an applicant may
confer with the planning commission to obtain information and guidance, before
entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial materials; provided,
however, that no such preapplication conference shall result in any binding
commitments on behalf of the applicant or the city.
   (B)   Preapplication Conference: The following procedures shall be required
for all planned developments:
      1.   Planning Commission: Prior to filing a formal application for
approval of a planned development, the applicant shall request a preapplication
conference with the planning commission. The request for a preapplication
conference shall be submitted to the director of planning and code enforcement.
      2.   Purpose: The purpose of the preapplication conference and the
presentation is to make advice and assistance available to the applicant before
presentation of the sketch development plan, so that the applicant may
determine:
         (a)   Whether the proposed planned development appears in general to
be in compliance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and other
applicable ordinances;
         (b)   Whether any zoning amendment or variance is required in
connection with the proposed development;
         (c)   Whether the proposed planned development will be in conformity
with land use policies and objectives of the city. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-4: SKETCH DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   (A)   Intent: This section is intended to provide a process through which
the plan commission may determine if the proposed development is of adequate
merit, and thereby complies with the purpose of this chapter. Developments of
twenty (20) acres or less shall submit both sketch and preliminary development
plans prior to a public hearing. Developments in excess of twenty (20) acres
shall submit preliminary and final sketch plans separately over the prescribed
period of time, unless the city waives this procedure by official resolution of
the city council.
   (B)   Requirements: Application for a planned development shall be executed
by, or on behalf of, the landowner, and filed in triplicate, accompanied by ten
(10) copies of a sketch development plan. A filing fee in accordance with the
fee ordinance to cover all professional services shall be submitted to the city
clerk along with the following information:
      1.   Ownership: The entire site of the planned unit development shall be
under single ownership, and/or unified control as demonstrated by a description
of legal responsibility as necessary to effectuate and maintain the plan.
      2.   Minimum Size: The site of the planned unit development shall be
determined on a case by case basis by recommendation of the planning commission
and approval of the city council during the sketch development plan phase of
the approval process. The developer/property owner shall provide sufficient
evidence to show the size of the property is sufficient for the proposed use(s)
and type of development.
      3.   Uses: The planned unit development may include any or all uses
permitted within any of the existing zoning districts or a mixture thereof;
provided that the uses permitted in the planned development shall be of a type
and so located as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon the
surrounding properties, and shall be compatible each with the other within the
planned unit development.
      4.   Notice Of Hearing: Names and addresses of the persons to whom
notices of hearing hereunder may be sent including the subdivider, the designer
of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land
to be platted.
      5.   Land Use Plan: A land use plan for the entire planned development,
which shows the boundaries of the proposed development, sets forth the present
plans of the developer of the planned development of the area into the types of
land uses and the location of such land uses. Any residential use area shown on
the plan shall also show the proposed number of dwelling units and densities by
type of residential unit proposed to be constructed, within each phase of the
planned development. Conceptual sketches shall be provided, demonstrating the
land planning concept for each proposed residential type of housing unit.
Similar, but more specific information should be provided for the area of the
plan intended for initial development.
      6.   Legal Description: A legal description of the property proposed to
be included in the total planned development.
      7.   General Character: A written explanation of the general character of
the proposed development including:
         (a)   The description and quantity of all land uses to be included in
the development, with maximum and minimum percentage limitations for each use
as well as the proposed number of acres to be devoted to recreational areas,
schools, and municipal purposes;
         (b)   The projected type, location and number of dwelling units and
densities to be constructed in each phase of the total development;
         (c)   A description of each type of residential, commercial or
industrial unit proposed to be constructed (i.e., single-family, commercial,
industrial, etc.);
         (d)   The estimated population broken down by housing type, location,
and school age children as may be anticipated upon completion of the
development.
      8.   General Description: A preliminary engineering study providing a
general description of existing sanitary and storm facilities and service water
facilities, on and adjacent to the proposed development and the proposed
improvements necessary to handle properly the sanitary and storm water and
service needs upon development and any additional information as may be
requested by the city engineer.
      9.   Traffic Study: A traffic study prepared by a qualified expert,
providing a general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the
proposed development, and the proposed road improvements necessary to handle
properly the traffic anticipated to be generated upon development. A
circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and
pedestrians within the planned development, and to and from existing
thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices
needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern must be
shown.
      10.   Construction Schedule: A proposed construction schedule showing the
anticipated number of dwelling units or other structures to be constructed
during anticipated term of development, and showing the anticipated amount of
square feet of commercial property (if any) to be constructed and ready for
occupancy during the anticipated term of the development:
         (a)   The approximate date on which construction of the project can be
expected to begin;
         (b)   The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate date when the construction of each stage can be expected to begin;
         (c)   The anticipated rate of development;
         (d)   The approximate dates when the development of each of the stages
in the development will be completed;
         (e)   The area and location of recreational space and common open
space that will be provided at each stage.
      11.   Modification, Exceptions And Variances: A description of the
modifications, exceptions, and variances from this chapter and the city's
subdivision regulations which are being requested as part of the application
for establishment of the planned development.
      12.   Front Elevation: Architect's rendering of front elevation of
primary and accessory buildings. Such renderings should be sufficient to permit
an understanding of the proposed character of development.
      13.   Feasibility: Adequate evidence, in the form of a market research
report or other appropriate evidence to establish the need for the feasibility
of the proposed development.
      14.   Resources: A preliminary statement identifying existing natural and
environmental resources, including a policy statement by the applicant
expressing basic plans and procedures, which will be utilized to ensure
protection of the total physical setting of the development and related
environs. The statement should identify and locate on one or more exhibits, the
following environmental factors:
         (a)   Soils Analysis: A soils analysis shall be prepared along with
recommendations from the Kankakee County soil and water conservation district.
The analysis must include soil types, code numbers, and limitation for:
urbanized areas, conservation and agricultural productivity, soil wetness and
erosion potential.
         (b)   Scenic View: Scenic view and vistas.
         (c)   Surface Hydrology: Surface hydrology identifying existing
surface drainage patterns, topography, major and minor watersheds and limits of
flood of record with elevations as set forth in the hydrological investigations
as last published by the U.S. geological survey, and also the identification of
the projected 100-year flood.
         (d)   Geology: Geology identifying surface geological deposits and a
statement of their characteristics and limitations prepared pursuant to the
recommendations and published data of the Illinois geological survey and of any
other mapping data and analysis of subsurface conditions on the subject
property if required by the city engineer.
         (e)   Coverage And Vegetation: Natural coverage and vegetation showing
marshes, bogs, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees, natural prairie, rock
outcroppings, existing pastureland, cropland, orchards, other agricultural
uses, areas of sand, gravel, or peat extractions, and any unique natural or
ecologically sensitive area.
         (f)   Existing Development: Existing development illustrating the
generalized pattern of land use, major highways, collector streets, minor
streets, sidewalks and railroads, sanitary sewer, storm sewers and drainage
improvements, water main and associated utility improvements and designated
landmarks, historical areas and buildings.
         (g)   Current Ground Elevations: Current ground elevations on the
tract contours at two foot (2') intervals and spot elevations at all peaks in
grade, along drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than
one hundred feet (100') in all directions.
      15.   Land Use: A written statement signed by the applicant outlining and
describing in detail as the planning commission deems appropriate, the
arrangement by which the applicant proposes to regulate land use and otherwise
ensure development of the proposed planned development, in accordance with the
approval of the planning commission and city council. Such statement may, but
need not, include a draft of proposed covenants intended to be included and to
be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Kankakee County prior to
disposition of any land in the planned development (which covenants may include
adequate provisions to assure proper maintenance and repair of all areas and
facilities under common ownership, including payment thereof, and
enforceability thereof by, or on behalf of, the city), proposed character and
bylaws of an association, if any, for homeowners, merchants, or industrial
owners within the proposed planned developments.
      16.   Statement Of Ownership: A statement of the present ownership of all
the land within the planned unit development.
   (C)   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
the application for a planned development and sketch plan (and preliminary
plans if the development is 20 acres or less), giving notice of the time and
place not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date
of the hearing by publishing a notice thereof at least once in the local
newspaper.
   (D)   Planning Commission Action: Within forty five (45) days after the
close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall provide a written
communication to the city council recommending approval, modification, or
disapproval of the sketch and/or preliminary plan of the planned development
and the reasons thereof:
      1.   In what respects the proposed plan is, or is not, consistent with
the stated purpose of the planned development regulations.
      2.   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the planned development regulations.
      3.   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations, otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public
interest.
      4.   The nature and extent of the common open space and recreational
space in the planned development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and recreational space,
and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and function of the open space in
terms of the densities and dwelling types proposed in the plan.
      5.   The manner in which said plan does or does not make adequate
provision for public services, provide adequate control over vehicle traffic,
and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
      6.   The relationship and compatibility, beneficial or adverse, of the
proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood.
      7.   The desirability of the proposed plan to the physical development,
tax base and economic well being of the entire community.
      8.   The conformity with the recommendations of the comprehensive plan of
the city.
      9.   In case of a plan which proposes development over a period of years,
the sufficiency of the terms and conditions proposed to protect the interests
of the public and residents of the planned development in the integrity of the
plan.
   (E)   Action By The City Council: The city council, after receipt of the
sketch development plan of the planned development, shall approve, modify or
disapprove such sketch development plan and/or preliminary plan. The city
council may require such special conditions in the approval of the sketch
development plan as it may deem necessary to ensure conformity with the intent
of all comprehensive plan elements and the stated purpose of the planned
development.
      1.   Upon approval by the city council of the sketch development plan by
resolution, a record shall be prepared including findings of fact and setting
forth the terms of relief and/or variances granted from existing ordinances in
general, and specifically from the subdivision regulations. No building permit
shall be issued for any structure until a final planned development plan has
been filed and approved.
      2.   Approval of a sketch development plan shall not constitute approval
of the final plan; rather, it shall be deemed an expression of the layout
submitted on the sketch plan, as a guide to the preparation of the preliminary
or final plans. Preliminary and final plan or plans for a portion of the
planned development or the entire planned development, shall be submitted by
the developer, not later than one year (or such additional time, as may be
authorized by resolution of the city council), after approval of the sketch
plan, for approval by the corporate authorities of the city and subsequent
recording upon the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and
conditions, if any, of the sketch approval. The final plan shall be approved as
the final land use and zoning plan, if it conforms substantially with the
sketch and preliminary plans. Upon approval of the city council, preliminary
and final plans may be filed and approved simultaneously if all requirements
hereof are met.
      3.   The city council shall notify the planning commission and applicant
of its action. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-5: PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   (A)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of the preliminary plan is to provide
a transitional phase between sketch and final plan approval and a logical
sequence of events.
It is intended to permit the applicant the opportunity to provide specific
information pertaining to that portion of the planned development, which is the
subject of the preliminary plan.
   (B)   Requirements:
      1.   Application for preliminary plan approval of a planned development
shall be filed with the director of planning and code enforcement in
triplicate, accompanied by ten (10) copies of a preliminary development plan.
      2.   Preliminary plans for all or specified development phases of the
planned development shall be submitted for approval. There shall be no minimum
acreage requirement with respect to preliminary plans. In considering the
approval of a preliminary plan, no further public hearing shall be required to
approve changes from the sketch development which are not "major changes" as
defined in subsection
9-15-8(B) of this chapter.
      3.   The following information shall be required for all preliminary
plans:
         (a)   Legal Description: A boundary survey and legal description of
the area covered by such preliminary plan, prepared and certified by a
registered Illinois surveyor, including the total acreage therein certified to
the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, a north point (designated as true
north) and the date of the preparation.
         (b)   Topographic Survey: A topographic survey of the area covered by
such preliminary plan at two foot (2') contour intervals as such as exists at
that time.
         (c)   Map: A map showing the existing zoning and land use of the
property covered by the preliminary plan and the area within five hundred feet
(500') thereof, as well as of the boundaries of the total planned development.
         (d)   Drawing: A detailed drawing of the area covered by such plan
prepared at a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred feet (1" = 200')
and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private) for
the area covered by such preliminary plan and the area within five hundred feet
(500') thereof, all buildings, their height and use, common open space,
recreational areas and facilities, parking areas, sidewalks, service areas, and
other facilities related to the proposed development. The submission may be
composed of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include:
            (1) Public Roads: Existing and proposed public roads including
classifications, width of rights of way, width of pavement, and construction
details.
            (2) Easements: Existing easements and proposed easements to be
granted in lieu of rights of way.
            (3) Density: Provide information on the density of residential
uses, including dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type
and the number of buildings by type.
         (e)   Public Utilities Plan: A schematic public utilities plan of
existing and proposed utilities drawn at a scale of not less than one inch to
two hundred feet (1" = 200') for the area covered by such preliminary plan and
the area within three hundred feet (300') thereof indicating the following, and
any additional documentation:
            (1) Schematic sanitary and storm sewer systems.
            (2) Schematic water supply systems.
            (3) Schematic street lighting and public area lighting systems.
            (4) A landscape plan.
         (f)   Time Schedule: A time schedule of the proposed development of
the area covered by such preliminary plan.
         (g)   Character: Explanation of the character of the area covered by
the preliminary plan and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage
of the flexibility of these regulations.
         (h)   Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which
will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space, and recreational areas and
facilities, in the area covered by the preliminary plan.
         (i)   Nonresidential Use: Provide information on the type and amount
of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential development, including
the amount of common open space, and recreational areas and facilities.
         (j)   Subsurface Conditions: Subsurface conditions on the tract (if
required by the city engineer); location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions; depth to ground water,
unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5').
         (k)   Title And Certificates: Present tract designation according to
official records in the office of the recorder of deeds; title under which the
proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners; and
notation stating acreage.
         (l)   Open Space And Recreation Areas And Facilities: All parcels of
land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all
property owners with the purpose indicated, and the improvements which will be
made to each area and facility.
         (m)   Architectural Renderings: Architectural renderings of the
proposed structures within only the area which is the subject of the
preliminary plan.
   (C)   Time Limitations For Submission Of Preliminary Plans: The first
preliminary plan of the proposed planned development shall be submitted for
approval within six (6) months after adoption by the city council of the sketch
development plan, provided, that upon request in writing of the developer, the
city council may, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the city
council, extend the period of time for the submission of a first preliminary
plan. If the first preliminary plan shall cover less than all of the planned
development, preliminary plans for additional areas of the planned development
may be submitted to the city council within such period of time as shall have
been prescribed in the approval of the application for establishment of the
planned development; provided, further, that upon request in writing of the
developer, the city council may extend the period of time for submission of
preliminary plans covering all of the planned development.
   (D)   Status Of Approved Preliminary Plan: Approval of a preliminary plan
shall not constitute approval of the final plan nor qualify a plat of the
planned development for recording, rather it shall be deemed an expression of
approval of the preliminary plan as a guide to preparation of the final plan. A
preliminary plan which has been granted approval as submitted or approval with
conditions or modifications shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise
impaired by action of the city pending an application for final approval
without the consent of the landowners, provided that application for final
approval is filed within the time or times specified in the resolution granting
preliminary approval and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner
shall choose to abandon such plan and shall so notify the planning commission
in writing, or shall fail to file application for final plan approval within
the required time period, the preliminary plan approval shall be deemed to be
revoked and all that portion of the area included in the plan for which final
approval has not been given shall be subject to those local ordinances
applicable thereto. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until
approval has been given by the city council.
   (E)   Submission Of Updated Land Use Plans:
      1.   Submission With Preliminary Plans: At any time and from time to time
when a preliminary plan for a portion of the planned development is submitted
for approval, it shall be an obligation of the developer of such portion to
cause the developer of the planned development to prepare and submit to the
city with such preliminary plan, an updated land use plan for those areas in
the planned development for which preliminary plans shall not then have been
submitted for approval.
      2.   Annual Submissions: When no updated land use plan of the planned
development shall have been prepared for one year, the developer of the planned
development shall, unless the city waives such obligation, prepare and submit
to the city a land use plan for those areas in the planned development for
which preliminary plans shall not then have been submitted for approval. (Ord.
621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-6: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of the final development plan is to designate
with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the
division of other lands, not so treated, into common open areas and building
areas, and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building
or structure, as well as of the land in general.
   (B)   Requirements: The final plan of the planned development shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plan as approved, and if desired by the
developer, it may be submitted in stages with each stage reflecting a portion
of the approved preliminary plan which is proposed to be recorded and
developed; provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of
these regulations. The required procedure for approval of the final plan of a
planned development shall require the following:
      1.   Application: Application for final plan approval shall be filed with
the director of planning and code enforcement in triplicate, accompanied by ten
(10) copies of a preliminary development plan. The final plan and supporting
data shall be filed with the city clerk and forwarded to the planning
commission for certification that the final plan is in conformity with these
regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary and sketch plans.
      2.   Final Plan Submission: Final plans for all or specified development
phases of the planned development shall be submitted for approval. There shall
be no minimum acreage requirement with respect to final plans. Approval of
final plans may not be withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the
approved sketch development plan. In considering the approval of the final
plan, no further public hearings shall be required to approve changes from
sketch and preliminary development plans which are not "major changes" as
defined in subsection
9-15-8(B) of this chapter.
      3.   Final Plan Approval: Within twelve (12) months after approval of the
sketch development plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan for approval
to the planning commission.
      4.   Subdivision Plan: If the planned development constitutes a
subdivision, a final subdivision plan shall be submitted. Any such final
subdivision plan shall set forth on the face thereof suitable dedications of
permanent open space and recreational space to be owned in common easements,
rights of way, and all other criteria in form and substance conforming to the
requirements of the city's subdivision regulations, as the same may be amended
and in force from time to time.
      5.   Final Version: The final version of the site plan of the planned
development shall be filed indicating the locations of all buildings, all
parking and loading spaces, and any other special structure, facility, or
feature approved or required by the city council.
      6.   Covenants: The final version of the covenants, if any, by which the
applicant proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed
development, accompanied by the written representation and warranty of the
applicant, in form and substance satisfactory to the city attorney to the
effect that the owner of the real property which is the subject of the proposed
planned development has not sold or otherwise disposed of any interest in said
property and will not sell, or otherwise dispose of any such interest, prior to
the filing for record of said covenants in the office of the recorder of deeds
of Kankakee County, Illinois.
      7.   Deeds Or Easement Agreement: Such deeds or easement agreement, if
any, as are required or approved by the city council, shall be filed in form
and substance approved by the city attorney, conveying a suitable ownership
interest in the parcels within the proposed planned development which are to be
subject to public or common ownership.
      8.   Articles Of Incorporation: Filing a copy of the articles of
incorporation of the homeowners', merchants', or industrial owners'
association, if any, required or approved by the city council, certified by the
secretary of state of Illinois, not more than thirty (30) days prior to the
filing of the final plan; a certificate of good standing for such corporation
certified by the secretary as being a true, correct, and complete copy of such
bylaws, as of the date not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of
such final plan.
      9.   Planning Commission Approval: After review of the final plan and
supporting data, the planning commission shall approve the plan within sixty
(60) days after filing by the developer. Disapproval of the final plan of the
planned development shall include a clear statement of the reasons thereof.
      10.   City Council Approval: Approval by the city council of the final
plan for any proposed planned development shall be effective only for a period
of sixty (60) days after the date of such approval, unless within such sixty
(60) day period the applicant shall record or cause the recordation of the
final plan including any final subdivision plan, the final restrictive
covenants, and the deeds and/or easement agreement required or approved by the
city council in the office of the recorder of deeds of Kankakee County,
Illinois.
      11.   Drawings And Specifications: Engineering drawings and
specifications for:
         (a)   Sanitary and storm sewer systems.
         (b)   Water supply systems.
         (c)   Street lighting and public area lighting systems.
         (d)   Sidewalks, trails, and paths.
Such engineering drawings and any other drawings required by any other
ordinance of the city shall be prepared in such detail as may be required by
the city engineer.
      12.   Cost Estimate: Estimate of the cost of installation of all proposed
public improvement confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
      13.   Impact Report: A plan or report shall be prepared by the developer
and shall evaluate in general terms the impact of the proposed development on
the natural environment. The report shall identify:
         (a)   The final version of the developer's policy toward maintaining
the natural environment.
         (b)   An analysis of the existing environment prior to the proposed
action. Consideration should be given to the following factors:
            (1) Unique physical features of the land such as soil stability,
erosion, and ground contours.
            (2) Scenic views.
            (3) Drainage, runoff surface water, ground water and floodplains.
            (4) Air quality.
            (5) Areas underlain by sand and gravel aquifers.
            (6) Vegetation.
            (7) Wildlife.
         (c)   A general listing of the effects on the environment which would
be caused by the proposed development, and the actions which the developer
proposes to undertake to resolve any adverse conditions resulting from
development of the land.
      14.   Final Renderings: Final architectural renderings and facades of all
proposed primary structures.
      15.   Delinquent Taxes: A certificate shall be furnished from the county
collector that he finds no delinquent taxes and that all special assessments
constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the property of the planned
development have been paid.
   (C)   Time Limitations For Submission Of Final Plans: Final plans for all of
the area covered by the first preliminary plan shall be submitted to the city
council for approval within one year after approval of the sketch development
plan by the city council, provided, that upon request in writing of the
developer, the city council may, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of
the city council, extend the period of time for the submission of such final
plans. Final plans covering all of the planned development shall be submitted
to the city council for approval within such period of time as shall have been
prescribed in the approval of the application for establishment of the
development provided that upon request in writing of the developer, the city
council may, by resolution duly adopted at any council meeting, extend the
period of time for submission of final plans covering all planned development.
(Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-7: STANDARDS:
In granting or withholding approval of the sketch development plan, preliminary
plans and final plans, the planning commission and the city council shall be
guided by the requirements of this chapter and the following standards:
   (A)   Public Good: All plans shall be so designed that the public health,
welfare, and safety will be protected.
   (B)   Property Value: The proposed development shall be such that it does
not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the immediate
area.
   (C)   Protection Of Conditions: All plans shall provide for protection of
both aesthetics and function of the natural environment, which shall include,
but not be limited to, conditions pertaining to floodplains, soil, and geologic
characteristics, air quality, and preservation of vegetation.
   (D)   Common Open Space: All plans shall provide for and ensure the
preservation of adequate recreational facilities and common open space.
   (E)   Balanced Neighborhood: Residential use areas shall have a variety of
housing types and densities necessary to achieve a balanced neighborhood.
   (F)   Public Activities: The planned development shall include land area
necessary to accommodate cultural, educational, recreational, and other public
and quasi-public activities necessary to serve the needs of the residents
thereof.
   (G)   Creative Land Uses: The proposed development shall provide for the
orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to each other
and to the entire city.
   (H)   Ways For Pedestrians And Cyclists: Walkways shall form a logical, safe
and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and to all
project facilities and off site destinations likely to attract substantial
pedestrian traffic. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as
play areas or routes to schools or other principal destinations shall be so
located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with normal automobile traffic.
Street crossings shall be held to a minimum on such walkways, located and
designed to promote safety, appropriately marked and otherwise safeguarded. If
substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated, bicycle paths shall be incorporated
in the walkway system. Pedestrianways appropriately located, designed, and
constructed may be combined with other easements and uses by emergency or
service vehicles, but shall not be used by other automotive traffic.
      1.   Access: Access for pedestrians and cyclists shall be arranged to
provide safe, convenient routes, and need not be limited to the vehicular
access points. When pedestrian access points do not occur at street
intersections, they shall be marked and controlled, and when such ways are
exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at the edges of a district, fences or
other barriers shall be erected and maintained to prevent crossings except at
designated points. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall be so related to the
pedestrianway system that street crossings are combined.
      2.   Screening At Edges Of The Planned Development: Fences, walls or
vegetation screening shall be provided along the edges of the planned
development where needed to protect residents from undesirable views, lighting,
noise, or other off site influences or to protect occupants of adjoining
residential districts from similar adverse influences within the planned
development. In both cases, screening shall be designed to control the existing
or potential first floor residential windows in the planned development or
other residential district. Screening requirements may be waived where terrain
makes protection overview impractical. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-8: LEGAL STATUS OF PLANS AND COVENANTS; CHANGES:
   (A)   Compliance: All planned developments shall be developed in strict
compliance with the recorded final plan and supporting data. All final plans
and covenants filed and recorded hereunder shall be contractual undertakings
by, and shall be binding upon, the applicants; therefore, the owners of the
land covered by such planned development and their successors and assigns shall
limit and control the construction location and use and operation of all land
in such planned development, and all improvements and structures to be located
thereon.
      1.   Schedule: The city council shall consider planned development
subject to revocation if construction falls more than two (2) years behind the
filed and approved schedule. The developer shall be notified at least ninety
(90) days prior to any revocation hearing.
      2.   Changes In Final Approval Plan During Development: Upon issuance of
a special use permit and the necessary building permits, no changes may be made
during or after the development of the final plan as approved and recorded
unless such changes are made pursuant to a new and separate application for
planned development.
      3.   Occupancy: No planned unit development, or any portion thereof, may
be occupied until such time as a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the building inspector and/or director of planning and code enforcement
certifying that the development or a stage of the development, if applicable,
has been completed in compliance with the final plan as approved and recorded.
   (B)   Major Changes: Any of the following changes shall be deemed to be a
"major change":
      1.   A change which alters the concept, character or intent of the sketch
development plan.
      2.   A change which increases residential density.
      3.   A change which significantly increases the height of any building or
structure; or alters the uses and design standards set forth as a minimum in
this chapter.
      4.   A change which significantly increases nonresidential floor area by
more than ten percent (10%).
      5.   A change which reduces the amount of common open space or
recreational land.
      6.   A change in the land use plan.
      7.   A change in the transportation plan.
   (C)   Minor Changes: The planning commission may approve minor changes in
the planned development which do not change the concept or intent of the
development. "Minor changes" are defined as any change not defined as a major
change. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-9: USE EXCEPTIONS:
The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may authorize, that
there be permitted in part of the area of a proposed planned development, and
for the duration of such development, specified uses not permitted by the use
regulation of the district in which said development is located, provided that
the planning commission shall find:
   (A)   That the uses permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the planned
development.
   (B)   That the uses permitted by such exceptions are not of such a nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood.
   (C)   That no more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground area of the
planned development shall be devoted to such specified use exceptions;
provided, however, that in a residential planned development not more than
eight percent (8%) of the total ground area in the planned development which is
zoned for residential purposes shall be devoted to uses first permitted within
the commercial zoning district; and no ground area in the residential planned
development shall be devoted to uses first permitted within the industrial
zoning district.
   (D)   That in an industrial planned development, such specified use
exceptions shall comply with any performance standards contained within the
zoning district in which the proposed planned development is located. (Ord.
621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-10: BULK REGULATION; EXCEPTIONS:
In the case of any planned development, the planning commission may recommend,
and the city council may authorize, exceptions to the bulk regulations of this
chapter within the boundaries of such planned development, provided that the
planning commission shall find:
   (A)   That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development as well as the neighboring property, that would be obtained under
the bulk regulations of the district in which said development is located.
   (B)   That along the periphery of such planned developments, yard shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said
development is located.
   (C)   That in a residential planned development the maximum number of
dwelling units per gross residential acre shall not exceed three (3) units per
acre. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-11: MINIMUM LOT AREA IN RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
Provided the overall number of dwelling units per acre (density) is not
increased beyond the provisions of section
9-15-10 of this chapter and provided that the common open space and
recreational area are in accord with section
9-15-13 of this chapter the planned development may include minimum lot areas
per dwelling unit smaller than those normally required in the zoning district.
(Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-12: SPACING BETWEEN DETACHED RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
In a residential planned development, the minimum distance between the walls of
any two (2) separate buildings over one story in height shall be as follows:
   (A)   Thirty feet (30'), if either wall contains bedroom windows.
   (B)   Forty feet (40'), if either wall contains living room windows.
   (C)   Thirty feet (30') in all other circumstances, except that the minimum
distance between walls, which are parallel or substantially parallel in the
portions thereof, which are directly opposite one another (measured
perpendicularly) and do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in length and contain no
windows, shall be:
      1.   Fifteen feet (15') for all structures below a horizontal plane
thirty five feet (35') above grade; and
      2.   Thirty feet (30') for all structures above said plane. (Ord. 621,
12-18-2006)
9-15-13: DESIGNATION OF RECREATIONAL SPACE AND PERMANENT COMMON OPEN SPACE:
Residential planned development areas shall include: Recreational areas
equivalent to at least thirty percent (30%) of the total residential area; and
industrial and commercial areas shall include permanent common open space in an
amount equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the total commercial and/or
industrial areas of the planned development.
   (A)   Definitions:
    DISTRICT PARKS: Large active and passive recreational areas generally
located on or near thoroughfares and within two (2) miles of each residence
intended to be served. District parks generally adjoin junior and senior high
schools and often include such facilities as swimming pools, tennis complexes,
recreational building and adequate off street parking.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS: Active and passive recreational areas which usually
serve children and adults in an urban area within a radius of approximately
one-half (1/2) mile. Neighborhood parks generally adjoin public elementary
schools and may include such features as ball diamonds and play area toward the
interior of the site so the perimeter can be landscaped to buffer sound and
provide a measure of safety to the public.
   PERMANENT COMMON OPEN SPACE: Parkways, medians, landscaped green space, or
other similar areas, defined as recreational areas.
   PLAY LOTS: Active recreational areas intended for children up to six (6) or
seven (7) years of age. Play lots generally feature play apparatuses, benches,
sand areas and landscaping. Play lots should be located near the center of the
housing areas generating children of such ages so that children need not cross
arterial streets to reach play lots.
   RECREATION AREA: Land specifically designed and intended for the active or
passive recreational use of the residents of the planned development and shall
include, but not be limited to: public or private play lots and parks; school
sites; storm water detention or retention areas if the planning commission
determines that such areas are capable of being utilized for multipurpose
recreational activities; pedestrian corridors; bicycle trails; greenbelts; and
open space networks.
   (B)   Designation:
      1.   The planning commission shall determine, in its reasonable
discretion, whether land is designated and intended for the recreational use of
residents of the planned development and in so doing shall consider the
following factors:
         (a)   The relationship of the location of the land being considered to
the residential use area which it is intended to serve.
         (b)   The size and usability of the land being considered.
         (c)   Other existing or proposed recreational facilities capable of
fulfilling recreational needs of the residents.
      2.   Within the percentage limitations set forth for residential land use
above, the developer should, to the extent that good planning allows, provide
such recreational space in the nature of play lots, neighborhood parks,
generally in accordance with the following standards, and should deviations
from the following standards be required, the planning commission may vary
these requirements by five percent (5%):
 
Classification     Approximate Size Acres Per
                                    1,000 People
                                   
Play lots          Up to 1 acre     1.0
Neighborhood parks 4 – 10 acres   6.0
District parks     10 – 20 acres  3.0
 
   (C)   Maintenance Of Common Open Space And Recreation Areas: In the event
that the organization established to own and maintain common open space and
recreation areas and related facilities or any successor organization, shall,
at any time after establishment of the planned development, fail to maintain
the common open space and recreation areas and related facilities in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the plan, the city may serve written
notice upon such organization or upon the residents of the planned development
setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty (30) days thereof, and shall
state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within
fourteen (14) days of the notice. At such hearing the city may modify the terms
of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time
within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be cured within said thirty
(30) days or any extension thereof, the city, in order to preserve the taxable
values of the properties within the planned development and to prevent the
common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said property
and maintain the same for a period of one year.
Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space or recreation areas when the same is voluntarily dedicated to
the public by the owners. Before the expiration of said year, the city shall,
upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing
upon notice to such organization, or to the residents of the planned
development to show cause why such maintenance by the city shall not, at the
election of the city, continue for a succeeding year. If the city council shall
determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain said common open
space and recreation areas at the end of said year, then such matter shall be
discontinued. If the city council shall determine that such organization is not
ready and able to maintain said common open space and recreation areas in a
reasonable condition, the city may, in its discretion, continue to maintain
said common open space during the next succeeding year and subject to a similar
hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. The decision of the city
council in any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision
subject to review in accordance with appropriate provisions of this chapter.
The cost of such maintenance by the city shall be assessed ratably against the
properties within the planned development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space and recreation space and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. The city at the time of entering upon said property for the purpose
of maintenance, shall file an appropriate notice of such lien upon the
properties affected by such lien within the planned development. (Ord. 621, 12-
18-2006)
9-15-14: PERMITS:
Building, zoning and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in
a planned development. No building permit relating to any part of a planned
development shall be issued prior to the approval of a final plan or such part
of the planned development; provided, however, that subject to the approval of
the village, excavation operations (construction of sewer, water and other
utility improvements) may proceed at any time following approval of the
preliminary development plan. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
9-15-15: EFFECT OF DENIAL OF A SPECIAL USE:
No application for a special use, which has been denied wholly or in part by
the city council, shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of said order of denial except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of conditions found to be valid by the planning commission and the city
council. (Ord. 621, 12-18-2006)
CHAPTER 16
SPECIALTY ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-16-1: A-1 Agricultural District
9-16-1-1: Purpose
9-16-1-2: Policy
9-16-1-3: Permitted Uses
9-16-1-4: Special Uses
9-16-1-5: Temporary Uses
9-16-1-6: Accessory Uses
9-16-1-7: Prohibited Uses
9-16-1-8: Special Provisions
9-16-2: OS-1 Open Space District
9-16-2-1: Purpose
9-16-2-2: Permitted Uses
9-16-2-3: Special Uses
9-16-2-4: Temporary Uses
9-16-2-5: Accessory Uses
9-16-2-6: Prohibited Uses
9-16-2-7: Special Provisions
9-16-1: A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
9-16-1-1: PURPOSE:
The A-1 zoning district is hereby established to allow the transitional and
temporary designation of lands for agriculture use until such time as
appropriate development is proposed and municipal improvements become
available. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-2: POLICY:
To achieve the purpose of the A-1 agricultural district, it shall be the policy
of the city to:
   (A)   Foster uses where adequate police and fire protection are available.
   (B)   Require a minimum, continuous area for the A-1 agricultural district
to be five (5) acres in area. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-3: PERMITTED USES:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or premises
shall be erected, altered, enlarged, occupied, or used, except as otherwise
provided in this title for other than the agricultural use that exists at time
of annexation. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-4: SPECIAL USES:
Any changes in usage from those in existence at time of annexation shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized by the council as allowed in chapter
12 of this title. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Upon application to and issuance by the code enforcement officer of a permit,
the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Temporary building, trailer or yard for construction materials and/or
equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning
district. Each permit shall specify the location of the building or yard and
the area of permitted operation. Each such permit shall be valid for a period
of six (6) calendar months and shall not be renewed for more than one
successive period location. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-6: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership, on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use.
Barns, stables, greenhouses, and other similar structures for the exclusive use
of the occupants of the premises, which are incidental to the use of the
property.
Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of the
residents or occupants of the premises. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-7: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-16-1-3 through
9-16-1-6 of this chapter, inclusive. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-1-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Sign Requirements: In accordance with the applicable regulations set
forth in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 619, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2: OS-1 OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
9-16-2-1: PURPOSE:
To recognize the existence of major open space and recreational areas in the
city. The open space district is intended to apply to all public open space of
notable quality and to major private open spaces. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-2: PERMITTED USES:
Detention, retention or natural swale areas and property designated for
recreational usage such as bike trails, walk paths or natural landscaping.
Municipal and public utility facilities.
Public and private cemeteries.
Public or private golf courses and recreational areas, including associated
structures such as clubhouses, maintenance buildings and pro shops.
Public parking lots on land whether public or private.
Public sports and recreation buildings and facilities, if constructed on
parcels of more than five (5) acres.
Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, gardens, recreational and other open areas,
including those leased, and also including associated structures such as
playground equipment, rest facilities, gazebos and other similar public
buildings. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the
council as allowed in chapter 12 of this title:
Band shells and amphitheaters.
Libraries and information centers.
Membership sports and recreation clubs.
Museums and art galleries.
Nonpublicly owned concession stands and restaurants, but not drive-through, and
only as associated with a particular permitted use.
Organized groups or clubs holding scheduled events or meetings on a regular
basis and utilizing the area in a manner consistent with its primary permitted
usage.
Public sports and recreation buildings and facilities, if constructed on
parcels of less than five (5) acres. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-4: TEMPORARY USES:
Upon application to the city council and issuance by the code enforcement
officer of a permit, the following uses may be operated as temporary uses:
Open space area designated for a special event; provided, however, that each
permit shall be valid only for the duration of the designated special event.
Temporary mobile signs on privately owned property only and as provided in
chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses and structures, as allowed under section
9-1-11 of this title, are permitted in the open space district, subject to
consistency with the permitted usage of the property. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized in sections
9-16-2-2 through
9-16-2-5 of this chapter, inclusive. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
9-16-2-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
   (B)   Lighting: Lighting of the facility and parking areas shall be directed
away from surrounding properties, and shall meet specifications as set by the
code enforcement officer.
   (C)   Parking: In accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in
chapter 10 of this title. (Ord. 618, 12-18-2006)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Official Status
10-1-3: Intent And Purpose
10-1-4: Application And Regulations
10-1-5: General Provisions
10-1-6: Rules And Definitions
10-1-7: Prohibition
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF MOMENCE, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-1-2: OFFICIAL STATUS:
This title is hereby made a part of the official plan of the city of Momence,
Illinois. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-1-3: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community
growth, and to safeguard the interests of the home owner, the subdivider, the
investor and the city.
   (B)   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs.
   (C)   To conserve the value of buildings placed upon land, provide the best
practicable environment for human habitation, and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city and the adjacent unincorporated
jurisdictional area. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-1-4: APPLICATION AND REGULATIONS:
No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the city or
in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the city except in conformity
with the provisions of this title.
The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all
procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with
the regulations herein. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-1-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Plats Required: Whenever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be
laid out within the incorporated limits of the city, or located entirely or in
part within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the incorporated boundary of the
city, provided such territory is not included in any other municipality, the
subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and final
subdivision plat to the plan commission for their approval. The subdivision
plats and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in full
compliance with these regulations. The developer shall submit a time schedule
of activities as well as a timetable for completion of the project to the plan
commission.
   (B)   Until Plats Approved: Until plats and plans for the subdivision are
approved:
      1.   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any
improvements made to the natural land.
      2.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or
given.
      3.   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service,
lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by
any owner or owners or his or their agent, or by any public service corporation
at the request of such owner or owners or his or their agent.
   (C)   Completion Of Improvements: The final plat for the subdivision will be
approved only upon completion of all improvements as required by this title,
specifically including storm sewer, sanitary sewer laterals, water main and
service laterals, streetlights, curbs, base course and lot line elevations
established. No building permit shall be issued by the city authorizing the
building on or improvement of any subdivided land not of record as of the date
of this title unless the provisions and requirements of this title have been
met.
   (D)   Dedications, Review And Recommendation: All offerings or dedications
of land to the city for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks,
playgrounds, or other uses, shall be referred to the plan commission for review
and recommendation before being accepted by the city council.
   (E)   Subdivision Approval: Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision
is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the city as a
whole, the plan commission may, before approval, cause to be prepared a plan
for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the plan
commission as an aid in judging the proposed plat. The city engineer shall
cooperate with the plan commission in reviewing plans and surveys prepared by
the developer. The developer shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, this plan
and shall furnish such surveys and data as may be necessary.
   (F)   Resubdivision Considerations: Whenever an area is subdivided into lots
of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots,
considerations shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original
subdivision so that additional minor streets can be located which will permit a
logical arrangement of smaller lots.
   (G)   Interpretation:
      1.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
title shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
      2.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the
use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this title or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
      3.   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this title
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
      4.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this title is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-1-6: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
In an interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this
section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (A)   Rules:
      1.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural
number the singular.
      2.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      3.   The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", and
"parcel".
      5.   The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for",
"designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
   (B)   Definitions:
    ALLEY: A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side
or in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
   APPLICANT: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the
plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this title.
   APPROVAL, FINAL: The approval given the final plat by the plan commission
and city council, allowing the plat to be legally recorded with the county
recorder of deeds.
   APPROVAL, TENTATIVE: The approval given by the plan commission and the city
council to a preliminary plat, indicating acceptance of such plan of
subdivision and authorizing the construction of the improvements.
   BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right of way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the city.
   BOULEVARD: A street, approved containing center grassed or landscaped areas
dividing the driving lanes.
   BUILDING: Any structure designed, built, or intended for a shelter,
enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of
any kind.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land which
determines the area on the land where the erection of a building or accessory
building is prohibited. The area between the building setback line and the
adjacent boundary of the street which the lot abuts is the area on which the
erection of a building or accessory building is prohibited.
   CITY COUNCIL: The words "city council", "council", "councilmen", or
"aldermen", refer to the city council of the city of Momence, Illinois.
   CROSSWALK: That portion of the sidewalk which lies between the curb and the
sidewalk along a street and complies with federal regulations for the
handicapped.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
   DEVELOPER: The person(s) having site control over real estate being
subdivided to erect any structure, or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activities such as grading in preparation thereof.
   EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation, or certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION: The unincorporated area within
one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the city and not
included in any other municipality.
   FRENCH DRAIN: A pipe installed for the purpose of discharging flows from
sump pumps and/or ground water when a storm sewer pipe is not readily available
to a property.
   FRONTAGE: The length of the front property line of the lot, lots, or tract
of land abutting a public or private street or right of way.
   GRADE: The slope of any portion of the earth's surface or any improvements
placed thereon, specified in percent and shown on the street profile plans as
required herein.
   HIGHWAY: A right of way for vehicular traffic which traverses a nonurban
area, usually a state or federal numbered route.
   LOT: A parcel of land in a subdivision, identifiable by reference to said
plat of subdivision recorded with the appropriate county official, and intended
for transfer of ownership and building development.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersection.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two
(2) substantially parallel streets.
   MAYOR: Chief executive officer of the city council.
   NEIGHBORHOOD DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan establishing finished garage floor and
corner elevations for each lot based on USGS datum.
   OFFICIAL CITY STANDARDS: Those standards of installation, construction and
design on file for public inspection in the office of the city engineer and
included as appendices 1  to ordinance 455, as the same may be approved,
adopted and amended from time to time by the city council of Momence, Illinois.
   OFFICIAL CORPORATE MAP: The map, adopted by the city council pursuant to the
state of Illinois statutes, known as the official map of the city of Momence,
with all changes and amendments thereto which are adopted from time to time.
   OUTLOT: A tract or portion of land in a subdivision or other parcels of land
authorized or granted for use for one or more specific purposes intended as a
unit, whether for immediate or future development. The lot shall be reserved
and recorded as an outlot.
   OWNER: The person, partnership, corporation, trustee, trust, or any other
legal entity, having sufficient proprietary interest of record in the land
sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the
same under the statutes of the state of Illinois or under the ordinance of the
city of Momence, Illinois.
   PARKWAY: A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and
whose right of way is or is intended to be developed in a park like character.
   PAVEMENTS: See definition of Roadway.
   PLAN COMMISSION: The words "plan commission" as used in this title refer to
the plan commission of the city of Momence, Illinois, established pursuant to
the statutes of the state of Illinois.
   PLAT: A plan, map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the
subdivision of land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends
to record in final form.
   PLAT, FINAL: The drawings and documents presented for final approval and as
described in section
10-3-3 of this title.
   RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
walkway, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, or another special
use. Every right of way established under this title and shown on a final plat
is separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right of way
and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
   ROADWAY: That portion of the street which has or is to be improved and is or
will be available for vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of the street, walkway or crosswalk which is paved to
meet the current American's with disabilities act requirements and is intended
for pedestrian use only.
   SKETCH PLAN: The preliminary general site development plan.
   STREET: An area which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a
vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets. The word
"street" refers to the right of way or easement, whether public or private, and
not to the roadway or paving or other improvement within the street right of
way.
   STREET, APPROVED: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards
and specifications of the city of Momence.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to
highways and primary thoroughfares and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on
the highways and primary thoroughfares.
   STREET, MINOR: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
   STREET, PRIVATE: Any street which is under the jurisdiction of an
individual, corporation, or trustee, or any street which is privately owned or
established.
   STREET, PUBLIC: Any primary or secondary thoroughfare or minor street which
is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated for public use.
   SUBDIVIDER: Any person, partnership, corporation, trustee, trust or any
other legal entity commencing proceedings under this title to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development for any future
use, either residential, commercial, or industrial. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION FEE: A fee assessed by the city to be paid by the developer as a
condition of subdividing. The fee schedule is included in subsection
10-2-3(A) of this title and may be amended from time to time by the city
council of Momence, Illinois.
   THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY: A street of considerable continuity which serves or
is intended to serve as a principal traffic artery between the various sections
of the Momence area and is so designated as a primary thoroughfare on the
official plan.
   THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY: A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to the primary thoroughfare system, or between primary thoroughfares, and is so
designated as a secondary thoroughfare.
   WALKWAY: A right of way within a block, ten feet (10') or more in width,
dedicated for public use, intended primarily for pedestrians, but which may
include utilities where necessary and from which motor and engine propelled
vehicles are excluded.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The Momence zoning ordinance, as amended. (Ord. 455, 4-21-
1997)
 
Notes
  1. Appendices have been codified as the following: Title 4, chapters 5, 6 and
  7 of this code; sections
1 7-2-4,
  7-6-1-1,
  7-6-2-2, and
  7-9-1 of this code.
10-1-7: PROHIBITION:
   (A)   No Contract Of Sale: No person, firm, or corporation proposing to make
or have made a subdivision within the city or the area within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city shall enter into any
contract for the sale of or shall offer to sell said subdivision or any part
thereof until he has obtained the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision.
   (B)   No Construction Of Land: No person, firm, or corporation proposing to
make or have made a subdivision within the city, or the area within the
extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction of the city shall proceed with any
construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until he has
obtained the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision.
   (C)   Not Entitled To Record: No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded
in the appropriate county recorder's office, or have any validity, until it has
been approved in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-2-1: Compliance With Required Design Principles
10-2-2: Preapplication Conference
10-2-3: Preliminary Plat Approval
10-2-4: Construction Of Subdivision Improvements
10-2-5: Final Plat Approval
10-2-6: Professional Fee Agreement
10-2-1: COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIRED DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
The subdivider or his agent shall comply with the general principles of design
and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions set forth in chapter 4
of this title and with the provisions of chapter 4 of this title establishing
minimum design standards and procedures for the installation of subdivision
improvements of this title, and in every case shall pursue the following
procedure. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-2-2: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Any owner or representative of the owner of land located in the city or in any
unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within one and one-
half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the city shall first submit to the
plan commission of the city such information as may be required by the plan
commission in chapter 3 of this title to describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development thereof. The applicant
shall be supplied with pertinent information on plan commission requirements
not herein contained, or as these regulations may be applied to the subject
property. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
   (A)   Before submitting a final plat of approval, the subdivider shall
prepare a preliminary plat, construction drawings and specifications for the
proposed subdivision which shall conform with the provisions set forth in
chapters 3 and 4 of this title, and shall file with the city an application in
writing for the tentative approval of said plat at least seventeen (17) days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered and accompanied by ten
(10) copies of the preliminary plat. The fee schedule as approved by the city
council and listed here shall apply:
 
Preliminary plat fee  $100.00
Final plat fee       100.00
 
   (B)   The preliminary plat will be checked by the plan commission and the
city engineer as to conformity with the official plan and official map and the
principles, standards and requirements set forth in this title.
   (C)   The construction drawings and specifications will be checked by the
city engineer and plan commission for conformity to the preliminary plat and
the principles and provisions set forth in this title.
   (D)   After review of the preliminary plat and construction drawings and
specifications, the subdivider must submit a written agreement reflecting
changes deemed advisable by the plan commission. The plan commission shall,
within ninety (90) days of its submission, forward to the city council a report
recommending either approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat.
   (E)   The action of the plan commission shall be noted in six (6) copies of
the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the applicant and the other five (5) copies retained
by the city.
   (F)   Upon receipt of the report of the plan commission, the city council
shall either accept or reject the preliminary plat. Such action shall be taken
within sixty (60) days after the first regular meeting of the city council
following receipt of the plan commission's report. Upon acceptance of the
preliminary plat and construction drawings and specifications as a part
thereof, the following statement signed by the mayor shall be stamped upon all
record copies thereof:
   NOTICE OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL
Notice is hereby given that the general plan of the subdivision shown in this
preliminary plat has received tentative approval (subject to special
conditions, if any) of the City Council of the City of Momence.
The City Council of the City of Momence, Illinois.
Date of Tentative Approval:                   
Date of Signature:                    
By:                    , City Mayor
   Passed this                             day of                             ,
19           .
   (G)   The subdivider shall be notified in writing of any conditions of such
tentative approval or the reasons for rejection.
   (H)   Such tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the subdivision by
the city council shall include approval of the construction drawings and
specifications.
   (I)   Tentative approval of the preliminary plat, which includes the
subdivision construction drawings and specifications, shall entitle the
subdivider to final approval of the layout shown by such plat if the final plat
conforms substantially to said plat and any and all conditions of approval have
been met and it complies with all applicable city ordinances. The final plat
will not be considered until all improvements are constructed and approved by
the city.
   (J)   The subdivider shall obtain the necessary permits from the appropriate
agencies of the state of Illinois, as an agent of the city only upon specific
authorization of the city council.
   (K)   The subdivider shall provide a complete listing of all existing
covenants which apply to the land to be subdivided, and a complete listing of
all covenants which are proposed by the subdivider to apply to the subdivided
land.
   (L)   Tentative approval shall be effective for not more than twelve (12)
months following the date of full tentative approval, unless by mutual
agreement between the subdivider and the city council this time limit is
extended in writing.
   (M)   Whenever any action or recommendation is requested of the city
engineer by subdividers or other parties, exclusive of members of the city
council, the city engineer shall obtain the approval of the plan commission
prior to providing any such action or recommendation. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-2-4: CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Upon tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the city council
and the approval of all appropriate agencies, the subdivider shall construct
and install the required subdivision improvements. The submissions required to
obtain all required permits shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. All
permits shall be obtained prior to the beginning of work on the improvements.
   (B)   The subdivider shall deposit with the city money in the amount of five
percent (5%) of the approved estimate of cost of said improvements to act as a
guarantee to the city for a period of one year following completion of
construction and final plat approval as outlined in chapter 5 of this title and
contained on the approved plans and specifications. If the improvements are
completed as agreed at the end of the year, the deposit shall be returned. If
they are not completed as agreed, the amount expended during that year on
repair of the improvements shall be deducted from the deposit before its
return. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-2-5: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
   (A)   Submittal: Upon completion of all improvements as required by this
title, the subdivider shall submit to the city the original tracing on
reproducible Mylar and six (6) copies of the final plat within one year of the
full tentative approval of the preliminary plat. The final plat shall be
considered to include "as-built" plans of completed improvements or complete
engineering construction plans for the proposed improvements unless substantial
changes have been approved by the city engineer. However, if approval of the
preliminary plat must be obtained from another approving authority subsequent
to approval by the city council, the final plat shall be resubmitted within one
year of such approval. The failure to submit a final plat for record within the
time specified shall operate as a revocation of the tentative approval of the
preliminary plat, and the subsequent subdivision of the same property shall
proceed only upon a new application to the city.
   (B)   Exceptions; Requirements: In some instances, the city may allow the
asphalt portion of the pavement to be placed at a later time, to allow for home
builder construction traffic to wear on the stone base instead of the final
surface. In these cases, the plan commission and the city council may at their
discretion agree to accept the final plat without the asphalt construction
being completed with the following requirements:
      1.   The asphalt pavement must be constructed by the developer within one
year of final plat approval.
      2.   The subdivider's deposit of ten percent (10%) of the construction
cost of the pavement, to act as a guarantee to the city, shall be made for a
period of one year following completion of the asphalt construction.
      3.   Surety shall be submitted to the city which shall:
         (a)   Apply to the city mayor and city council;
         (b)   Be in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
pavement improvements to the subdivision not in place at the time of the
submittal of the final plat, said amount to be determined by the city's
consulting engineer assigned to review the project;
         (c)   Be in one of the following forms:
(1) Surety bond by a company licensed to do business in the state;
(2) Cash;
(3) An irrevocable letter of credit;
         (d)   Specify the time for the completion of the asphalt pavement. The
time limit for completion shall be no longer than one year.
   (C)   Review Of Final Plat: The final plat shall then be referred to the
city engineer and plan commission for review, who shall prepare a certificate
showing:
      1.   That technical details of the plat itself have been checked and
found satisfactory;
      2.   That all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
      3.   That a quit claim deed has been provided at final approval for all
dedicated lands other than public rights of way (i.e., parks, detention
basins).
   (D)   Approval Or Rejection Of Final Plat: The final plat and appropriate
recommendations shall then be referred to the city council within forty five
(45) days of its submission to the city. The city council shall approve or
reject the final plat within thirty (30) days, unless the time is extended by
agreement with the subdivider. In the event that the city council rejects the
final plat, the reasons for rejection shall be stated in the minutes of the
council meeting, and a copy thereof or a written statement of the reason for
the rejection shall be supplied the subdivider by the city clerk.
   (E)   Recording The Final Plat: The city clerk shall, upon payment by the
subdivider to the clerk of the estimated cost of recording, record the plat in
the office of the county recorder of the appropriate county. A copy of the
supporting documents transmitted with the final plat, after recording, shall
remain on file in the office of the city clerk with one copy to the plan
commission, five (5) copies with the city mayor. The final plat, with copy of
the approval thereof by the city council and all supporting documents, shall be
delivered to the subdivider. Fees as approved by the city council shall apply.
See subsection
10-2-3(A) of this title. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-2-6: PROFESSIONAL FEE AGREEMENT:
Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or group filing an
application with the planning and zoning commission, or with the city of
Momence for any development, zoning action, subdivision and the like shall at
the time of execution of said petition or application execute a professional
fee agreement with the city of Momence substantially in the form attached as
exhibit A to ordinance 572. (Ord. 572, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT PREPARATION
SECTION:
10-3-1: Preapplication Conference Data
10-3-2: Preliminary Plat Preparation
10-3-3: Final Plat Preparation
10-3-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE DATA:
The following information shall be presented by the subdivider at the time of
the preliminary consultation:
   (A)   Proof of ownership of the land to be subdivided, in the form of deed
or certificate of title search. No further consideration will be given to a
proposed subdivision unless such proof of ownership is established at the time
of the preapplication conference.
   (B)   Information including data on existing covenants, land characteristics
and available community facilities and utilities, and information describing
the subdivision proposal, such as a number of residential lots, typical lot
width and depth, business areas, public areas, proposed protective covenants,
and proposed utilities and street improvements.
   (C)   Sketch plan (10 copies) showing in simple sketch form the proposed
layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions.
The sketch plan shall be an engineered sketch made directly on a print of the
topographic survey, with all details to scale. Similarly, a map shall be
prepared indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the
city.
   (D)   No sketch plan or preliminary plat will be approved for a subdivision
which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage
facilities and which would make adequate drainage of the lots and streets
impossible. However, if the applicant agrees to make improvements which will,
in the opinion of the city engineer, make the area completely safe for
residential occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage, the
preliminary plat of the subdivision may be approved. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT PREPARATION:
   (A)   Preliminary Plat Preparation:
      1.   The preliminary plat shall be legibly drawn with waterproof,
nonfading, black ink on reproducible Mylar of good quality at a scale not
greater than one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"), and shall show correctly
on its face:
         (a)   The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate the
name of any plat previously recorded in Momence, Illinois;
         (b)   Date, scale and north point;
         (c)   The name and address of the owner, the subdivider, and the
engineer, surveyor, or land planner preparing the plat;
         (d)   Location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section,
section, township, range, and county;
         (e)   A small scale drawing of the section of government subdivision
of the section in which the subdivision lies, with the location of the
subdivision indicating thereon, and oriented in the same manner as the main
drawing;
         (f)   The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, such boundary to be indicated by a solid, heavy line;
         (g)   A legal description for the tract of land defined by the
boundaries;
         (h)   Location and owners' names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided
land;
         (i)   Zoning on and adjacent to the subdivision;
         (j)   Location, widths and names of all existing and platted streets,
alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility right of way,
parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings,
bridges, and other pertinent data as determined by the plan commission within
three hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision or property owned or
controlled by the subdivider;
         (k)   The water elevations of adjoining rivers or streams at the date
of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such rivers
or streams; all elevations shall be referred to USGS datum;
         (l)   The boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting
the subdivision and the source of information;
         (m)   If the subdivision borders a river or stream, the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back
from the ordinary high water mark of the river or stream;
         (n)   Layout and width of all streets and rights of way, such as
alleys, highways, sidewalks, easements for sewers, water mains, and other
public utilities;
         (o)   Approximate dimensions and areas of lots;
         (p)   Proposed building setback lines;
         (q)   Approximate radii of all curves and length of tangents;
         (r)   Approximate location and area of any property proposed to be
dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all
property owners in the subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such
dedication or reservation;
         (s)   All corporate boundary lines on or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision;
         (t)   A statement, near the owner's name to read:
PRELIMINARY PLAT, NOT TO BE RECORDED.
         (u)   A table of the following information: total acreage of
subdivision; acreage of streets; total number of lots; average area of lots;
and acreage of public lands to be dedicated other than streets.
   (B)   Construction Drawings And Specifications: As required under chapters 2
and 4 of this title, construction drawings and specifications shall accompany
the preliminary plat. However, if only a portion of the plat is to be improved
and submitted for final approval, construction drawings and specifications need
be prepared for such portion only. However, the entire area necessary to
properly design facilities shall be the basis for design and be so indicated.
Tentative approval of the remainder of the plat shall be valid and lawful only
for a period of one year from the date of final approval of the most recently
developed portion of the plat.
      1.   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by construction drawings
and specifications, which shall include the following:
         (a)   Setbacks: Proposed building setback lines;
         (b)   Profiles: Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed
street grades;
         (c)   Elevations: Finished garage floor elevations, elevation of lot
corners;
         (d)   Curves: Curve data of all curves;
         (e)   Cross Sections: Typical cross sections of the proposed grading,
roadway and sidewalks;
         (f)   Sewers: Plans of proposed sanitary and storm water sewers with
slopes and sizes indicated, or direction and distance to nearest water and
sewer mains, if the plans do not show the mains;
         (g)   Other Required Data: All data required under the city's drainage
and floodplain provisions, see title 4, chapters 5 and 6 of this code;
         (h)   Water Lines; Fire Hydrants: Plans for proposed water lines and
fire hydrant locations;
         (i)   Streetlights: Locations and specifications for streetlights;
         (j)   USGS Datum: All elevations shall be based on USGS datum;
         (k)   Ground Elevations On The Tract: Based on the USGS datum plane.
For land that slopes less than one-half percent (1/2%), show not less than one
foot (1') contours; for land that slopes one-half (1/2) to two percent (2%)
show not less than two foot (2') contours; and for land that slopes more than
two percent (2%) to show not less than five foot (5') contours. Contours shall
be shown at more frequent intervals as may be required by the plan commission
or city engineer for land of unusual topography;
         (l)   Subsurface Conditions On The Tract: If required by the plan
commission. Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil,
rock, and ground water conditions; depth of ground water unless test pits are
dry at a depth of five feet (5'); written approval from the health department
of the appropriate county if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed
and proof that the county health department has approved the individual sewage
disposal system;
         (m)   Other Conditions On The Tract: Watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1') or more in
diameter, structures and other significant features;
         (n)   Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other
nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; and owners of adjacent
unplatted land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by name,
recording date, and number and show approximate percent built up);
         (o)   All improvements detailed in the official city standards. See
title 7, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-3-3: FINAL PLAT PREPARATION:
A final plat of subdivided land shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   General Requirements: All plats shall be legibly prepared as follows:
      1.   On reproducible Mylar not larger than twenty four inches by twenty
eight inches (24" x 28"), or divisible into parts not exceeding twenty four
inches by twenty eight inches (24" x 28").
      2.   With waterproof, nonfading, black ink on a scale not greater than
one hundred feet (100') to an inch. The scale used shall be indicated on the
plat graphically and in letters.
   (B)   Map And Engineering Information: The final plat shall show correctly
on its face:
      1.   The name or names of the owners of the property;
      2.   The name of the registered land surveyor who prepared the plat and
the date thereof;
      3.   The legal description of the property subdivided;
      4.   All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the
field in their proper places, including the corner of all lots; the material of
which the monuments, corners, or other points are made shall be noted at the
representation thereof or by legend;
      5.   The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries, the
boundary lines of all blocks, public grounds, streets and alleys, and all lot
lines, except that when the lines in any tier of lots are parallel, it shall be
sufficient to make the bearings of the outer lines on one tier thereof;
easements shall be shown by centerline and width when lines are parallel to a
boundary; otherwise, boundary bearings and distances shall be shown;
      6.   All blocks consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order;
the blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be
numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions;
      7.   All lots in each block consecutively numbered;
      8.   The exact width of all easements, streets and alleys;
      9.   All river or stream shore meander lines established by the surveyor
in accordance with chapter 5 of this title, the distances and bearings thereof,
and the distance between the point of intersection or such meander lines with
lot lines and the ordinary high water mark;
      10.   All building setback lines, including setback lines on corner lots;
      11.   Accurate boundaries and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property
owners in the subdivision;
      12.   Date, scale, and north arrow.
   (C)   Name, Location And Position: The name of the plat shall be printed
thereon in prominent letters and shall not be a duplicate of the name of any
plat previously recorded in Momence, Illinois. The following information
relating to the position and location of the subdivision shall be shown on the
plat:
      1.   The location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section,
section, township, range, and county noted immediately under the name given the
subdivision;
      2.   The exact location of the subdivision indicated by distances and
bearings with reference to a corner or corners established in the United States
public land survey;
      3.   Where provisions are made for access from any subdivision to any
river or stream, the plat shall show the area over which access is provided to
the river or stream;
      4.   The names of adjoining streets, state highways, and subdivisions
shown in their proper location;
      5.   Abutting street and state highway lines of adjoining plats shown
shall be given also.
   (D)   Roads And Public Spaces:
      1.   The name of each road or street shown on the plat which is to be
dedicated shall be printed thereon in prominent letters, and be labeled "hereby
dedicated".
      2.   All lands reserved for public use except roads and streets shall be
clearly marked "Reserved for Public Use".
   (E)   Site Conditions And Topography:
      1.   All existing buildings and structures;
      2.   All watercourses and drainage ditches;
      3.   Boundary of any floodplain area or zone, or area subject to
flooding, as determined in accordance with this code for special flood hazard
areas. See title 4, chapter 5 of this code.
   (F)   Documents To Accompany Final Plat:
      1.   To entitle a final plat to be recorded, such certificates as are
required by law shall be lettered or printed legibly with black durable ink or
typed legibly with black ribbon;
      2.   Restrictive covenants shall accompany the final plat;
      3.   Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him, that the monument and markers thereon exist as
located and that all dimensions and details are correct;
      4.   Notarized certification, by the owner or owners of the dedication of
streets and other public areas;
      5.   Approvals by county authorities as required;
      6.   A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public
improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision;
      7.   Construction drawings and specifications, including profiles, cross
sections and details as applicable, of all public improvements, reflecting
improvements record must accompany the final plat submission. Elevations shall
be referred to USGS datum. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 4
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS AND GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES
SECTION:
10-4-1: General
10-4-2: Streets
10-4-3: Public Use Facilities And Areas
10-4-4: Blocks
10-4-5: Lots
10-4-6: Easements
10-4-7: Building Setback Lines
10-4-8: Drainage And Floodplain Provisions
10-4-9: Natural Features
10-4-10: Schools And Parks
10-4-11: Minimum Standards For Required Utilities And Street And Lot
Improvements
10-4-1: GENERAL:
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider shall conform to:
   (A)   The zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The official plan and official map, as amended, of the city.
   (C)   Applicable laws, rules and regulations of the state and county and
fully constituted agencies thereof.
   (D)   In all instances where a requirement of this title is similar to or in
conflict with other provisions of the city, township or county ordinances,
rules or regulations, the most restrictive shall apply and prevail.
   (E)   The subdivider shall improve any existing platted road adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. The road may be under the jurisdiction of the county,
township or city. This improvement shall conform to the design specified in
this title for the type of road specified. The subdivider will be required to
construct these improvements for the half of the road adjacent to the proposed
subdivision. The remaining half of the road may be improved by the agency
having jurisdiction, or a subdivider adjacent to the road on the opposite side
of the road, and these improvements may be constructed at a later date. (Ord.
455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-2: STREETS:
   (A)   Public Streets To Be Provided: A public street shall be provided for
convenient access to all property within the subdivision. No private street or
thoroughfare shall be permitted.
   (B)   Street Layout: The street layout of the subdivision shall be in
general conformity with the official map of the most advantageous development
of adjoining areas in the entire neighborhood. The streets shall be designed
and located in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions and natural terrain features, such as streams and existing street
growth, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to
the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
   (C)   Other Requirements: All streets in a subdivision abutting a state or
county highway shall meet all the requirements of the state or county
regulations pertaining thereto as well as meeting the requirements of this
title. Where such requirements are in conflict, the most restrictive shall
apply.
   (D)   Parallel Streets Required: Where a subdivision borders on or contains
a railroad or highway, the plan commission may require a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes
in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (E)   Public Streets In Subdivisions: Whenever a tract to be subdivided
embraces any part of a public street so designed in the comprehensive plan and
official map, such part of such street shall be platted by the subdivision at
the location and width indicated on the plan.
   (F)   Street Classification: Highway, major collector and local streets as
classified in this subsection shall be as shown and designed in the official
map.
      1.   Highway: Those state, county and village designated routes which
provide continuity of travel and freedom from hazards and congestion necessary
for interregional and city traffic movement.
      2.   Major Street: Those routes so designated by the city to be of
importance in intra-city traffic movement and necessary to provide easy access
to neighboring communities.
      3.   Collector Street: Those primary streets within the neighborhood unit
which will act to collect traffic from minor streets for travel to major
streets and highways.
      4.   Local Street: Those streets whose prime function is to give access
to abutting property. They are not intended to carry heavy through traffic and
are designed to discourage such movement.
      5.   Marginal Access Street: Those local streets which serve to control
access to major thoroughfares and permit development of lands adjacent to high
speed and high capacity highways. Their primary function is property access.
   (G)   Proposed Streets: Provision shall be made so that all proposed streets
shall have a direct connection with or be continuous and in line with existing,
planned, or platted streets with which they are to connect.
   (H)   Extension Of Streets: Where, in the opinion of the plan commission, it
is necessary and desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
subdivision with the existing or more advantageous future layout for
development of adjacent land, to extend streets within the proposed
subdivision, those streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
proposed street construction, including grades, horizontal curves, vertical
curves, and tangents, within the proposed subdivision, shall be in accordance
with the "minimum standard for street design" in title 7, chapter 9 of this
code.
   (I)   Street Names: New street names shall not duplicate the names of
existing streets, but streets that are continuations of others already in
existence shall bear the name of the existing street. All new streets shall be
subject to the approval and guidelines of the plan commission.
   (J)   Cul-De-Sacs: Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall
terminate in a turnaround or tee terminus. A turnaround shall have a right of
way of not less than one hundred forty feet (140') in diameter and a paved
roadway turnaround of one hundred ten feet (110') in diameter. Cul-de-sac
streets shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length as measured from
center of the turnaround to the center of the intersection.
   (K)   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations and where the plan commission finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
   (L)   Intersections:
      1.   Streets shall be designed with no jogs or offsets less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125'). Where streets intersect highways, their
alignment shall be continuous.
      2.   Streets shall intersect in a manner to ensure safe traffic flow,
preferably at right angles, but in no case shall two (2) streets intersect with
an acute angle of less than sixty degrees (60°).
   (M)   Alleys:
      1.   Alleys shall not be permitted except that the plan commission may
require alleys where other definite and assured provisions are not made for
service access, such as off street loading, unloading, and parking, consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      2.   The width of an alley, where required, shall be a thirty foot (30')
right of way and pavement shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
      3.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided, but, where necessary, corners may be modified to allow the vehicle
types anticipated adequate space to perform turning maneuvers safely.
      4.   Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
   (N)   Reserve Strips: Controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is placed with the city under conditions approved by
the plan commission. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-3: PUBLIC USE FACILITIES AND AREAS:
In addition to providing for streets and alleys and ways and easements for
public facilities and utilities, provision shall be made for the reservation of
such storm floodwater runoff channels and basins, and public grounds as may be
reasonably required by the plan commission to conform to the official map.
   (A)   See park requirements in section
10-4-10 of this chapter.
   (B)   The plan commission and city may require land to be set aside for use
as bicycle or pedestrian paths. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-4: BLOCKS:
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate for the
topography and the type of development contemplated. It is desirable that block
lengths in residential areas should not exceed one thousand two hundred sixty
feet (1,260') nor be less than four hundred feet (400') nor have less than
sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth
between street lines, except where fronting on marginal access streets.
   (B)   Pedestrian walkways not less than ten feet (10') wide may be required
by the plan commission through the center of blocks more than nine hundred feet
(900') long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and/or other community
facilities.
   (C)   Blocks, or portions thereof, intended for commercial or industrial use
shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate off street areas
to provide for parking, loading docks, and other such facilities. (Ord. 455, 4-
21-1997)
10-4-5: LOTS:
   (A)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the appropriate
zoning classification of the zoning ordinance, but in no case shall a lot have
an average depth of less than one hundred twenty feet (120'). In the case of
double frontage or reverse frontage lots, the minimum average depth shall be
one hundred fifty feet (150').
      1.   Single-family residential lots shall be at least eighty feet (80')
in width.
      2.   Duplex (R-1-D) residential lots shall be at least one hundred feet
(100') in width.
   (B)   Residential lots which abut upon major streets shall also abut upon a
local street. Vehicular access to such lots shall be to the local street only.
   (C)   Lots at right angles to each other shall be avoided where possible in
residential areas.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (E)   Lots shall not cross municipal nor county boundary lines.
   (F)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways
or primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least thirty feet (30'), and
across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the
line of lots abutting such highways and primary thoroughfares or other
disadvantageous use.
   (G)   Lots shall be of sufficient size and area to provide for all required
activities such as, but not limited to, parking and loading as required by the
zoning ordinance.
   (H)   Corner lots in residential zones shall be considered as having
frontage on each street and shall be increased in width by a minimum of twenty
percent (20%) to conform with minimum setback lines on both streets.
   (I)   Angular lots in residential zones shall be a minimum width of seventy
feet (70') measured at the building setback line. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-6: EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet (10')
wide.
   (B)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
   (C)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right of way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and
shall include such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for the purpose and as determined by the plan commission. A minimum of ten feet
(10') shall be provided on either side of the ditch measured from the top of
the bank away from the centerline of the drainageway. Parallel streets or
parkways may be required in connection therewith.
   (D)   When a subdivision drainage plan proposes use of detention basins or
ponds which are to be dedicated for public use, provision shall be made that a
public access be possible through extension of a public access easement to
connect the facility to a public street. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform
to the front yard provisions of the Momence zoning ordinance, except that in no
case shall the building setback line be less than twenty five feet (25') from
the front property line.
A corner lot shall maintain not less than the minimum building setback lines
required on both streets on which the lot abuts. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-8: DRAINAGE AND FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS:
Refer to special flood hazards, and to standards and controls for storm water
management, erosion and sedimentation. These regulations are included in title
4, chapters 5 and 6 of this code. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-9: NATURAL FEATURES:
In all subdivisions due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural
features including:
   (A)   Trees;
   (B)   Commercial landscaping. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-10: SCHOOLS AND PARKS:
Where deemed essential by the plan commission upon consideration of the
particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, the plan commission
may recommend and the city council require the dedication or reservation of
land for park and recreational purposes and land for school site(s), to serve
the immediate and future needs of the residents of the parcel, to make a cash
contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or to provide a combination of
both at the option of the city. Such dedications are necessary to ensure proper
provision of park and school sites for persons who are expected to reside
within the subdivision or development, which sites would otherwise have to be
acquired at the expense of the general public but whose utility would generally
be limited to residents of the parcel.
   (A)   Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication:
      1.   Calculation: The subdivider may be required to dedicate for park and
recreation purposes an amount of land determined on the basis of eight (8)
acres per one thousand (1,000) persons. This calculation shall be based upon
3.5 persons per single-family dwelling unit.
      2.   Location; On Site Storage:
         (a)   Location: The location of the site to be dedicated will be
determined by the city council upon recommendation.
         (b)   On Site Storage: No storage of materials, including spoil
materials or top soil will be allowed on a park site designed for recreational
use or land designated as future or proposed school sites.
      3.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: Private open
space or recreation areas may be utilized in lieu of dedication required by
this subsection (A) provided that detailed improvement plans shall be approved
by the plan commission and city council and that satisfactory guarantees of the
permanency of the use and its maintenance, enforceable by the city, shall be
entered into by the subdivider.
   (B)   Criteria For School Site Provision: Subdividers may be required to
begin negotiations with the school district to determine requirements for
school site locations or cash contributions to ease the impact of a proposed
development. The subdivider shall provide a written statement to the city that
an agreement has been reached regarding any future school sites or
contributions to the school district.
   (C)   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park And School
Sites:
      1.   Cash Contribution: When the resulting site in a proposed subdivision
or development is too small to be usable for the purpose intended or where it
is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or a school site, the city
may require the subdivider to contribute cash in lieu of land dedication. The
cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held
in trust by the city or other public body designated by the city, solely for
the acquisition of park and recreation land as hereinbefore classified, which
will serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision
or development or the improvement of other existing park and recreation land
which already serves such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of school sites
shall be held in trust by the city, or other public body designated by the
city, solely for use in the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the
immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or development or
for the improvement to any existing school site which already serves such
needs, but not for the construction of any school buildings or additions
thereto. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation
land dedication or cash contribution in lieu of school site(s) is not expended
for the purpose set forth herein within seven (7) years from the date of
receipt, it will be refunded to the subdivider who made such contribution.
      2.   Fair Market Value: The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of land as improved, that otherwise
would have been dedicated as park and recreation sites. The subdivider shall
submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land or
other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair market value per
acre of such improved land shall be made by the city council based upon such
information from other sources which may be submitted to the city council by
any local park district, school district or others.
   (D)   Criteria For Requiring Dedication And A Fee: There will be situations
when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are
both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
      1.   A major part of the local park or recreation site or school site has
already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
subdivision or development to complete the site. The portions needed to
complete the park or school site shall be dedicated, and cash contribution will
be required in lieu of the balance of the required dedication.
   (E)   Improved Sites: The slope, topography and geology of the site to be
dedicated as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not
differ greatly from the surrounding land. Before dedication, all sites shall be
improved with a vigorous stand of grass. The grass shall be a mixture of
bluegrass, fescue, and rye as approved by the city engineer. The applicant/
developer shall be responsible for all maintenance of the site until the site
is accepted by the city, or acceptable provisions shall be made for such
improvement before dedication. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-4-11: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR REQUIRED UTILITIES AND STREET AND LOT
IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Public water: Per Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) and
city specifications, and connected to the water distribution system of the
city. All fire hydrants shall be spaced to provide coverage for all buildings
within a three hundred foot (300') radius of a hydrant. The fire chief of the
Momence fire protection district or his designee may require additional
hydrants where deemed necessary.
   (B)   Public sanitary sewers: Per "Standards For Sewer And Water Main
Construction In Illinois", as published by the Illinois environmental
protection agency (IEPA) (current edition).
   (C)   Primary thoroughfares: In accordance with the official city standards
1 .
   (D)   Secondary thoroughfares: In accordance with the official city
standards 2 .
   (E)   Streets: In accordance with the official city standards 3 .
   (F)   Street lighting: In accordance with the provisions of title 4, chapter
7 of this code.
   (G)   Streets along development boundaries, and streets connecting
development with existing improved street system: Cross sections as determined
by the city engineer and the plan commission. Constructed per the official city
standards 4 .
   (H)   Alleys: Per the official city standards 5 .
   (I)   Lot and street grading: Per plans and profiles approved by the city
engineer.
   (J)   Drains, storm sewer system and other drainage improvements: Per the
official city standards. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code, and the plans and
specifications approved by the city engineer and the plan commission. Shall
include access to each lot for storm sewer connection either to the main street
storm sewer system or to a supplement system. All streets shall be provided
with inlets and underground drainage facilities having a design capacity
adequate to carry off surface water falling or coming onto the streets in the
duration storm specified in the official city standards. Sufficient inlets
shall be provided so that no pavement is designed to allow water to drain
across the crown of an intersecting street or is carried in the gutter for more
than the distance specified in the official city standards. Storm sewer systems
shall be constructed per the official city standards. The proposed storm sewer
system shall be approved by the city engineer.
   (K)   Combination concrete curb and gutter: Per the official city standards
6 .
   (L)   Concrete valley gutter: Per the official city standards 7 .
   (M)   Pavement base: Per the official city standards 8 .
   (N)   Wearing surface: Per the official city standards 9 .
   (O)   Driveways: Per the official city standards 10 .
   (P)   Street trees: Three inch (3") caliper, forty feet (40') to fifty feet
(50') apart per city specifications.
   (Q)   Sidewalks: Per the official city standards 11 .
   (R)   Pedestrian walkways: Per the official city standards 12 .
   (S)   Landscaping: Per the official city standards 13 .
   (T)   Street name signs: Per the official city standards 14 . Street name
signs shall be located at all intersections. Regulatory signing as per the city
engineer.
   (U)   Telephone and electric service: In rear or side lot easements.
   (V)   Gas: In street planting strip.
   (W)   Cable/pay TV: In rear or side lot easements.
   (X)   Lot grading: Per neighborhood drainage plan.
   (Y)   Storm water control: The city mayor and city council require that all
improvements "conform with local, state and federal authorities which have
jurisdiction over the subdivision"; therefore, the design for storm water
control shall conform to the drainage and floodway provisions of title 9,
chapter 14 of this code and title 4, chapters 5 and 6 of this code.
   (Z)   General: Any damage done to the city infrastructure system at the time
of construction shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the city engineer or
the appointed city official.
   (AA)   Enforcement: The building inspector of the city is charged with the
responsibility to enforce the provisions of this title.
All plans and specifications for utility and street improvements shall be
prepared by and certified by an Illinois registered professional engineer.
(Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
 
Notes
1  1. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
2  2. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
3  3. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
4  4. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
5  5. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
6  1. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
7  2. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
8  3. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
9  4. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
10 5. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
11 6. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
12 7. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
13 8. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
14 9. See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
CHAPTER 5
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Improvements Completed
10-5-2: Optional Completion Of Improvements
10-5-3: City Engineer Certification
10-5-4: Insurance
10-5-5: Procedure
10-5-1: IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED:
All of the improvements required under this title shall be constructed in
accordance with these provisions prior to the filing with the city of the final
plat for final approval by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-5-2: OPTIONAL COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
There should be no other optional methods of completion of improvements except
as provided herein. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-5-3: CITY ENGINEER CERTIFICATION:
Before a preliminary plat is approved, the city engineer shall certify that the
improvements described in the construction drawings and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of
the city and that they comply with the following. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-5-4: INSURANCE:
The party initiating or installing any of the improvements herein shall, prior
to the installation thereof, agree to protect and save the city harmless from
any and all claims, expenses, liability or judgments, in any manner resulting
from, arising out of, or incident to the making of any of the aforesaid
improvements or the granting of permission to so make. Said party, naming said
party and the city as the insured, shall cause a policy of insurance to be
issued providing minimum public liability coverage in the amounts of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or death to one person, one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury and death to more than one person in
any one accident, and property damage in any amount of not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
All such policies of insurance shall be approved by the city plan commission
prior to the installation of any of the aforesaid improvements. (Ord. 455, 4-
21-1997)
10-5-5: PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Construction Drawings And Specifications: Simultaneous with filing the
preliminary plat, ten (10) copies of the construction drawings and
specifications, prepared by a professional engineer registered in Illinois,
shall be furnished to the city in accordance with the provisions of this
section for the following subdivision improvements:
      1.   Street pavements,
      2.   Sanitary sewage system,
      3.   Storm drainage including sewers and neighborhood drainage plan to
include finished garage floor elevations and overland surface water flow,
      4.   Water supply and distribution, including all fittings and
appurtenances,
      5.   Curb and gutter,
      6.   Public utility locations,
      7.   Street signs, guardrails, etc.
   (B)   Construction And Inspection:
      1.   All improvements shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized
city inspectors both during the course of construction and after construction
is completed. The contractor shall provide for reasonable test and proof of
quality of materials as requested by the inspector. Upon due cause, the city
engineer may require that work be suspended and due cause shall include weather
conditions, questionable materials of construction, methods of construction or
nonadherence to specifications and drawings, and failure to stop work upon the
order of the city engineer shall constitute a violation of this title. The
inspector shall prepare and submit to the city engineer periodic reports
stating progress of work and giving his findings as to quality of materials and
workmanship. He shall call attention to any circumstance that entails departure
from drawings and specifications. When an improvement has been completed, he
shall prepare a summary report.
      2.   Approval by the inspector or absence of inspection shall in no way
relieve the subdivider of full responsibility for adherence by his contractor
to specifications.
   (C)   Record Plans: After completion of all public improvements and prior to
final acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider or city, whichever is
responsible for installation of the particular works, shall make or cause to be
made drawings showing the actual locations of all valves, manholes, stubs,
sewer and water mains, and such other facilities as the city engineer shall
require. This map shall be in black ink on Mylar and shall bear the signature
of a professional engineer registered in Illinois. The presentation of this map
shall be a condition of final acceptance of the improvements and release of the
surety bond assuring their completion.
   (D)   Survey Monuments: All permanent and other monuments required under
subsection
10-3-3(B)4 of this title shall be placed prior to the approval of the final
plat. Monuments shall be of concrete, not less than six inches (6") in diameter
and thirty six inches (36") deep, with a center metal dowel rod at least twelve
inches (12") long cast in place. Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half
inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches (18") long shall be set at the
intersection of street centerlines and at all corners of lots not marked by
monuments.
The monuments and markers shall be set level with the finished grade.
   (E)   Acceptance Of Dedications, Improvements:
      1.   The approval of the final plat by the mayor and city council shall
constitute acceptance of the dedication of any public street, open space, or
other public area.
      2.   The acceptance of the improvements constructed, in accordance with
this title for operation and maintenance purposes, shall be after successful
completion of the guarantee period covered by the guarantee bond and by formal
resolution of the mayor and plan commission. However, the normal operating
costs of any pumping stations, etc., shall be assumed by the city when put in
operation upon being tentatively accepted subject to the guarantee. (Ord. 455,
4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 6
VARIANCES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Extraordinary Hardship
10-6-1: EXTRAORDINARY HARDSHIP:
Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from
strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary enforcement of the
regulation so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the official comprehensive plan of the city or these
regulations. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
CHAPTER 7
CERTIFICATION OF PLATS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Signatures
10-7-2: Certificates
10-7-1: SIGNATURES:
When the city council shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve the final
plat, the mayor and city clerk shall be authorized to sign the original Mylar.
The certificates on the final plat shall be in the following form, with the
signatures of the chairman of the Kankakee County board and the township
highway commissioner, the county engineer, and the chairman of the county
planning and zoning committee to be necessary only where the plat covers land
in the unincorporated areas. (Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
10-7-2: CERTIFICATES:
The following certificates shall appear on all final plats:
   OWNERSHIP CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            )
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
This is to certify that the undersigned are the Owners of the land described in
the annexed plat, and that they have caused the same to be surveyed and
subdivided as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth,
that they hereby dedicate to the public for use as streets any right or title
they may have to any land noted on the plat as streets, and do hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated.
Dated this                       day of                             , A.D. 19
          .
                                     
   NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
I,                                     , a Notary Public, in and for said
County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that the people whose
signatures appear in the "Ownership Certificate" are personally known to me to
be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument as
such Owners and that they appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and delivered the annexed plat as their own free
and voluntary act for the purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal at                                    ,
Illinois, this                      day of                          , A.D. 19
         .
                                      Notary Public
   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
This is to certify that I,                              , Illinois Professional
Land Surveyor No.                              , have surveyed and subdivided
the following described property:
                                               , dividing the same into lots as
shown by the annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey and
subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further
certify that all regulations enacted by the City Council relative to
subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of this plat.
Given under my hand and seal at
                                                , Illinois, this
                   day of                           , A.D. 19           .
                                 , I.P.L.S. #           
   TOPOGRAPHY
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
To the best of my knowledge no part of this subdivision is located within a
special flood hazard area as indicated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, FIRM Maps, Panel Number                  , dated
                            .
Dated this                      day of                            , A.D. 19
          .
                                   , P.E. #           
   CITY ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
Approved by the City Engineer of Momence, Illinois on the                     
day of                           , A.D. 19           .
                                     , City Engineer
   CITY PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
Approved by the Plan Commission of the City of Momence, Illinois, at a meeting
held on the                      day of                         , A.D. 19
         .
                                 , Chairman                               ,
Secretary
   CITY COUNCIL CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
Approved by the City Council of the City of Momence at a meeting held on
the                      day of                           , A.D. 19           .
                                 , Mayor                               , City
Clerk
   COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:
I,                              , County Clerk of Kankakee County, Illinois,
and custodian of the records and files of said office, do hereby certify that I
find from such records and files, no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid
current general taxes, no delinquent special assessments on file against the
tract of land described on the attached plat of                               ,
and there are no unpaid deferred installments of special assessments
outstanding against the said property or any part thereof.
Dated at Kankakee, Illinois this                      day of
                          , A.D. 19           .
                                 , County Clerk
   TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
I,                               ,                                Township
Highway Commissioner, do hereby certify that all matters pertaining to the
highway requirements as prescribed in the regulations governing plats adopted
by the Board of Supervisors of Kankakee County insofar as they pertain to the
annexed plat have been complied with.
Dated this                      day of                          , A.D. 19
          .
                                 , Highway Commissioner
   COUNTY ENGINEER CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
I,                               , County Engineer of said County, do hereby
certify that the annexed plat has been examined by me and found to comply with
the highway requirements as set forth in the regulations governing plats of
subdivided land adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Kankakee County,
Illinois.
Dated this                      day of                           , A.D. 19
          .
                                 , County Engineer
   COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMITTEE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
Approved by the Kankakee County Planning and Zoning Committee at a meeting held
on the                      day of                         , A.D. 19          .
                                 , Chairman
Kankakee County Board
   KANKAKEE COUNTY BOARD CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
            ) SS
COUNTY OF KANKAKEE   )
Approved by the Kankakee County Board, Kankakee, Illinois at a meeting held on
the                      day of                           , A.D. 19           .
                , Chairman                , County Clerk
(Ord. 455, 4-21-1997)
