Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Mount Vernon. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained in
PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to April
2024, please contact the City of Mount Vernon.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2026 Ordinances
 
Older Ordinances
 
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
2018-25  5-22-2018 Establishing administrative procedure to determine
                   eligibility under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act
                  
                  
 
 
2024 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
2024-11  4-15-2024  Budget FY May 1, 2024 - April 30, 2025
2024-12  4-15-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    A-G to Class R-3
2024-13  4-15-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    A-G to Class R-2
2024-14  5-6-2024   Salaries
2024-15  5-20-2024  Authorizing sale of surplus municipal property
2024-16  5-20-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    A-G to Class R-1
2024-17  5-20-2024  Granting a conditional use
2024-18  6-3-2024   Adopting ordinance
2024-19  6-3-2024   Declaring certain property as surplus and authorizing its
                    transfer
2024-22  7-22-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    A-G to Class R-2
2024-23  7-22-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    R-1 to Class R-M2
2024-24  7-22-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    A-G to Class R-1
2024-25  7-22-2024  Granting a conditional use
2024-26  3-25-2024  Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
                    B-PL to Class B-2
2024-27  8-5-2024   Authorizing property purchase agreement
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2024-28  8-19-2024  B-2 Secondary Business District to Class I-2, General
                    Industrial District
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from A-
2024-29  8-19-2024  G General Agriculture District to Class B-2 Secondary
                    Business District
                    Adding Chapter 94 prohibiting unauthorized camping on
2024-30  9-3-2024   public property
                     
                    Chapter 94
                    Amending number of licenses
2024-31  9-3-2024    
                    111.09
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2024-32  9-16-2024  R-MH Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home District to A-
                    G General Agriculture District
2024-33  10-7-2024  Reclassifying districts from Class R-1 to Class R-M2
                    Changing annual raffle license to permit unlimited number
2024-34  10-7-2024  of raffles
                     
                    115.04(C)
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2024-35  11-4-2024  I-1, Light Industrial District to Class R-M2, Medium
                    Density Residential and Mobile Home District
                    Amending code regarding sale of alcoholic liquors for
2024-36  11-4-2024  consumption within designated outdoor refreshment areas
                     
                    111.17, 111.23, 111.24, adding 111.25
                    Adopting 2021 International Codes: Building Code,
                    Residential Code, Existing Building Code, Fuel Gas Code,
2024-37  11-4-2024  Mechanical Code, and Fire Code, and the 2023 National
                    Electrical Code
                     
                    91.01, 150.01
2024-38  11-18-2024 Amending Ord. 2022-02 regarding public sewerage system
                    Amending police department
2024-39  11-18-2024  
                    35.02
2024-40  11-18-2024 Granting a conditional use
2024-41  12-2-2024  Tax levy and collection of taxes
                   
 
 
2025 Ordinances
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2025-01  1-21-2025  A-G, General Agriculture District to Class R-3, High
                    Density Residential
2025-02  2-3-2025   Authorizing sale of municipal property
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2025-03  2-18-2025  A-G, General Agriculture District to Class I-2, General
                    Industrial District
2025-04  2-18-2025  Requesting a conditional use permit
                    Amending code regarding hotel liquor regulations
2025-05  3-17-2025   
                    111.05
2025-06  3-17-2025  Authorizing the ceding of private activity bonding
                    authority
2025-07  4-7-2025   Budget for fiscal year May 1, 2025 - April 30, 2026
2025-08  4-7-2025   Authorizing sale of municipal property
2025-09  4-21-2025  Amending personnel policy regarding employee residency
                    requirements
2025-10  5-5-2025   Authorizing sale of municipal property
                    Change classification of the use of real estate from Class
2025-11  5-19-2025  R-2, Medium Density Residential to Class R-M2, Medium
                    Density Residential and Mobile Home District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class R-2,
2025-12  5-19-2025  Medium Density Residential to Class B-1, Primary Business
                    District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class R-1,
2025-13  5-19-2025  Low Density Residential to Class B-2, Secondary Business
                    District
2025-14  5-19-2025  Granting a conditional use to 801 Fairfield Rd. Mt. Vernon,
                    IL
2025-15  5-19-2025  Purchasing new fire truck
2025-16  7-7-2025   Amending personnel policy
2025-17  7-7-2025   Autohrizing "Interested Parties" registries and rules
2025-18  7-21-2025  Ordinance to Grant Conditional Use - 1012 Main Street
2025-19  7-21-2025  Ordinance Amend Ch 161 - Zoning - 1410 Peek Street
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class B-2,
2025-21  8-19-2025  Secondary Business District to Class I-1, Light Industrial
                    District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class B-2,
2025-22  8-19-2025  Secondary Business District to Class R-1, Low Density
                    Residential District
2025-23  9-3-2025   Implementing Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax
                    and a Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
2025-24  --         Approving Tax Increment Redevelopment Plan and Project for
                    the Frontage Road TIF
2025-25  --         Designating the Frontage Road TIF
2025-26  --         Adopting Tax Increment Financing for the Frontage Road TIF
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class A-
2025-27  9-3-2025   G2, General Agriculture District to Class R-1, Low Density
                    Residential District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class I-1,
2025-28  10-22-2025 Light Industrial Residential District to Class R-1, Low
                    Density Residential District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class A-G,
2025-29  10-22-2025 General Agriculture District to Class B-2, Secondary
                    Business District
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class I-1,
2025-30  10-22-2025 Light Industrial Residential District to Class R-1, Low
                    Density Residential District
2025-31  10-22-2025 Authorizing sale of municipal property
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class R-1,
2025-32  11-17-2025 Low Density Residential District to Class R-3, HIgh Density
                    Residential District
2025-33  11-17-2025 Authorizing donation of municipal real property
                    Intergovernmental agreement with Downstate Major Case Squad
2025-34  12-1-2025  related to Criminal Justice Service Assistance Mutual Aid
                    Agreement
2025-35  12-15-2025 Bonds
2025-36  12-15-2025 Reallocating proceeds from Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
                    and Service Occupation Tax
                    Change classification of use of real estate from Class A-G,
2025-37  12-15-2025 General Agriculture District, to Class R-1, Low Density
                    Residential District
2025-38  12-15-2025 Levy and collection of taxes for Fiscal Year May 1, 2025
                    ending April 30, 2026
                   
 
 
2026 Ordinances
 
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                   Change classification of use of real estate from Class B-2,
2026-01  1-20-2026 Secondary Business District, to Class R-1, Low Density
                   Residential District
                   Change classification of use of real estate from Class A-G,
2026-02  1-20-2026 General Agriculture District, to Class R-1, Low Density
                   Residential District
                   Change classification of use of real estate from Class RM2,
2026-03  1-20-2026 Medium Density Residential and Mobile Home District and
                   Class I-1 Light Industrial District, to Class R-3, High
                   Density Residential District
2026-04  2-3-2026  Authorizing the ceding of private activity bonding authority
                  
                  
 
MT. VERNON, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-23, passed 9-3-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Citation
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Construction
   
10.04   Separability
   
10.05   Repeal of prior ordinance
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 CITATION.
   The within Ordinance shall be known and hereafter cited by the title
“REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MT. VERNON”. All ordinances enacted
after the effective date hereof which shall amend or otherwise modify the terms
hereof shall specify the part or portion of this revised code of ordinances
which shall be amended or affected. A copy of the within code shall be kept on
file in the office of the City Clerk in looseleaf form as the official Revised
Code of Ordinances and the City Clerk shall insert therein all amendments,
hereto immediately upon the same becoming effective.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.1)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of the within Revised Code of Ordinances, except as
specifically otherwise provided in any Article or section hereof, the following
terms and words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
   (A)   The word “person” shall include and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships, corporations, clubs, societies, and bodies politic, as well as to
individuals.
   (B)   The term “city” shall mean the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   (C)   The term “City Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon, including the elected Councilmen and Mayor of such City.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.2)
§ 10.03 CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules of construction shall be observed in the enforcement and
interpretation of the within ordinance:
   (A)   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of language, except that technical words and
phrases and such others as may have acquired a special meaning in the law shall
be construed and understood according to such special meaning.
   (B)   Every word herein importing the masculine gender shall extend and be
applied to females as well as males. Every word importing the singular only
shall extend and be applied to the plural as well as to the singular; and every
word importing the plural shall extend and be applied to the singular as well
as to the plural.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.3)
§ 10.04 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council in enacting
the within Revised Code of Ordinances or any amendment or modification hereof
that if any article, section, paragraph, phrase, or part of this ordinance
shall be held invalid, the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs, phrases,
and parts shall remain in full force and effect and the provisions hereof are
hereby declared to be separable.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.4)
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE.
   (A)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this ordinance are hereby repealed. All general ordinances of the City
passed prior to the adoption of this Revised Code of Ordinances are hereby
repealed, except the following, which are excluded and not hereby repealed:
      (1)    Appropriation and Tax levy ordinances.
      (2)    Salary ordinances.
      (3)    Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
      (4)    Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons.
      (5)    Ordinances creating or authorizing the execution of contracts or
the issuance of warrants.
      (6)    Ordinances establishing names for or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places.
      (7)    Bond ordinances.
      (8)    Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate
or personal property by or from the City.
      (9)    All special ordinances.
   (B)   The within Revised Code of Ordinances or any amendment hereto shall
not be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether expressly
repealed or not as to any offenses committed against such former ordinance or
as to any act done or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred or any
right accrued or created arising under such former ordinance, and shall not in
any way whatever affect any such offense or act so committed or done or any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or created
arising before the effective date of such Revised Code of Ordinances or
amendment thereof.
   (C)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any ordinance of the City herein repealed or if
discontinued, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue
or affecting the liability or any person waiving any right of the City under
any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.5)
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
city for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined not
more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   EX PARTE HEARING: In all cases in which a court appearance is
not required under the Statutes of the State of Illinois and in which a cash
bail is posted or a bond certificate deposited, the defendant shall be provided
with a statement in substantially the following form, on the “Complaint” or on
the bond form:
“In the event you fail to appear in court to answer a charge that does not
require you to appear in court you thereby consent to the entry of a judgment
against you in the amount of all applicable fines, penalties, and costs and the
application of a cash bail or other security you have deposited to their
payment and satisfaction”.
      (2)   If the defendant does not appear on the date set for appearance or
any date to which the case may be continued, the Court may enter an ex parte
judgment against the defendant assessing fines, penalties, and costs in an
amount not to exceed the cash bail or security and apply the cash bail or
security in payment thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 22, § 22.6)
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
31.   CITY COUNCIL
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CITY POLICIES
      
34.   CITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
35.   FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION, FIRE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
36.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Qualifications
City Officials
   
30.15   Mayor
   
30.16   City Clerk, Deputy City Clerk
   
30.17   City Treasurer
   
30.18   City Manager
   
30.19   Assistant City Manager
   
30.20   City Engineer
   
30.21   Budget Officer
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The elective officers of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be a Mayor, four
(4) Councilmen, a City Clerk, and a City Treasurer. At the general election for
City officers to be held in January 1969 and every four (4) years thereafter,
there shall be elected a Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer, and two (2)
Councilmen. At the general election held in 1967 and every two (2) years
thereafter, two (2) Councilmen shall be elected.
   (B)   The appointive officers of the City shall be the Director of Finance,
City Attorney, City Engineer, Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Health
Officer and such other appointive officers as may be authorized from time to
time by ordinance. Each such appointive officer shall be appointed and hold
office for the term upon the conditions set forth in this Ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall be eligible for any City office who is not a
qualified elector of this City and who has not resided therein at least one (1)
year preceding his election or appointment.
      (2)   All officers of this City shall, before entering upon the duties of
their respective offices, take and subscribe the oath of office which may be
prescribed by law therefore, which oath shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk. All such officers shall furthermore execute such bond as may be
required by ordinance, payable to the City, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of their offices.
   (D)   Every officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall, upon
the expiration of his office, immediately deliver to his successor in office,
all books, property, and effects in his possession which belong to the City of
Mt. Vernon and appertaining to his office.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.1)
CITY OFFICIALS
§ 30.15 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take
the oath of office prescribed by law and shall execute a bond in the penal sum
of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his office, and file same with the City Clerk. The
Mayor shall possess only such powers and have such duties as are imposed upon
him as obligations under the statutes of the State of Illinois, together with
such powers and duties vested in him as a member of the City Council.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the power to appoint such officers as may be
provided by this ordinance or any ordinance of the City, with the advice and
consent to the City Council. The Mayor shall have the power to remove for good
cause any officer appointed by him, but such removal shall be effective only
upon the concurrence of a two thirds (2/3) vote of the City Council. The Mayor
shall be paid an annual salary of seven thousand two hundred dollars
($7,200.00), payable in equal monthly installments.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.2)
§ 30.16 CITY CLERK, DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council. The term of office, duties, compensation, and amount of bond
required for the appointed City Clerk shall be as provided by law or ordinance,
the same as if the City Clerk were elected. The City Clerk shall, before
entering upon the duties of the Office of the City Clerk, take the oath
prescribed by law. There shall be paid to the City Clerk an annual salary of
$2,400.00 payable in equal monthly installments; provided that beginning with
the May 2025 term of office, the annual salary shall be $600.00 payable in
equal monthly installments.
   (B)   (1)The City Manager shall designate a Deputy City Clerk. The Deputy
City Clerk shall be an employee position of the City, subject to the length,
terms, and conditions of employment as provided by the ordinances and policies
of the City for employees.
      (2)   The Deputy City Clerk is authorized to assist the City Clerk and to
perform duties of the Office of the City Clerk as provided by this ordinance.
The Deputy City Clerk shall be paid such salary as provided by the Salary
Ordinance of the City.
   (C)   The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall keep the office of the City
Clerk open in the City Hall from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. of each day of the
week, except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays.
   (D)   The City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
City Council and shall keep a record of its proceedings in a suitable permanent
record. The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall record and properly index in
a permanent record kept for that purpose all ordinances passed by the City
Council, showing date of passage and publication thereof. The City Clerk and
Deputy City Clerk shall also record all official bonds.
   (E)   The City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall prepare all commissions,
licenses, permits, and other documents required to be issued by the Office of
the City Clerk under the laws and statutes of the State of Illinois and
ordinances of this City and attest same with the corporate seal of the City, of
which seal the Office of the City Clerk shall be the custodian.
   (F)   The Deputy City Clerk is authorized to execute all documents and
perform all duties required to be executed or performed by the Office of the
City Clerk. The Deputy City Clerk is directed to execute documents in the
following manner: “City Clerk by Deputy City Clerk” or “Office of City Clerk by
Deputy City Clerk”; provided that the failure to execute a document in such
manner shall not negate nor affect the validity of the signature of the Deputy
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.4)
§ 30.17 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the City Council. The term of office, duties, and compensation required for
the appointed City Treasurer shall be the same as if the City Treasurer were
elected. The City Treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, take the oath prescribed by law.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall perform all duties imposed by law or
ordinance.
   (C)   All payments drawn by the Treasurer shall be authorized by the Mayor
and counter-authorized by the Clerk.
   (D)   The City Treasurer shall receive a salary of $1,200.00 per year,
payable in equal monthly installments; provided that beginning with the May
2025 term of office, the annual salary shall be $600.00 payable in equal
monthly installments.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.6)
§ 30.18 CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council for an
indefinite term as provided by law. Before taking office the City Manager shall
furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00),
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, in which bond shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The City Manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties
assigned to him by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the
City Council. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the municipality insofar as their enforcement is within the
power of the City.
   (C)   The Manager shall attend all meetings of the City Council, shall keep
the Council informed as to the affairs of the City, and shall recommend to the
Council such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
City.
   (D)   The City Manager shall hire and discharge all employees (other than
those under civil service or other tenure of office law) authorized by the City
Council to be hired, at such compensation as may be set or authorized by the
City Council. All employees shall perform their duties subject to the direction
of the City Manager or that of the superior to whom the Manager may assign such
employee; provided that the Manager may delegate to any other official or
employee the authority to hire or discharge any employee so authorized.
   (E)   All appointive officers of the City shall be filled by appointment by
the Manager, except where otherwise provided by law, and the Manager shall
report to the Mayor and Council such appointments or any removal from office,
made by him as soon as possible after the appointment or removal.
   (F)   Every administrative department of the City shall be under the
supervision and control of the Manager, who shall have the power to remove from
office any officer appointed by the Manager, subject to the provisions of this
Section.
   (G)   The Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the City may
be a party, and may sign on behalf of the City any contract authorized by the
City Council, excepting where the Council directs that some other officer or
officers shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to it that all
terms of any contract to which the City is a party, are fully performed by all
parties thereto.
   (H)   The Manager shall be general purchasing agent of the City, and except
where specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the Council, he
shall make all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment authorized by the
Council in the manner prescribed by, and subject to the limitations imposed by
law. No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting upon
authorization by the Council and no expense shall be incurred, except for
purposes for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if the amount
thereof is not covered by an unexpended appropriation.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of the Manager to cause to be prepared each year
the Annual Appropriation Ordinance in time for consideration and enactment by
the Council during the first quarter of the fiscal year; and to prepare the Tax
Levy Ordinance for passage and file a certified copy with the County Clerk
within the time required by law. He shall keep current accounts of the amounts
appropriated and the amounts spent out of each appropriation, showing the
unexpended appropriations at all times.
   (J)   It shall be the duty of the Manager to keep current accounts showing
at all times the fiscal condition of the City, including the current and
anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and anticipated revenue of
all municipal funds and accounts; and shall see to the collection of all money
due the municipality.
   (K)   The Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and
personal property of the City and its location, and shall be responsible for
the care and custody of all such property, including equipment, buildings,
parks and all other City property, which is not by law assigned to some other
officer or body for care and control.
   (L)   It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to the publication of all
notices, ordinances or other documents required by law to be published, and to
prepare or cause to be prepared, all reports which the City of any of the
officials thereof are required by law to prepare.
   (M)   The Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records
required by law to be kept by the City and not by a specific officer. Where the
law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain records, the
Manager shall make available to such officer all necessary clerical assistance
for the preparation of such records and shall make available a place for the
custody of such records. And in compliance herewith, the Manager shall make
available to the Clerk, stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the
preparation of the Journal of Council Proceedings, and the record of ordinances
and all other documents which by law the Clerk is required to keep, and he
shall perform similar services for the Treasurer in the maintenance of bond
registers and all other records or documents which by law the Treasurer is
required to keep or prepare. Where the law requires or provides for
certification of any records or documents by any officer of the City, the
Manager shall cause such records or documents to be properly prepared and
presented to each officer for his signature.
   (N)   The Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats,
showing the location of all City utilities, and other municipal properties, all
street and other public places, and all lots or parcels of land subdivided
according to law.
   (O)   The Manager shall maintain an office in the City Hall and shall spend
such time in the performance of his duties as may be required by the Council.
In the event that the City Manager shall be absent from the City or
incapacitated from performing the duties of his position, the City Attorney
shall act as Manager during such absence or incapacity.
   (P)   The above described salary shall be adjusted quarterly hereafter by
one half the percentage of increase in the Consumer Price Index published by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The average index
number as published for the month of May, 1981, for “All Items”, in a table
entitled, “Consumer Price Index of U.S. City Average, All Items and Commodity
Groups”, shall have subtracted from it the same index number as published for
the month of August, 1981. The resultant number shall be divided by 2, and that
figure used as percentage for increase or decrease in the salary herein
provided. The same computation shall then be made quarterly thereafter, using
the average index figure for the last month of the prior quarter and the last
month of the then quarter.
   (Q)   The City Manager shall make periodic surveys of the functions, duties
and work load of all departments and officers of the City. Based thereon, the
City Manager shall, from time to time, determine the need of all departments
and officers of the City, all secretarial, stenographic, and clerical
assistance, and shall, based upon results of said periodic survey, have
complete authority from time to time to assign secretarial, stenographic, and
clerical employees of the City to the various departments and officers of the
City in accordance with their current requirements. The City Manager is hereby
granted the right, authority, and power to hire such secretarial, stenographic,
and clerical employees as shall, in his opinion, be necessary to the efficient
discharge of business of the City and such other limitations of those numbers
of employees as shall be authorized by annual appropriation and salary
ordinances, and the City Manager shall further have the power to discharge such
employees.
   (R)   Any employee of the City in any position who shall become disabled or
incapable of performing the duties of his office or position shall be
automatically retired arid the City Manager is hereby granted authority to
retire any employee who shall be shown to be so disabled or incapable of
performing the duties of his office or position by certificate of a duly
licensed physician. No retirement benefits shall be due or payable to any
employee, except under the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund, Firemen’s Pension Fund, or the Policemen’s Pension Fund. The provision of
this subsection (R) shall not apply to officers under the jurisdiction of the
Fire and Police Commission.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.1)
§ 30.19 ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Assistant City Manager.
   (B)   The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager and
shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager and shall
receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time
and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
   (C)   The Assistant City Manager shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   Assist the City Manager in planning, coordinating, analyzing,
implementing, and managing City departments, programs, and policies.
      (2)   Coordinate with City department Heads to develop strategic plans to
obtain desired objectives.
      (3)   Synthesize information from numerous sources, prepare reports,
recommend solutions, and make presentations to the City Manager, elected
officials, City staff, and the general public.
      (4)   Perform special assignments; oversee and coordinate projects as
assigned by the City Manager.
      (5)   Assist in the formulating and implementing of City administrative
policies and procedures; enforce departmental rules, regulations, policies, and
procedures.
      (6)   Plan, organize, and direct the administration of the City; develop
and manage departmental goals and objectives; provide administrative leadership
in City administration, personnel, and building maintenance.
      (7)   Coach, direct, and supervise personnel engaged in performing City
administration, personnel, and building maintenance; plan, schedule, and assign
work; instruct and train, correct methods and procedures; establish
departmental work priorities; monitor work in progress; ensure City employees
follow safe practices; revise departmental policies and procedures.
      (8)   Review and evaluate employee performances.
      (9)   Develop, coordinate, and direct public relations activities for the
City by performing the duties personally or through subordinates.
      (10)   Implement department operational procedures and ensure compliance
with City, County, State, and Federal ordinances, laws, regulations, and
policies; resolve departmental operational problems.
      (11)   Assist, conduct, and participate in negotiations with union
organizations representing employees.
      (12)   Coordinate and direct the City’s participation in events and
programs.
      (13)   Assist in negotiating contracts with outside vendors.
      (14)   Serve as interim department head as needed and perform duties of
the City Manager in his/her absence as directed by the City Manager or Council.
      (15)   Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City
Manager.
   (D)   The Assistant City Manager shall specifically perform the duties of
the Executive Administrator, of the Department of Economic Development as
provided within §
32.006 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.1A)
§ 30.20 CITY ENGINEER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of City Engineer; who shall be
appointed by the City Manager with the advice and consent of the City Council
and who shall, before entering the duties of his office, take the oath
prescribed therefor.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall devote his full time to the duties of his
office and shall not perform any professional services for any other person,
corporation, or entity. He shall perform the following engineering services for
the City:
      (1)   Attend all Council meetings and all Utility Commission meetings for
the purpose of ascertaining the desires of the City in regard to engineering
projects or problems and to offer advice on such projects or problems when
requested.
      (2)   Obtain resolutions when necessary for engineering projects and
secure the approval of the proper agency for saw.
      (3)   Supervise all maintenance operations, including the preparation of
estimates, maintenance expenditure statements, inspection of work, ordering
materials; and checking bills for approval and payment by the City for projects
not requiring plans and specifications and not part of the MFT maintenance.
      (4)   Make the necessary inspections of all problems of an engineering
nature when reported to the City or requested by the City Manager and
recommendations for the improvements or correction of same.
      (5)   Represent the City in all transactions or working agreements when
engineering services are required.
      (6)   Supervise the work on any construction which does not require
detailed plans and specifications.
      (7)   Supervise all maintenance operations which are part of MFT
maintenance, including preparation of estimates, maintenance expenditure
statements, inspection of work, ordering of materials, checking bills for
approval and payment, and all other services for MFT work, including where
appropriate, plans and specifications.
      (8)   Perform any other engineering and professional services directed by
the City Manager.
      (9)   Supervise the staff of his office.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time
and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.3)
§ 30.21 BUDGET OFFICER.
   (A)   The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, hereby adopts the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10.
   (B)   There is further hereby provided the office of Budget Officer, who
shall be appointed by the City Manager and who shall take oath, as provided in
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25, and post bond as provided in 65 ILCS 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.
In the event that no Budget Officer appointed by the City Manager shall hold
another municipal office, either elected or appointed, then that person shall
not be entitled to receive additional compensation for his duties as such. The
Budget Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and shall have
the powers and duties described in §§ 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 inclusive.
   (C)   The City Council shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently
available for public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to its passage, by
publication in the general proceedings of the City Council. The Council shall
hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget not less than
one week after publication of such tentative annual budget.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.12)
CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Composition
   
31.02   Eligibility
   
31.03   Regular meetings
   
31.04   Special meetings
   
31.05   Quorum
   
31.06   Open door meetings
   
31.07   Order of business
   
31.08   Ordinances
   
31.09   Passage of ordinances
   
31.10   Compensation
   
31.11   Fiscal year
   
31.12   Council rules
   
31.13   Public participation
§ 31.01 COMPOSITION.
   The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and four (4) Councilmen elected
at large; which shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
own members and in case any vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or Councilmen
by death, resignation, removal, or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled by
the remaining members of the Council by appointment of some person to such
office for the unexpired term thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(a))
§ 31.02 ELIGIBILITY.
   No person shall be eligible to the office of Councilman unless he shall be a
qualified elector and reside within the City, nor shall he be eligible if he is
in arrears in payment of any tax or other liability due the City. No Councilman
shall be interested either directly or indirectly in any contract to which the
City is a party. No person shall be eligible to the office of Councilman if he
shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery, or other corrupt practices
or crimes. No Councilman shall be eligible to any office, the salary of which
is paid out of the City Treasury, during his term as Councilman, nor shall he
be engaged in any business transaction, either directly or indirectly, or
individually, or as a member of a firm or corporation with the City whereby any
money is to be paid directly or indirectly by the City to such member, firm or
corporation.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(b))
§ 31.03 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and
third Mondays of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m.; provided that when any
such meeting date shall fall upon a legal holiday, then such meeting date shall
be the Tuesday following at the same hour and place.
   (B)   Regular meetings shall be held at the Roland W. Lewis Building at
Veteran’s Park or at such other locations that shall be fixed from time to time
by vote of the City Council. Adjourned and special meetings shall be held at
such times and places as determined by the Council.
   (C)   An Agenda for each meeting shall be prepared by the City Manager. The
City Manager shall place such items upon the Agenda as the City Manager deems
necessary for the operation of the City. In addition, the City Manager shall
place upon the Agenda, upon request by the Mayor or by a Council Member, a
Motion authorizing and directing the City Manager to prepare an ordinance,
resolution, or other matter of concern to the requestor for placement upon the
Agenda for Council’s consideration.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(c))
§ 31.04 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the City Council may be held on the call of the Mayor or
any of two Councilmen to consider any ordinance, resolution, motion,
discussion, or other item by giving at least twenty-four hour notice thereof,
by written notice to be delivered to members of the Council thereof, or by
leaving copies at the residence of each member, which notice may be served by
any police officer of the City and shall specifically state the business to be
transacted at such meeting.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(d))
§ 31.05 QUORUM.
   A majority of all Councilmen elected, including the Mayor, shall constitute
a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time,
and may compel any absent Councilman to attend any regular, special, or
adjourned meeting by written citation to that effect, stating the day and hour
of such meeting, which citation shall be signed by at least two (2) Councilmen
and served by any police officer of the City upon the absent Councilman in
person.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(e))
§ 31.06 OPEN DOOR MEETINGS.
   The City Council shall sit with open doors. It shall control the finances
and property of the City, shall appropriate money for corporate purposes and
shall provide for the expenses and debts of the City. The City Council shall
have and shall exercise all the powers and duties conferred and imposed by the
laws of the State of Illinois and the ordinances of this City.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(f))
§ 31.07 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The following shall be the order of business of the Council at each meeting:
   (A)   The reading and approval of the journal for the meeting next preceded.
   (B)   Reports from the City Manager.
   (C)   Unfinished business.
   (D)   New business.
   (E)   Ordinances or resolutions.
   (F)   The order of business for a specific purpose by a majority vote of the
Council. No action shall be taken on any matter not on the agenda without
consent of the members present.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(g))
§ 31.08 ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances enacted by the City Council imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or forfeiture or making any appropriation shall (1) be printed in
book or pamphlet form published by authority of the corporate authorities, or
(2) published at least once, within ten days after passage, in one or more
newspapers published in the City. No such ordinances shall take effect until
ten days after it is so published, except that an ordinance imposing a
municipal retailer’s occupation tax or a municipal leasing occupation tax as
provided by the Illinois Municipal Code or affecting a change in the rate
thereof, shall take effect on the first day of the month next following the
expiration of the ten day publication period. All other ordinances, resolutions
and motions shall take effect upon their passage unless they otherwise provide.
All ordinances and the date of publication thereof may be proved by the
Certificate of the City Clerk under the seal of the City. Ordinances printed in
book or pamphlet form as provided herein need not be otherwise published, and
such book or pamphlet shall be received as evidence of the passage and
publication thereof without further proof.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(h))
§ 31.09 PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES.
   The yeas and nays of the City Council shall be taken on passage of all
ordinances, resolutions, motions and all propositions presented to the Council
which shall be recorded in the Journal of its proceedings by the City Clerk. A
concurrence of a majority of all members of the Council will be necessary to
passage of any ordinance or propositions creating any liability against the
City or providing for expenditures or appropriations of its fund. The
concurrence of four fifths (4/5) of all members of the Council shall be
required to sell City property or vacate any street or alley. All other matters
require only a majority vote of members present.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(i))
§ 31.10 COMPENSATION.
   There shall be allowed and paid to each Councilman, other than the Mayor, a
salary of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per year, payable in
equal monthly installments.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(j))
§ 31.11 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal and municipal year of the City of Mt. Vernon shall commence on
the first day of May of each year and end on the thirtieth day of April of the
following year.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(k))
§ 31.12 COUNCIL RULES.
   The City Council, in its proceedings, shall be governed by the following
rules:
   (A)   First: The Mayor, as presiding officer of the Council (or, in his
absence, a temporary chairman selected by the Council) shall call the Council
to order promptly at the time fixed for the meeting, and on the appearance of a
quorum, shall cause the journal of the previous meeting to be read.
   (B)   Second: The presiding officer shall in addition:
      (1)   Announce the business before the Council in the order appearing on
the agenda.
      (2)   Recognize members entitled to the floor.
      (3)   Put to a vote all questions regularly moved or which necessarily
arise in the course of the proceedings and announce the result of the vote.
      (4)   Conduct the meetings in an orderly manner so as to expedite the
efficient and responsible processing of municipal affairs.
   (C)   Third: All questions relative to the priority of business shall be
decided by the Council without debate subject, however, to the provisions of
this ordinance.
   (D)   Fourth: Every member present, when a question is put, shall vote,
unless excused for cause by the Council; provided, however, that no member
shall vote upon a question in which he shall have a personal interest.
   (E)   Fifth: Every motion or proposition shall, if requested by any member,
be reduced to writing before a vote be taken.
   (F)   Sixth: A member desiring to address the Council shall rise and say
“Mr. Mayor”, or “Mr. Chairman”, and, on being recognized, shall speak no longer
than ten minutes at any one time, nor more than once on the same question,
except by leave of the Council.
   (G)   Seventh: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order except when the
Council is actually engaged in voting, and as well as the motion to table,
shall be decided without debate.
   (H)   Eighth: All motions, resolutions, petitions, orders, and
communications, and any ordinance relating to matters referred from or subject
to a recommendation of the Zoning and Planning Commission or the TIF Advisory
Committee may be acted upon by the Council at the meeting at which first
presented or received, but no ordinance, except the ordinances specifically
identified above, shall be voted upon at the meeting at which it is first
presented unless the rules shall first be suspended. All resolutions and
ordinances presented to the Council in writing need not be read verbatim unless
any member of the Council shall so request; otherwise any such resolution or
ordinance may be introduced by title only.
   (I)   Ninth: No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded
at a special meeting unless there be present as large a number of Councilmen as
were present when such a vote was taken.
   (J)   Tenth: A motion to reconsider may be made by any member of the City
Council.
   (K)   Eleventh: These rules may be temporarily suspended by a vote of three
fifths (3/5) of the elected Councilmen, but shall not be repealed, altered, or
amended except by concurrence of four fifths (4/5) of all Councilmen elected.
   (L)   Twelfth: The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in “Roberts’
Rules of Order” shall govern in all cases where applicable and where they do
not conflict with the rules and ordinances of this City or the laws of the
State of Illinois.
   (M)   Thirteenth: Upon a consistent or willful violation of these rules, a
member may be expelled from the meeting by a majority of all the members of the
Council.
   (N)   Fourteenth: In order to secure the right and opportunity of each
citizen of the City of Mt. Vernon to address the City Council and to guarantee
order at all public meetings of the City of Mt. Vernon rules for public
participation during public meetings of the City of Mt. Vernon are hereby
established.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(k))
§ 31.13 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Public Participation. Public Participation shall be permitted during
the following portions of an open meeting of the City Council:
      (1)   Public Forum.
      (2)   Public Hearing.
      (3)   Invited Speakers.
   (B)   Public Forum. Any person who seeks to address the members of the City
Council at any Regular Monthly Meeting of the City Council will be permitted to
speak on any matter listed on the Agenda or on any other matter directly
relevant to the business of the City of Mt. Vernon. Comment, promotion, or
advocacy regarding any matter not subject to a decision within the authority of
the City Council is not a matter relevant to the business of the City. Any
person who seeks to address the members of the City Council at any Special
Meeting or Workshop Meeting of the City Council will be permitted to speak only
on the specific matter listed on the Agenda for the meeting.
   (C)   Public Forum Rules for Public Participation. Persons desiring to
address the City Council during a Public Forum shall do so in compliance with
the following requirements:
      (1)   Persons desiring to speak during a Public Forum of a Regular
Council Meeting, Special Meeting, or Workshop shall be permitted to speak
during the Public Participation portions of the meeting appearing upon the
Agenda for the meeting. Public Participation shall appear upon the Agenda for
each meeting and shall be conducted immediately after “Approval of the Journal
for the Preceding Meeting” and also immediately prior to the “Mayor”, unless
the City Council, by majority vote of the members in attendance, direct that
Public Participation shall be conducted at another time during the same
meeting. The Public Participation portions of a meeting shall appear upon a
meeting’s Agenda as “Visitors/Citizens Requests/Addresses from the Audience.”
Persons who do not address the Council during the Public Participation Items
upon the Agenda shall address the Council only as an Invited Speaker.
      (2)   Each person wishing to speak during the Public Participation
portion of a meeting immediately after the “Approval of the Journal for the
Preceding Meeting” shall sign a Speaker’s List at the meeting prior the start
of the meeting and shall provide his or her name and the topic(s) to be
discussed. No sign-in on a Speaker’s List shall be required for persons wishing
to speak during the second Public Participation portion of a meeting. No person
appearing before the Council as the Petitioner or Requesting Party for an Item
upon the Agenda for the meeting shall be required to sign the Speaker’s List,
unless said person also desires to speak during the Public Participation
portion of the meeting, as said person shall be considered an “Invited
Speaker”.
      (3)   Prior to speaking, each person must be recognized by the Mayor or
by the designee of the Mayor. Speakers desiring to speak on permitted topics
will be called to speak in the order that the speaker’s name appears upon the
Speaker’s List, if applicable.
      (4)   Prior to speaking, each speaker, if physically able, shall stand at
the designated podium and shall state his or her name for the record. The
speaker shall not be required to state an address. Reasonable accommodations
shall be made for any speaker who is physically unable to appear at the podium.
      (5)   Public comments during the Public Participation portion of a
meeting shall be limited to five (5) minutes per person, unless extended by
consent of a majority of the City Council members present at the meeting. The
City Clerk, or such other person as may be designated by the Mayor, shall
monitor each speaker’s use of time and shall notify the speaker when the time
allotted has expired. A speaker cannot give his or her allotted minutes to
another speaker to increase that person’s allotted time. No speaker shall be
entitled to speak but one time on the same topic during any meeting, although a
majority of the City Council members may permit a speaker to speak more than
once if deemed necessary to permit a reasonable full and fair opportunity for
public participation
      (6)   In order to expedite Council business and to avoid repetitious
presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the Council on
the same subject matter, it shall be in order for the Mayor to encourage that a
spokesperson be chosen from the group to address the Council. If additional
matters are to be presented by any other members of the group, the Mayor may
limit the number of such persons and limit the presentation to information not
already presented by the group spokesperson.
      (7)   Speakers shall address their comments only to the entire City
Council and not to an individual Council Member or the Mayor, nor to the City
Manager or a staff member, nor to the audience. Speakers are requested to be
well-mannered in their language and presentation. No speaker shall use obscene
language, fighting words, or defamatory statements. Any person who engages in
threatening, disruptive, or disorderly conduct when addressing the City Council
or who otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of the Ordinance shall be
deemed out-of-order by the Mayor and their time to address the City Council at
said meeting shall be terminated.
      (8)   The Mayor, a Council Member, City Manager, or other City Official
shall respond as each deems appropriate to any comment or question of any
speaker. The Mayor, Council Member, City Manager, or other City Official may
interrupt a speaker and ask questions or make statements during any comment
made by a speaker; in the event of such questions or statements, the Mayor may
extend a speaker’s allotted time to compensate for the time which elapsed
during statements or questions by City Officials.
      (9)   After a verbal warning, a person who refuses to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance regarding public participation may be directed to
cease speaking and to leave the podium, and may also be asked to leave the
meeting room; a person may be physically removed if the person fails to comply
with a request if such failure interrupts, disturbs, or disrupts the orderly
conduct of business during the meeting. In addition, any person who fails to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to issuance of a
citation and fine for violation of this Ordinance.
   (D)   Closed Sessions. Public participation shall not be permitted during
any meeting or portions of a meeting which is deemed to be a closed session
under the Illinois Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120.
   (E)   Audience. Members of the audience shall refrain from applauding,
cheering, or booing during or at the conclusion of remarks made by any speaker,
staff member, presiding officer, or Council Member.
   (F)   Public Hearing. The rules applicable to the Public Forum shall
generally apply to public hearings, except that public comments shall be
limited to the matter subject of the Agenda for the public hearing and public
participation shall be for such periods of time as determined necessary by the
City Council to permit a reasonable full and fair opportunity for public
participation; during the public hearing, the time limitation of each
individual speaker shall be as provided within this Ordinance or shall be as
announced at the public hearing, but in no event shall the limitation be less
than five (5) minutes per speaker. Invited Speakers may also speak at a public
hearing.
   (G)   Subordinate Public Bodies. The rules applicable to a Public Forum and
to Invited Speakers shall generally apply to public meetings and hearings of
City Commissions, Boards, Committees, and similar subordinate bodies created by
the City Council, except that public comments shall be limited to the specific
matters subject of items appearing upon the Agenda for the meeting or hearing.
   (H)   Invited Speakers. Any citizen may address the City Council by
invitation of the Mayor or a Council Member, unless a majority of the City
Council present at the meeting denies the invitation; provided however that the
Petitioner or Requesting Party for an item upon the Agenda shall be entitled to
speak as an Invited Speaker. Participation as an Invited Speaker by non-
Petitioners or non-Requesting Parties shall be within the sole discretion of
the City Council. Persons speaking as Invited Speakers shall be subject to such
limitations as the Mayor or a majority of the City Council shall prescribe
during the meeting. In the absence of other restrictions, speakers shall be
governed by the same rules which govern speaking during a Public Forum. Nothing
herein shall prohibit someone who participated during the Public Participation
Item on the Agenda from being an Invited Speaker at the same meeting.
   (I)   Alternative Channels of Communication. In addition to speaking at City
Council meetings and other meetings subject of this Ordinance, members of the
public may communicate any concern or make comment regarding the City of Mt.
Vernon to the Mayor and/or to individual Council Members or to the City Council
as a group in writing by mail addressed to the Mayor or Council Member at City
Hall, 1100 Main, Mt. Vernon, Illinois 62864, or by email to the published email
addresses on the City of Mt. Vernon’s website. Also, written comments may be
provided to the Mayor or Council Members by delivery of written comments to the
office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.3(l))
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Department of Public Works
   
32.002   Health
   
32.003   Human Resources Department
   
32.004   Commission for Advancement of Programs for the Disabled
   
32.005   Department of Tourism
   
32.006   Department of Economic Development
   
32.007   Minority Affairs and Human Relations Commission
Department of Finance
   
32.020   Creation
   
32.021   Finance Director
   
32.022   Finance Director’s duties
   
32.023   Department divisions
   
32.024   Receipt and collection of charges
   
32.025   Accounting procedure
   
32.026   Payroll, vouchers and bills
   
32.027   Accounts
   
32.028   Allotments of appropriations
   
32.029   Liability
   
32.030   Close of each fiscal year
   
32.031   Exhaustion of appropriation or fund
   
32.032   Warrants
   
32.033   Bond register
   
32.034   Reports
   
32.035   Close of month or other time
   
32.036   Annual report
   
32.037   Internal audit
   
32.038   Records open for inspection
Legal Department
   
32.050   Legal Department established
   
32.051   Corporation counsel
   
32.052   Litigation
   
32.053   Retainer
   
32.054   Conflict of interest
   
32.055   Duties; conflict
Park and Public Facility Department
   
32.070   Creation
   
32.071   Park and Recreation Board
   
32.072   Appropriation and levy of a special tax
   
32.073   Director of Parks and Public Facilities
   
32.074   Swimming pool
Fair Housing Regulations and Board
   
32.085   Declaration of policy
   
32.086   Definitions
   
32.087   Prohibited acts
   
32.088   Fair Housing Board
   
32.089   Duties of the Fair Housing Board
   
32.090   Enforcement procedure
   
32.091   Penalty
Tree Board
   
32.105   Establishment
   
32.106   Composition
   
32.107   Appointment of members
   
32.108   Duties
Bureau of Inspection
   
32.120   Creation
   
32.121   Duties
   
32.122   Director of the Bureau of Inspection
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   There is hereby created a Department of Public Works for the City of Mt.
Vernon, which shall be directed by the Superintendent of Public Works under the
supervision of the City Manager. The Department shall have jurisdiction and
control of the operation, construction, maintenance and improvement of all City
streets, sidewalks, and other public places, not including parks, sanitary
sewage systems, or water system. The Superintendent shall personally
superintend all improvements upon streets, alleys, and sidewalks of the City of
Mt. Vernon and cause all unsecure and unsafe places thereon to be repaired, and
shall cause all ordinances relating to streets, alleys, and sidewalks to be
enforced. He shall keep a record of all tools and property in his possession
belonging to the City and shall make monthly reports as to all services
performed by the department during the preceding month. He shall annually,
under the direction of the City Manager and City Engineer, prepare a program of
maintenance for all streets, alleys, and sidewalks and construction of new
public facilities for the next ensuing year.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.4)
§ 32.002 HEALTH.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created a Division of Sanitation within the City
of Mt. Vernon under the supervision of the City Manager and consisting of such
employees as may be necessary for the operation of the Division, provided that
the maximum number shall be authorized by the Annual Budget Ordinance.
      (2)   The City will regularly collect and dispose of garbage and refuse
of residential dwelling units within the City; provided that the City shall not
collect garbage at any place which is not within the City limits; shall not
collect garbage at any dwelling unit which is located above business
establishments which are located in the downtown area; shall not collect
garbage from any school, commercial, or industrial establishment; and shall not
collect garbage from any dwelling having five or more apartments or units.
      (3)   A monthly service charge shall be collected from each residential
dwelling unit receiving City garbage and refuse collection; for purposes of
assessing this fee, each single family residence, each apartment, each mobile
home, or each other living unit shall constitute a “dwelling unit”. The service
charge shall be in addition to any tax or other fee imposed or received by the
City for garbage and refuse collection and may be reviewed annually at the
beginning of each fiscal year. Effective May 1, 2023, the service charge shall
be $23.00 per dwelling unit per month. The charge for garbage and refuse
collection service shall be made monthly and shall be made payable 16 days
after rendition. The applicant for service, the occupants of the dwelling unit
served, and the user of the garbage and refuse collection service shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay the service charge set forth for service to
a dwelling unit. The City shall be under no obligation to furnish garbage and
refuse collection to any person who is in default as to any garbage and refuse
collection charges or to any dwelling unit occupied by a person who is in
default as to any garbage and refuse collection charges; and the City at any
time after a charge becomes delinquent shall have the full power and authority
to terminate garbage and refuse collection service; upon any charge for garbage
collection service becoming delinquent or upon a service being terminated, all
delinquent charges for garbage collection services, water services, and sewer
services must be paid in full before garbage collection service is continued or
resumed. No garbage and refuse collection service shall be provided to any
dwelling unit upon application of any person who is in default as to any
garbage and refuse collection charges due the City, no matter at which dwelling
unit said default occurred until such person has paid all delinquent charges in
full. No garbage and collection service shall be provided to any dwelling unit
occupied by any person who is in default as to any garbage and refuse
collection charges, no matter at which dwelling unit said default occurred and
no matter whether the said person is the applicant until such person has paid
all delinquent charges in full. The garbage and refuse collection service fee
shall be billable with water and sewer charges; and in the event any person
shall be otherwise entitled to a refund of a water or sewer deposit or shall
have a delinquent or billed garbage collection service charge, said charge
shall be deducted from the refund before payment of any refund or credit to
said person.
      (4)   The garbage and refuse collection service fee shall be billable
with water and sewer charges; and in the event any person shall be otherwise
entitled to a refund of a water or sewer deposit or shall have a delinquent or
billed garbage collection service charge, said charge shall be deducted from
the refund before payment of any refund or credit to said person.
      (5)   The owner or operator of each trailer park receiving garbage
service for multiple dwelling units but receiving a single billing shall on
December 1, March 1, June 1 and September 1 submit a report to the City Manager
as to the total number of occupied units and total number of vacant units
within the trailer park as of the reporting date so that the City can determine
the appropriate number of dwelling units to bill effective January 1, April 1,
July 1, and October 1, respectively. In addition, upon request by the City
Manager or his designee or agent, each owner for operator shall submit within
10 days thereafter business records and other information as may be required to
document any report of dwelling units submitted. In the event any owner or
operator refuses or fails to file the required report on the above due date or
fails or refuses to submit documentation requested within 10 days, then a
monthly service charge shall be imposed based upon the total number of dwelling
units (occupied and vacant) described within the most recent report on file or
upon such number of units as determined by the City if greater than the number
described within the most recent report.
      (6)   (a)   In the event charges, including penalty charges, for garbage
service are not paid on or before the due date of the bill for such services,
such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent.
Thereafter, such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien upon the real
estate for which such garbage services are supplied, regardless of whether such
service has been supplied upon the application of an owner, an occupant or
other user; provided, however, that the owner of the real estate shall have no
personal liability for the delinquent charges unless said owner was also the
applicant for or user of the services giving rise to the charges. The City
Manager or the Finance Director or a designee of either is hereby authorized
and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies and claiming
such in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois,
after first giving seven (7) day notice by regular mail of such delinquency to
the owner of said real estate. This statement shall contain a description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City
claims a lien for the unpaid amount as well as for all charges for garbage
service subsequent to the period covered by the bill. The lien for garbage
services may be enforced and foreclosed against the premises by suit in the
Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois according to the rules and
practices of said Court.
         (b)   The City shall recover all costs, including reasonable attorney
fees, incurred by the City in preparing, filing, and foreclosing the lien. The
lien may also be enforced and foreclosed by intervention in any suit already
commenced in said Court or any other Court whenever said intervention is proper
under the law. In addition, whenever the City is made a defendant in any suit
on account of any lien, it shall have for the furnishing of garbage service
full power to enforce its said lien in said proceedings. The method herein
provided for enforcing and foreclosing a lien shall not be considered as
excluding any other remedy or any other method of collecting unpaid garbage
service charges but shall be concurrent with all other remedies and methods.
The City shall recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred
by the City in effecting collection for garbage services or incurred by the
City in effecting or defending any remedy.
   (B)   Garbage, when used herein, shall be held to include any refuse,
accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation,
use, cooking, or dealing in of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, or other
things used for food preparation.
   (C)   Garbage and refuse collection shall be subject to the provisions of §
130.21 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to place ashes, chemicals, drugs, poisons, or
hazardous materials in receptacles provided for garbage or other refuse.
   (E)   All vehicles used in the collection or hauling of garbage or other
waste or refuse shall be so constructed as to prevent leakage or spillage and
fit with a cover to reduce odor and to prevent garbage, waste, and other refuse
from being deposited on public or private places within the corporate limits or
upon roadways.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit
the accumulation of garbage, waste or other refuse upon premises owned or
occupied by him or to allow garbage, waste, or refuse to be carried or
deposited upon any private property or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public places within the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.6) (Ord. 2023-20, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 32.003 HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Department of Human Resources of the City of
Mt. Vernon and the Office of Director of Human Resources.
   (B)   The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the City Manager
and shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager and
shall receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time
to time and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
   (C)   The Director of Human Resources shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   Handle administrative duties concerning the Department of Human
Resources for the City of Mt. Vernon.
      (2)   Prepare and administer annual budget for the Department of Human
Resources and submit yearly a fiscal proposed budget to the Office of the City
Manager.
      (3)   Prepare and maintain records of the activities of the Department of
Human Resources.
      (4)   Provide reports as to matters relating to the Human Resources of
the City to the City Manager and Council.
      (5)   Possess knowledge of Human Resource information and laws; implement
Human Resource laws and monitor the City’s compliance with Human Resource laws.
      (6)   Administer and coordinate hiring for City employment except the
City Manager, Department Heads, and employees subject to the jurisdiction of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, including but not limited to
posting new jobs internally, advertising new positions, preparing, receiving,
and maintaining job applications, verifying references, conducting,
coordinating background and credit checks of prospective employees, and
interviewing, testing and recommending applicants to the City Manager.
      (7)   Coordinate and administer drug testing policies of the City.
      (8)   Process and maintain Personnel Action Reports of employees, and
maintain official personnel files for each employee of the City.
      (9)   Assist, conduct, and participate in negotiations with union
organizations representing City employees.
      (10)   Coordinate and implement training programs and activities of
employees.
      (11)   Insure compliance with Workmen Compensation laws and maintain
records relating thereto.
      (12)   Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.8)
§ 32.004 COMMISSION FOR ADVANCEMENT OF PROGRAMS FOR THE DISABLED.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Commission for the Advancement of Programs
for the Disabled for the City which shall be an agency of City, and shall have
the powers and duties prescribed by this ordinance and by the Statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   (B)   (1)   The Commission shall consist of three voting members, one of
whom shall be the Manager of the City who shall serve as a member of such
Commission ex-officio during his/hers term of office. The remaining two members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
      (2)   Initial appointments shall be made of one member for a two year
term, and one member for a four year term, and thereafter all appointments
shall be for a four year term. In the event of a vacancy, said vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
   (C)   The Commission shall designate one of its members as Chairman and one
of its members as Secretary.
   (D)   The Commission shall make an annual report to the corporate
authorities not later than May 1 of each year hereafter.   
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.10)
§ 32.005 DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Department of Tourism of the City of Mt.
Vernon. The Department shall encourage, foster, promote, and stimulate
conventions and tourism in the City of Mt. Vernon and shall acquaint and inform
the public as to these objectives by providing information and other civic,
educational, social, and public features and events we will encourage, foster,
promote, and stimulate conventions and tourism in the City of Mt. Vernon. The
Department of Tourism shall be under the direction and supervision of the City
Manager.
   (B)   There is further hereby created a Tourism Board which shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the City Manager and the City Council in the
expenditure of funds and in the operation of the Department of Tourism. The
Board shall consist of nine (9) appointed members and three (3) non-voting ex
officio members. The nine appointed members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council and each member shall serve a
term of three (3) years, which term shall commence May 1 and expire April 30
three years succeeding; the three year terms shall be staggered so that the
terms of three members expire each year. The ex officio members shall be the
Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon, Chairman of the Jefferson County Board, and
President of the Jefferson County Chamber of Commerce. All appointed members
shall be voting members and a majority of the voting members shall constitute a
quorum. Vacancies for appointed Board members shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term of the vacancy, and a vacancy for an ex officio member
shall be filled by the successor in office. Each member shall serve without
compensation. Failure of a member to attend three meetings during a calendar
year shall subject the non-attending member to removal as a member of the Board
upon recommendation of the Mayor and approval by the City Council.
   (C)   The City Council shall impose a tax upon gross rental receipts from
the renting, leasing, or letting of hotel and motel rooms under the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/8-3-4, and all funds received from such tax shall be kept by the
City Treasurer in the City Tourism fund to be used solely for the Department of
Tourism.
   (D)   The Executive Administrator of the Department of Tourism shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall receive a salary within ranges
determined by the City Council from time to time and fixed by the City Manager
based upon performance and merit.
   (E)   The Executive Administrator of the Department of Tourism shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   To coordinate, recommend, and implement the Department of Tourism
Programs.
      (2)   To be responsible for supervision, maintenance, and general
housekeeping of Department of Tourism facilities under the control of the City
of Mt. Vernon.
      (3)   To act as the Administrative Assistant to the Tourism Board of the
City of Mt. Vernon and to keep all records of the Board, minutes of meetings
for the Board, and to coordinate activities of the Board with the office of the
City Manager.
      (4)   To be responsible for submitting yearly a fiscal proposed budget to
the office of the City Manager.
      (5)   To handle all administrative duties concerning the Tourism
Department for the City of Mt. Vernon as directed by the City Manager.
      (6)   To provide the Board and the City Manager with all programs of
tourism which will be operated under the Department.
      (7)   To act as the City’s representative on all tourism matters and
related organizations or groups or as directed by the City Manager and to
assist and to make recommendations to appropriate civic organizations or
groups.
      (8)   To provide a monthly and annual report of activities, costs, and
projected activities to the City Manager and City Council.
      (9)   To perform such other duties as directed by the City Manager and
the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.11)
§ 32.006 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Department of Economic Development of the
City of Mt. Vernon. The Department shall encourage, foster, promote, and
stimulate business and industrial development in the City of Mt. Vernon. The
Department of Economic Development shall be under the direction and supervision
of the City Manager.
   (B)   An Executive Administrator of the Department of Economic Development
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   To coordinate, recommend, and implement the Department of Economic
Development programs.
      (2)   To act as the Chairman of the Mt. Vernon Economic Development
Commission, to keep all records and minutes of the Commission, and to
coordinate the activities of the Commission with the City Manager.
      (3)   To develop and submit an annual proposed budget for the Department
for consideration by the City Manager and City Council.
      (4)   To organize and implement sales and marketing programs consistent
with the Commission’s goals and objectives.
      (5)   To maintain a data base on available industrial sites and
buildings.
      (6)   To organize and implement industrial retention programs consistent
with the Commission’s goals and objectives.
      (7)   To handle all administrative duties concerning the Department of
Economic Development for the City of Mt. Vernon as directed by the City
Manager.
      (8)   To provide monthly and annual reports of activities, costs, and
projected endeavors to the City Manager and City Council.
   (C)   (1)   There is further hereby created the Mt. Vernon Economic
Development Commission for the City of Mt. Vernon which shall be an agency of
the City and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this Ordinance and
by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
      (2)   The Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City
Manager and the City Council in the operation of the Department of Economic
Development and the City’s economic development efforts.
      (3)   The Commission (excluding the non-voting Chairman and non-voting
Secretary) shall consist of 21 members. Ten of the 21 members shall serve ex
officio, said members being the Mayor and Council of the City of Mt. Vernon,
the Chairman of the County Board of Jefferson County, the City Manager of the
City of Mt. Vernon, the President of the Greater Jefferson County Chamber of
Commerce, the Illinois 54th District State Senator, and the Illinois District
107 State Representative; said ex officio members shall be non-voting members
and may attend meetings by an appointed designee. The remaining 11 members
shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Each term of office shall begin May 1, except that
initial appointments shall take effect upon appointment. All appointments shall
be for a three year term, except the initial appointment of three members shall
expire on May 1, 1996, the initial appointment of the final four members shall
expire May 1, 1997, and the initial appointment of four of the final four
members shall expire on May 1, 1998. Upon a member’s term expiring, the
position becomes vacant unless filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council within 60 days of expiration of the term.
      (4)   In the event of a vacancy, said vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
City Council.
      (5)   The Commission may designate one of its members or a non-voting
administrative person to serve as Secretary. The Chairman of the Commission
shall be the Executive Administrator of the Department of Economic Development;
the Chairman shall be nonvoting.
      (6)   The Commission shall make an annual report to the corporate
authorities not later than May 1 of each year hereafter.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.13)
§ 32.007 MINORITY AFFAIRS AND HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Membership. There is hereby created the Mt. Vernon Minority Affairs
and Human Relations Commission consisting of thirteen (13) voting members and
two (2) ex officio non-voting members, all of whom shall serve without
compensation. The Commission shall reflect a broad representation of community
interests; the members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of Mt.
Vernon and/or officially designated representatives from a recognized and
functional governmental, religious or educational entity or a similarly
recognized entity, or otherwise designated or determined by the City Council.
Nine (9) of the voting members shall be representatives of the afore-described
recognized entities and four (4) voting members shall be from the community at
large. The two (2) ex officio members shall be one (1) representative from each
the Jefferson County Housing Authority and the City Housing Authority.
   (B)   Appointment and term. The voting members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council for the
terms as follows: four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2)
years; four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years; and
five (5) members shall be appointed ford term of five (5) years. Ex officio
members shall each be appointed by the entity each represents and shall have no
designated term. Vacancies of voting members shall be filled by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council within 60 days after having occurred for
the unexpired portion of the vacant term or full term.
   (C)   Officers. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission, and any
other officers deemed necessary by said body, shall be elected by the majority
vote of the membership of the Commission.
   (D)   Duties. The Commission shall, in cooperation with the Mayor and the
City Council, endeavor to assure fair and equal treatment under the law to all
citizens; to protect the rights of all persons to enjoy public accommodations
and facilities; to receive equal treatment from all agencies of the City and
from all holders of licenses, contracts, and privileges from the City; and to
assure equality of opportunity for employment and advancement in the City
government.
   (E)   Discrimination. The Commission shall advise and consult with the Mayor
and the Council in all matters involving prejudice or discrimination based upon
race, sex, religion, ethnic origin, age, marital status, or physical or mental
disability unrelated to ability, and recommended such legislative action as it
deems appropriate to effectuate the policy of this Resolution and to improve
human relations in the entire City. The Commission shall also seek to
accomplish the goals and purposes of the Commission through education and
conciliation.
   (F)   Definitions. For the purpose hereof:
      (1)   AGE means the chronological age of a person who is at least forty
(40) years old; and
      (2)   DISABILITY means a determinable physical or mental characteristic
of a person, including, but not limited to, a determinable physical
characteristic which necessitates the person’s use of a guide, hearing, or
support dog; the history of such characteristic; or the perception of such
characteristic by others, which may result from disease, injury, congenital
condition of birth or functional disorder, and which characteristic is
unrelated to the person’s ability to perform or carry out the function involved
in the practice of discrimination or acts of prejudice.
   (G)   Annual report. The Commission shall not less than annually report to
the City Council its activities and recommendations.
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§ 32.020 CREATION.
   There is hereby created the Department of Finance of the City. The
Department shall consist of a Finance Director and such other employees as may
be provided for by the City Council. All City employees who perform services
and obligations in all of the areas described in §§
32.020 through
32.038 and all subparagraphs thereof shall report to the Director of Finance
insofar as the services and duties of these employees relate to those areas.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(a))
§ 32.021 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from time to time
and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of appointment of the first Director of
Finance, the City Clerk shall cease to act as ex officio Director of Finance
and no further salary shall be payable by reason thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(b), (c))
§ 32.022 FINANCE DIRECTOR’S DUTIES.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall:
      (1)   Assist in preparing, under the direction of the City Manager the
annual budget which shall, upon the approval of the City Manager, constitute
his report of estimates required by law to be submitted to the Council.
      (2)   Prepare and submit to the City Manager such financial statements
and reports as the City Manager may require.
      (3)   Prepare the Annual Appropriation and Levy Ordinances as required by
law.
      (4)   Sell such personal property of the City as will not be needed for
further public use, subject to the approval of the City Manager and City
Council.
      (5)   Have charge of the storage and supplies and materials purchased by
the City and not delivered directly to the various departments and agencies and
keep proper records thereof.
   (B)   The Finance Executive shall establish, organize and keep all accounts
of the City Government, assist in preparing, under the direction of the City
Manager and Finance Director, the Annual Budget which shall, upon approval of
the City Manager, constitute his report of estimates required by law to be
submitted to the Council.
      (1)   Prepare and submit to the City Manager such financial statements
and reports as the City Manager may require.
      (2)   Establish procedures to assure the receipt and deposit of all sums
due the City.
      (3)   Establish procedures to prevent expenditures in excess of budget
appropriations and in order to prevent illegal or irregular expenditures.
      (4)   Conduct special studies and investigations into the fiscal affairs
of the City Departments whenever he deems it advisable.
      (5)   Collect or supervise the collection of all monies belonging to the
City from all sources except Real and Personal Taxes and from other
Governmental Jurisdictions.
      (6)   Assist the City Manager in the purchase of all supplies, materials,
and equipment required by the various departments and agencies of the City,
subject to the ordinances relating thereto and the directions of the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(d), (e))
§ 32.023 DEPARTMENT DIVISIONS.
   (A)   The Finance Executive shall establish two divisions in the Department,
operated independently of each other as a security measure, but supervised by
the Finance Executive.
   (B)   One such division shall receive all revenues payable to the City as
hereinafter set forth; the other such division shall account for all such
revenues as hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(f))
§ 32.024 RECEIPT AND COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   The Finance Executive shall receive and collect all charges for the use of
City property or special services rendered by the City, sums due the City on
any contract, public utility revenues from sewer and water operations, and all
other sums due to the City other than those which are by law paid directly to
the Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Finance Executive to keep the City
Manager informed as to all sums due on taxes, accumulations in the Motor Fuel
Tax Account to the credit of the City, and all other revenues to which the City
is entitled. Likewise, he shall also receive and collect all other license
fees, permit fees, and City charges where it has not either by Statute or by
this Code, been provided that they shall be otherwise collected. He shall give
every person paying money into the City a receipt therefor, specifying the date
of payment, amount and upon what account paid. Nothing in this section shall
interfere with the City Clerk collecting in behalf of the City such fees as
said Clerk is now collecting for and is by this Code provided for.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(g))
§ 32.025 ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE.
   The Finance Executive shall establish the City’s accounting procedure in
such a manner that the accounts will show all financial transactions of each
branch of the City Government and all financial transactions relating to all
appropriations, funds and sub funds, all cash receipts and disbursements, and
all transactions effecting the acquisition, custody, and disposition of assets.
Such accounts shall at all times show the fiscal condition of the City,
including the current revenues and expenditures of all municipal funds and
accounts.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(h))
§ 32.026 PAYROLL, VOUCHERS AND BILLS.
   (A)   The Finance Executive shall examine all payrolls, vouchers and bills
and other claims and demands against the City and shall not issue a warrant for
payment thereof, unless he has found by diligent investigation that the claim
is in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly and
legally due and payable, and that it is accompanied by the certification of a
responsible official of the department concerned that the goods and services
listed therein were actually received. He may require a statement in writing
under oath as to any fact or matter concerning the justness or correctness of
any such bill or claim. If he finds the claim to be fraudulent, erroneous, or
otherwise invalid, he shall refuse to authorize the payment of same and shall
make immediate report of the circumstances to the City Manager.
   (B)   The Finance Executive shall, immediately preceding each regular
monthly meeting of the Council, prepare a warrant on the Treasurer for the
payment of all sums due from the City, listing each item and the fund out of
which it is payable; which warrant, when properly signed by the Mayor and
Clerk, shall authorize the issuance of a voucher or check as provided by law
for the payment of each item. No item shall be included in such warrant unless
it has been authorized by the Council.
   (C)   (1)   A list of all items to be paid shall be submitted to the Mayor
for his signature. Such list shall contain the statement of the Finance
Executive and of the City Manager to the effect that all items contained herein
are proper expenses due from the City for services performed or materials
furnished to the City.
      (2)   Approval of such list of items to be paid by the Council on a roll
call vote shall constitute the Council’s approval of the payment of all
expenses listed thereon; provided that the Council may in the motion to approve
payment, except specific items from such approval, in which case such items
shall not be paid. Notwithstanding any such other provision in this Code
contained where employees’ services have been previously authorized and such
services performed and being due and payable, the payment for such services may
be made and a regular warrant on the Treasurer for such payments issued without
requiring further Council authorization. It shall be the duty, however, of the
Finance Executive to prepare a report of such payments so made to be presented
to the Council at the next meeting following for further approval of the
payments so made.
   (D)   If the Finance Executive issues a warrant authorizing payment of any
item which no appropriation has been made, or for the purpose of which there is
not sufficient balance in the proper appropriation and allotment, or which is
otherwise contrary to law, he and his sureties shall be individually liable to
the City for the full amount thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(i))
§ 32.027 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Accounts shall be kept by Finance Executive for each appropriation
made by the Council, together with a record of each allotment of the
appropriation by the City Manager, and every purchase order and contract and
every warrant passed for payment shall state specifically against which it is
drawn. The Finance Executive’s accounts shall show for each departmental
appropriation and allotment made, the amount of obligations incurred against
the same, and the balance remaining to the credit thereof.
   (B)   No contract or purchase order involving the expenditure of tax or bond
money shall be issued or entered into, nor shall any such be valid unless the
Finance Executive shall first certify thereon that there is in the Treasury to
the credit of the Appropriation from which it is to be paid, a balance
sufficient to meet the obligation. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements,
stores and service requisitions and emergency purchase orders issued in
accordance with the rules promulgated by the City Manager, may be certified not
later than twenty four hours after their issuance.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(j))
§ 32.028 ALLOTMENTS OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   The allotments of appropriations, as approved by the City Council and from
time to time revised, shall limit the amount of expenditures which may be
certified against any appropriation by the Finance Executive.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(k))
§ 32.029 LIABILITY.
   If an official or employee of the City shall authorize or incur an
obligation against the City without first securing the Finance Executive’s
certification required by this Article, he and his sureties shall be
individually liable for the amount of such obligations.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(l))
§ 32.030 CLOSE OF EACH FISCAL YEAR.
   At the close of each fiscal year, any balance of an appropriation, except
those relating to bond funds and other appropriations specifically granted for
longer than one year by the Council, shall automatically lapse and shall cease
to be available for expenditure, unless reappropriated by the Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(m))
§ 32.031 EXHAUSTION OF APPROPRIATION OR FUND.
   Whenever any appropriation or fund is exhausted, the Finance Executive
immediately shall notify the City Manager thereof, and he shall not thereafter
draw any warrant against any such fund or appropriation until the same shall be
renewed.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(n))
§ 32.032 WARRANTS.
   The Finance Executive shall keep in a suitable book an accurate list of all
warrants drawn upon the City Treasury, showing the date, number and amount of
each, the name of the person in whose favor drawn, and the fund out of which
each warrant is payable.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(o))
§ 32.033 BOND REGISTER.
   The Finance Executive shall keep in his office in a book expressly for that
purpose, to be known as the bond register, a full and correct list of all
outstanding bonds of the City, showing the number, amount, time of maturity,
rate of interest and place of payment of each bond; and for what and to whom
the same was issued; and when any City bonds are surrendered, cancelled or
paid, said register shall show the fact and in his annual report to the City
Manager the said Finance Executive shall describe particularly the bonds sold,
exchanged or redeemed during the fiscal year and give an itemized statement of
the expenses thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(p))
§ 32.034 REPORTS.
   (A)   The Finance Executive shall require all officers charged in any manner
with the receipt, collection, or disbursement of City funds to submit to him
monthly reports in writing, showing in detail all such receipts, collection and
disbursements.
   (B)   If any such officer shall neglect to make such report or to adjust his
accounts whenever required by the Finance Executive or to pay over to the
proper officer any money in his possession belonging to the City, it shall be
the duty of the Finance Executive to cause a written notice to be served upon
such officer and his sureties demanding a settlement of his accounts with the
City forthwith.
   (C)   In case of neglect or refusal of such officer to make such settlement
and pay over said monies for a period of ten days after the serving of such
notice, the Finance Executive shall report such officer to the City Manager for
his action in the matter, and proceedings shall be instituted against such
delinquent officer and his sureties for the recovery of any money due said
City.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(q))
§ 32.035 CLOSE OF MONTH OR OTHER TIME.
   (A)   At the close of each, month and at any other time, if so ordered, the
Finance Executive shall prepare and submit to the City Manager a statement of
the condition of each appropriation and fund or sub fund and such other reports
as may be required of him.
   (B)   At the close of the year he shall submit to the City Manager a
statement of the condition of each appropriation and fund or sub fund and such
other reports as may be required of him. At the close of the year he shall
submit to the City Manager a complete report of the financial transactions of
the year and the condition of the City’s finances, including a balance sheet
for each fund and such other reports as may be required of him.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(r))
§ 32.036 ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   He, with the City Treasurer, shall within ninety days after the first
day of May in each year, make out an annual report for publication, giving a
detailed statement of all the receipts and liabilities of the City, the
condition of all unexpended appropriations, all contracts unfulfilled, the
balance of money remaining in the Treasury, all sums due and outstanding, and
all other matters necessary to exhibit the true financial condition of the
City.
   (B)   When examined and approved by the City Manager, the Treasurer shall
publish said report in such manner as the Council may direct.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(s))
§ 32.037 INTERNAL AUDIT.
   (A)   (1)   The Finance Executive shall conduct a thorough and continuous
internal audit of all receipts, payments assets and liabilities of all funds
handled by the City, or by any agency thereof, in order to protect the City
from loss through accident, negligence, or dishonesty.
      (2)   Said Finance Executive shall audit all reports of officers handling
any City monies and submit same to the City Manager, together with any
obligations he has thereto.
      (3)   (a)   It shall be his responsibility to see that all amounts
legally due the City are correctly computed, collected in full and deposited in
the Treasury to the credit of the proper fund and account.
         (b)   He shall verify the daily cash transactions and certify to the
correctness of the daily cash report.
   (B)   The Finance Executive shall, when so ordered by the City Manager, and
may upon his own initiative, make special audits and investigations into the
finances of any department of the City Government. At the close of each fiscal
year the Council shall cause an audit to be made of the City accounts by duly
qualified public accountants.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(t))
§ 32.038 RECORDS OPEN FOR INSPECTION.
   All warrants, books, and all papers pertaining to his office as such Finance
Executive, shall at all times be open to the inspection of and subject to the
examination of the Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director, City Treasurer, and
any Councilman.
(Prior Code, Art. 1, § 1.5(u))
LEGAL DEPARTMENT
§ 32.050 LEGAL DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Legal Department for the City of Mt. Vernon
which Department shall be under the supervision and direction of the City
Manager for all administrative purposes and which Department may consist of a
Corporation Counsel, a City Attorney, or such Assistants and Special Assistants
as determined by the City Council, all of whom shall be Attorneys at Law duly
licensed to practice in the State of Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2A) (Ord. 2024-10, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 32.051 CORPORATION COUNSEL.
   The Corporation Counsel, City Attorney, and such Assistants and Special
Assistants of the City shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the advice
and consent of the City Council. Each may be appointed for a definite term or
be appointed on an indefinite basis and shall continue in office until a
successor has been appointed and qualified or until terminated by the City
Manager. Each shall perform such duties as determined and directed by the City
Manager. The duties of the Corporation Counsel, the City Attorney, or any
Special Counsel shall not prevent said attorneys from engaging in the general
practice of law in any matter not in conflict with the interests of the City of
Mt. Vernon. The compensation paid to a Corporation Counsel, a City Attorney, an
Assistant or Special Assistant shall be recommended by the City Manager, but
shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2B) (Ord. 2024-10, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 32.052 LITIGATION.
   (A)   City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City
Manager and shall prosecute all actions for violation of City Ordinances
initiated or referred by the City Manager, City Engineer, or other City
official, except the Police Department and such other litigation matters as may
be assigned by the City Manager.
   (B)   Assistant City Attorney. An Assistant City Attorney may be appointed
by the City Manager to prosecute all actions for violation of traffic
ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, including all provisions of Title VII
hereof of the Revised Code of Ordinances and also, complaints of ordinance
violations made by private citizens.
   (C)   General Litigation. The Corporation Counsel or such other member of
the Legal Department as shall be designated by the City Manager from time to
time shall prosecute and defend any and all other suits or causes of action to
which the City may be a party and shall represent the City in all matters
before the Circuit, Appellate, or Supreme Courts of the State of Illinois, in
any Federal Court hearing, hearings before the Illinois Commerce Commission or
other judicial or quasi judicial commission where there is a possibility of an
appeal to a court of record.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2C)
§ 32.053 RETAINER.
   The Corporation Counsel shall be paid a retainer of $125.00 per month for
his attendance upon the official bi-monthly meetings of the City Council. For
all other services, the Corporation Counsel and the City Attorney shall keep
detailed time records of time necessarily spent by each of them for their
services, and shall bill the City monthly for services of the month prior to
such bill, which shall be at the same rate for hourly services as the fair,
usual, and customary hourly fee by attorneys in Jefferson County. The City
shall further pay the proper out of pocket expenses of the Legal Department,
including all court costs, publication costs, telephone expenses, and other out
of pocket expenses.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2D)
§ 32.054 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   In the event that any member of the Legal Department of the City may
be prevented from representing the City in any matter for which their office
would otherwise require them to provide legal services to the City, including
prohibition of representation by reason of conflict of interest or other
ethical prohibition or by reason of time constraint or in which any of them
shall desire or request assistance, the City Manager may authorize any other
member of the Legal Department to represent the City in any particular case, or
the City Manager may employ Special Counsel for any such purpose.
   (B)   In the event of appointment of Special Counsel who is not then the
Corporation Counsel, City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney appointed by the
City Manager, that appointment shall be at such salary or compensation as may
be agreed upon between the City Manager and that Special Counsel but which
compensation shall be ratified by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2E)
§ 32.055 DUTIES; CONFLICT.
   The duties of the Corporation Counsel, the City Attorney, or any Special
Counsel shall not prevent either office from engaging in the general practice
of law in any matter not in conflict with the interests of the City of Mt.
Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.2F)
PARK AND PUBLIC FACILITY DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Parks and Public Facilities Department. The
Department shall have authority over the Veteran’s Park, Lincoln Park and all
lands acquired by the City by donation, condemnation or otherwise for park
purposes and, in addition, shall have responsibility for maintenance of public
buildings, public grounds and municipal right-of-ways.
   (B)   The Parks and Public Facilities Department shall be administered by
the Director of Parks and Public Facilities who shall be under the direction
and supervision of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.7(a))
§ 32.071 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   There is further hereby created a Park and Recreation Board which
shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Manager and the City Council in
the use, operation, and maintenance of the park system of the City and other
public grounds as determined by the City Manager.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Beginning May 1,
2013, three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two
members for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members for a term of one (1)
year; thereafter, each member appointed shall serve a term of three (3) years.
Terms shall commence on May 1 and expire on April 30.
   (C)   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term of the
vacancy. Each member shall serve without compensation. Failure of a member to
attend three meetings during a calendar year shall subject the non-attending
member to removal as a member of the Board upon recommendation of the Mayor and
approval by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.7(b))
§ 32.072 APPROPRIATION AND LEVY OF A SPECIAL TAX.
   The City Council shall appropriate and levy a special tax for the use,
maintenance and operation of the City Park system and all funds received from
such levy shall be separately accounted for by the Finance Director of the City
to insure that said funds are solely used for the operation, maintenance and
improvement of the Park system.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.7(c))
§ 32.073 DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   The Director of Parks and Public Facilities shall be appointed by the
City Manager and shall receive a salary within ranges as determined by the City
Council from time to time and fixed by the City Manager, based upon performance
and merit.
   (B)   The Director of Parks and Public Facilities shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:
      (1)   Plan, direct, and administer all park recreation programs;
supervise and direct the design, planning, development and implementation of
recreational and instructional park programs.
      (2)   Inspect physical park and recreation facilities and develop plans
for their replacement and direct and evaluate construction, maintenance and
repair of City Park grounds and equipment.
      (3)   Coordinate maintenance and repair schedules of property under the
authority of the Department and be responsible for the maintenance and general
housekeeping of said property.
      (4)   Prepare and administer annual recreational budget; approve
recreational expenditures; prepare and maintain records of recreational
expenditures and activities.
      (5)   Supervise, inspect and evaluate the work of subordinate personnel
engaged in construction, maintenance and repair activities to insure compliance
with project standards; provide training and orientation to new employees;
administer the terms of the labor contract between City and the Union.
      (6)   Plan, direct and evaluate the performance of a recreational
coordinator, clerical staff and other employees of the Department.
      (7)   Direct and assist the Recreational Coordinator in the performance
of specific duties of the Recreational Coordinator; including duties of (1)
acting as administrative assistant to the Park and Recreation Board and keeping
all records of the Board, minutes of meetings for the Board and coordinate
activities of the Board with the Office of the City Manager; (2) acting as the
City’s representative in all recreational matters in related organizations and
assisting and making recommendations to appropriate civic organizations or
groups; (3) coordinating State and Federal grants with the Grant Coordinator
and insuring compliance with funding requirements and grant regulations; and
(4) supervising recreational employees, such as swimming pool employees and
umpires.
      (8)   Plan, direct and evaluate the construction, maintenance, cleaning,
and repair of public buildings, right-of-ways, Park, and other public property
under the authority of the Department.
      (9)   Plan, direct and evaluate the cleaning; setting up, opening, and
closing of municipal buildings and recreational sites.
      (10)   Plan, direct and evaluate mowing of public grounds, trimming of
trees and shrubbery, cultivating of flowers, and landscaping of public grounds.
      (11)   Organize, plan, direct; and evaluate long range plans for public
maintenance improvements in conjunction with other City Departments; organize,
plan, direct, and evaluate preventative maintenance for public facilities.
      (12)   Receive complaints and questions from the general public regarding
public maintenance activities and initiate corrective actions where necessary.
      (13)   Prepare, submit and administer an annual budget; prepare projected
costs for labor, materials and equipment; review and approve requests for work
materials and purchases of services and equipment, and prepare and maintain
records of work performed.
      (14)   Handle all administrative duties concerning the Parks and Public
Facilities Department.
      (15)   Provide a monthly and annual report of activities, costs. and
projected activities to the City Manager and Council and respond as necessary
to other inquiries of the City Manager and Council.
      (16)   Perform such other duties as directed or assigned by the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.7(d), (e))
§ 32.074 SWIMMING POOL.
   The swimming pool of the City of Mt Vernon shall be under the authority of
the Parks and Public Facilities Department. The public swimming pool of the
City of Mt Vernon and use thereof by all persons shall be subject to the
following regulations:
   (A)   Admission to the pool shall be refused to all persons having venereal
disease, contagious disease, infectious diseases such as colds, fevers,
ringworms, foot infections, skin lesions, carbuncles, pimples, inflamed eyes,
ear discharge, or any other conditions which have the appearance of being
infectious. Persons with excessive sunburn, abrasions which have not healed,
corn plasters, bunion pads, adhesive tape, rubber bandages, etc. or other
bandages of any kind, will not be admitted.
   (B)   No food, drink, gum or tobacco shall be allowed in the pool area.
   (C)   All persons shall be required to take a shower in the nude with soap
and warm water before being allowed in the pool area.
   (D)   Bathers who leave the pool area for any reason shall be required to
shower before returning to the pool.
   (E)   All persons with long hair shall be required to wear caps while in the
pool.
   (F)   All persons shall report to the attendant after taking their shower,
before entering the water.
   (G)   People in street shoes shall not be allowed in the pool area.
   (H)   No flotation devices such as inflatable rafts or inner tubes shall be
allowed in the swimming pool.
   (I)   No person shall engage in expectoration of water or other fluids,
spouting or throwing of water roughness, rowdiness, or loud or raucous
behavior.
   (J)   The Parks and Public Facilities Director shall have the authority to
adopt the necessary regulations in addition to the above in order to carry out
these regulations and for the efficient and safe operation of the swimming
pool.
   (K)   In addition to the penalty clause of this ordinance, any person
violating these regulations or the necessary directions of the Parks and Public
Facilities Director, the Manager of the swimming pool or the lifeguards, shall
be subject to exclusion from the swimming pool.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.7(f))
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS AND BOARD
§ 32.085 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the State of Illinois as expressed in its
Constitution and other laws; in order that the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of all the inhabitants of the City may be protected and
insured; it is hereby declared the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois
to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of race, religion,
national origin or ancestry, to live in decent, sanitary, and healthful living
quarters.
   (B)   It is further declared to be the policy of the City that no owner,
lessee, sub-lessee, assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm or
corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise control any
housing accommodation, within the City, or any agent of any of these, should
refuse to sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person
or group of persons such housing accommodations because of the race, religion,
national origin or ancestry of such person or persons or discriminate against
any person because of his race, religion, national origin or ancestry in the
terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith.
   (C)   In furthering the policy of the City of Mt. Vernon, this Council and
its Commission on Human Relations shall endeavor to work with, and cooperate
with Real Estate Associations, individual members thereof, lending
institutions, and all others engaged in dealing with housing accommodations in
the City, in a spirit of harmony, to the end that the declared purpose of this
ordinance be accomplished in an orderly, lawful, and proper fashion.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(I))
§ 32.086 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this ordinance, unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the context, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed in this
section:
   DISCRIMINATE. The terms DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION mean any difference
in the availability of, or the terms of, the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or
financing for housing accommodations to any person in regard to such sale,
exchange, rental, lease or finance, because of the race, religion, national
origin or ancestry of such person.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. The term HOUSING ACCOMMODATION includes any standard
building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied, or is
maintained, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence,
or sleeping place of one or more human beings, or any real estate so used,
designed, or intended for such use.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. The term REAL ESTATE BROKER means any natural person,
partnership, association, corporation or agent, thereof, who for a fee or other
valuable consideration offers, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents or
negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange of rental of a housing
accommodation of another, or collects rental for the use of a housing
accommodation of another.
   OWNER. An OWNER means any person holding title to any housing accommodation,
such owner’s authorized representative, or any person in control of any housing
accommodation.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(II))
§ 32.087 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesman, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of
any of the foregoing, to discriminate against any other person because of the
race, religion, national origin or ancestry or such other person or the friends
or associates of such other persons, in regard to the sale, exchange, or rental
of, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation.
   (B)   Without limiting the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker, real estate salesman or agent, owner or other person, or lending
institution dealing with housing in the City:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of, or the
price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to the sale,
rental, lease or occupancy of any housing accommodation in the City or in the
furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement of advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to use any
form of application for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of real estate
used for residential purposes which indicates racial preference.
      (3)   To exploit or overcharge any person for housing accommodations
because of race, religion, national origin or ancestry.
      (4)   To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation.
      (5)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, or
any housing accommodation of the ground of loss of value because of the present
or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any
particular race, religion, national origin or ancestry.
      (6)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of any Housing Accommodation to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective charge in the
race, religion, national origin or ancestry of persons in the neighborhood.
      (7)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation for
the purpose of induction or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale
of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or anticipated
presence of persons of any particular race, religion, national origin or
ancestry in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(III))
§ 32.088 FAIR HOUSING BOARD.
   There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board which shall consist of three
members from the community at large, one or more with experience as real estate
brokers, in finance, or other housing related fields. Members shall be
appointed and be removable for cause by the Mayor, with consent of the Council.
In the first instance, one member shall be appointed for a term of three years,
one for a term of two years, and one for a term of one year. Thereafter each
member appointed shall serve for a term of three years. The Mayor shall
designate one of the members of the Board to be its Chairman. Two members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(IV))
§ 32.089 DUTIES OF THE FAIR HOUSING BOARD.
   It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
   (A)   Receive or initiate, record, and investigate complaints charging any
violation of this ordinance.
   (B)   Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints by
conciliation conferences, holding a hearing where necessary, making findings of
fact, issuing recommendations to solve any problems.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(V))
§ 32.090 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Fair Housing Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this ordinance.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provision
of this ordinance may file a written complaint setting forth his grievance with
the Fair Housing Board. Such complaint must be filed within 90 days of the
commission of the alleged violation and shall state the name and address of the
complainant and of the person against whom the complaint is brought, and shall
also state the facts surrounding the alleged violation.
   (C)   The Fair Housing Board shall investigate every such complaint thus
filed. If the Fair Housing Board determines that the party complained against
has not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact
in writing and dismiss the complaint. If the Fair Housing Board determines,
after such investigation, that probable cause for the complaint exists, the
Fair Housing Board shall set a date for a conciliation hearing. At such
hearing, the Fair Housing Board shall interview the complainant and the person
or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to
resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion. If
such attempts at conciliation are not successful within sixty days after the
date of filing of the complaint, the Fair Housing Board shall then proceed
promptly with a formal hearing of the complaint.
   (D)   Such formal hearing shall be conducted by the Fair Housing Board upon
due and reasonable notice to all parties. The Fair Housing Board shall have
full power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, which power may be
enforced by the Fair Housing Board by proper petition to any court of competent
jurisdiction. The Fair Housing Board shall have power to administer oaths and
to take sworn testimony. At the conclusion of the hearings, the Fair Housing
Board shall render a written report and recommendations which shall be served
by mail upon the complainant and the party complained against, No report shall
be delayed more than sixty days after date of the issuance of notice for
commencement of such formal hearing.
   (E)   If, during the course of any proceedings prescribed herein, the Fair
Housing Board, on the basis of the evidence before it, concludes that a
violation of this ordinance is imminent, it may relay such evidence to the City
Council, together with its recommendation that the City Attorney be instructed
to seek injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to prohibit
such violation.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(VI))
§ 32.091 PENALTY.
   The Fair Housing Board may include as part of its report a recommendation to
the City Attorney for prosecution of any person or persons who violate any of
the provisions of this ordinance or any rule or regulation adopted by the Fair
Housing Board or who fail to comply with an order of the Fair Housing Board.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of the Revised
Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.9(VII))
TREE BOARD
§ 32.105 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Tree Board which shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the City Manager and the City Council its duties and functions are
limited to those set. forth in this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.14(A))
§ 32.106 COMPOSITION.
   The Tree Board shall be composed of eight members. Five shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. These five
members shall serve without compensation and shall reside within the City of
Mt. Vernon. The Public Works Director, Parks and Public Facilities Director,
and the Downtown Mt. Vernon Development Corporation Executive Director of the
City of Mt. Vernon shall be the remaining three and shall be ex officio members
and shall not vote.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.14(B))
§ 32.107 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   Each of the five appointed members shall serve a term of two years; which
term shall commence May 1 and expire April 30, two years succeeding. The
initial appointments shall expire upon April 30, 1995. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term of the vacancy. The Mayor shall
designate the Chairperson of the Tree Board.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.14(C))
§ 32.108 DUTIES.
   The Tree Board shall advise the City Manager and the Council on matters to
promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare regarding
policy for planting, maintaining and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants
on City owned property. Topics under this advice may be given and may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Development, implementation, interpretation, and amendment of a policy
for the planting, maintaining, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants
on City owned property.
   (B)   Review, alteration, and/or revision of the Mt. Vernon Forestry Plan.
   (C)   Establishment of educational and informational programs to promote
proper planting, maintaining, and removal of trees upon property utilized by
the City as a right-of-way for street and/or utility purposes or by other
public utilities as a right-of-way.
   (D)   Review, management, and updating of the City tree inventory.
   (E)   Recommending budget expenditures and planning goals and priorities
regarding purchase of trees and tree services and other financial decisions
relating thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.14(D))
BUREAU OF INSPECTION
§ 32.120 CREATION.
   There is hereby created within the City of Mt. Vernon a Bureau of
Inspection. The Bureau shall consist of Director of the Bureau of Inspection,
who shall be appointed by the City Manager, and such other employees as shall
be authorized by the City Council from time to time and appointed by the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 10-A, § 10-A.1)
§ 32.121 DUTIES.
   The Bureau of Inspection shall coordinate the enforcement of all ordinances
of the City and statutes of the State of Illinois calling for public
inspection, including without limitation all ordinances and statues relating to
buildings, electricity, health, weed control, housing, plumbing, sewer and
other similar activities. The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall have
the responsibility for enforcement of all ordinances and statutes relating to
housing, health, and weed control.
(Prior Code, Art. 10-A, § 10-A.2)
§ 32.122 DIRECTOR OF THE BUREAU OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall be ex officio the
Housing Inspector as defined and provided in Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon. He shall also be ex officio Health
Inspector and shall be charged with the investigation, inspection, and
enforcement of ordinances and regulations of the City and the State of Illinois
relating to health and sanitation, and also relating to any alleged violations
under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20.
   (B)   The Director of the Bureau of Inspection shall further have full
control and responsibility for weed control under the provisions of §
90.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon and of the
State Statutes applicable thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 10-A, § 10-A.1)
CHAPTER 33: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Paid Leave for All Workers Act
Officials’ and Employees’ Ethics Act
   
33.15   Definitions
   
33.16   Prohibited political activities
   
33.17   Gift ban
 
   
33.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PAID LEAVE FOR ALL WORKERS ACT.
   (A)   The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated as
findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set forth herein.
   (B)   The City of Mt. Vernon hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for
all City of Mt. Vernon employees as set forth in the City of Mt. Vernon’s Code
of Ordinances, Personnel Policy Manual, Employee Handbook, Annual Salary
Ordinances, or any collective bargaining agreements to which the City of Mt.
Vernon is a party and all other binding legislative actions governing paid
leave adopted by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, as the same may be
amended from time to time. However, in no event shall the City of Mt. Vernon,
as an employer, provide less than one (1) day of paid leave per year to any
City employee.
   (C)   Pursuant to the City of Mt. Vernon’s home rule authority, the City of
Mt. Vernon hereby declares that the City of Mt. Vernon, as an employer, is
exempt from the requirements of the Paid Leave for All Workers Act (820 ILCS
192/1 et seq.). The City of Mt. Vernon, as an employer, shall have no
additional obligations with regard to mandatory paid leave, including, without
limitation, any obligations provided under the Act, except those obligations
required by federal and/or state law which validly preempt the City of Mt.
Vernon’s home rule authority.
   (D)   Repeal of conflicting provisions. All ordinances, resolutions, and
policies or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance
are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly repealed on the effective date of
this Ordinance.
   (E)   Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance or application
thereof to any person or circumstance is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
this Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid application or
provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this Ordinance
is severable.
   (F)   The Deputy City Clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to
publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form. This Ordinance shall be in full force
and effect after its passage and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
4.
(Ord. 2023-39, passed 12-18-2023)
OFFICIALS’ AND EMPLOYEES’ ETHICS ACT
§ 33.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or
Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
(ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that are otherwise in
furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-
3).
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 3
of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
Ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, whether on
a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material
details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive (i)
compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension benefits, and
(iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining,
or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county
clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Means:
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Means any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii)
with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Prior Code, Art. 29, § 1)
§ 33.16 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   (1)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein.
      (2)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois in connection with any prohibited
political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as
part of that officer or employee’s duties, (ii) as a condition of employment,
or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this Ordinance.
   (E)   No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Prior Code, Art. 29, § 5)
§ 33.17 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Gift ban. Except as permitted by this Article, no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this Section.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Subsection (A) is not applicable to the following:
         (a)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         (b)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
         (c)   Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election
Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
         (d)   Educational materials and missions.
         (e)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         (f)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancee.
         (g)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
         (h)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on
the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For
the purposes of this Section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
         (i)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
         (j)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and “inter-governmental gift” means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         (k)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         (l)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this Section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
   (C)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this Ordinance if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a
gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount
equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or
hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
(Prior Code, Art. 29, § 10)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
33.16 of this Ordinance may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
33.17 of this Ordinance is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than
$1,001 and not more than $5,000.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this Ordinance to the local enforcement authorities, the
State’s Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed
$2,500.
   (D)   A violation of §
33.16 of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an
attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall
be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
33.16 or
33.17 of this Ordinance is subject to discipline or discharge.
(Prior Code, Art. 29, § 25)
CHAPTER 34: CITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Establishment
   
34.02   Coordinator
   
34.03   Functions
   
34.04   Service as mobile support team
   
34.05   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
34.06   Emergency action
   
34.07   Compensation
   
34.08   Reimbursement by state
   
34.09   Purchases and expenditures
   
34.10   Oath
   
34.11   Office
   
34.12   Appropriation; levy of taxes
§ 34.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the Mt. Vernon City Emergency Management Agency to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from
natural or man made disaster, in accordance with The Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305 et seq.). The term EMA is herein defined to
mean Emergency Management Agency where the same appears.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(a))
§ 34.02 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the City EMA shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council and shall serve until removed by same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction
and control of the City Council as provided by statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act
as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(b))
§ 34.03 FUNCTIONS.
   The City EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the City as shall be
prescribed in and by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act plan and
program prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may
the promulgated by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid
Agreement with any other political subdivisions, municipality, or quasi
municipality entered into as provided by “The Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act”.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(c))
§ 34.04 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any members of the City organization may be designated as
members of a Mobile Support Team created by the Director of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency as provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of such Mobile Support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the City EMA Organization.
   (C)   Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a City employee or officer
while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities
incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(d))
§ 34.05 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of EMA may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreement with other cities
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the City Council, and by the State
Director of EMA, if required.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(e))
§ 34.06 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois or a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the City
EMA to cooperate fully with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency and with
the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(f))
§ 34.07 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the City, if called
for training by the State Director of EMA; shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; such
members who are not such City employees or officers shall receive for such
training time, such compensation as may be established by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(g))
§ 34.08 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The City Finance Director may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support Team while serving outside
of the City in response to a call by the Governor of State Director of EMA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to EMA
activities as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(h))
§ 34.09 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The City Council may, on recommendation of the City Coordinator of
EMA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the City in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from man made or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the City Coordinator
of EMA is authorized on behalf of the City, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts or obligations, as authorized by
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, provided that if the City Council
meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions
imposed by that body.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(i))
§ 34.10 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City EMA Organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the Coordinator:
“I,                                                         , do solemnly swear
(or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance
to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public
and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic, that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor
have I been, a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Mt. Vernon City
EMA Organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political
party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the
United States or of this State by force or violence.”
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(j))
§ 34.11 OFFICE.
   The City Council is authorized to designate space in a City building, or
elsewhere, as may be provided for by the City Council for the City EMA as its
office.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(k))
§ 34.12 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The City Council may make an appropriation for EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for EMA purposes only a tax not to
exceed five (5) cents per one hundred dollars ($100) of the assessed value of
all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act; however, that amount collectable
under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents (25¢) per capita.
(Prior Code, Art. 2, § 2.5(l))
CHAPTER 35: FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION, FIRE DEPARTMENT
AND POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
35.01   Fire and Police Commission
   
35.02   Police Department
   
35.03   Fire Department
   
35.04   Policemen’s Pension Fund
   
35.05   Firemen’s Pension Fund
   
35.06   Community services personnel
§ 35.01 FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners in
accordance with and pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, which Board shall consist of
five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. Such Commissioners shall have the qualifications, take oath,
give bond, and meet such other requirements as other appointive officers in the
City of Mt. Vernon and as required by law. Each Commissioner shall serve for a
term of three (3) years with the terms being staggered, except one Commissioner
appointed in 2018 shall serve an initial term of four (4) years, which terms
shall commence May 1 and expire April 30, three years succeeding. Upon a
Commissioner’s term expiring, the position becomes vacant unless filled by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council within sixty (60) days of
expiration of the term. (Note: given the provisions of this amending Ordinance,
the terms of the Commissioners after adoption of the Ordinance shall expire as
follows: one Commissioner in 2018, one Commissioner in 2019, and one
Commissioner in 2020, which three dates reflect the existing three
Commissioners serving their current terms with current expiration dates, and
the two new appointments to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners serving
terms expiring in 2021 and 2022.)
   (B)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such duties and
such power and authority as shall be granted by the provisions of Division 2.1
of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code and by the Ordinances of the City
and shall make rules only concerning the appointment, removal, and discharge of
officers and members of the Fire and Police Departments of the City, and shall
maintain eligibility registers of persons eligible for appointment to each
Department. Appointments to each Department, except that of the lowest rank
(e.g. Patrolman or Fire Fighter) and except that of the Chief and the Assistant
Chief of the Police Department and the Chief and the Assistant Chief of the
Fire Department, shall be from the rank next below that to which the
appointment is made. The Chief and the Assistant Chief of the Police Department
and the Chief and the Assistant Chief of the Fire Department may be appointed
from among members of the Police and Fire Departments regardless of rank or may
be appointed from any qualified applicants from the general public without
first considering members of the Department. The Rules and Regulations of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners providing for appointments shall be
consistent with this Section.
   (C)    All applicants for a position in the Fire Department or Police
Department shall be at least 21 years of age, citizens of the United States,
and shall reside in either Jefferson County, or a county adjacent to Jefferson
County, including any of the following: Marion, Wayne, Hamilton, Franklin,
Perry, or Washington, as their principal place of residence, within six months
of hire, and thereafter at all times during the time of their employment by the
city. Any employee who shall fail to establish and/or maintain his or her
domicile and residency as required herein shall be subject to discharge from
employment with the city.
   (D)   (1)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may, upon adoption of
Rules consistent with this Section, consider and appoint Applicants who meet
the requirements hereinafter set forth for lateral entry to the Police
Department without such candidates participating in the hiring process for
Original Appointments; provided that such appointments, except as provided
herein, shall be subject to all other applicable Rules of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners. A lateral entry Police Officer appointed by the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners shall be at the patrol officer level with service
time starting on the date when sworn in as a member of the City of Mt. Vernon
Police Department. A lateral entry Police Officer shall be subject to the same
probationary conditions as applicable to Original Appointments, and may also be
subject to additional probationary educational and training requirements if the
Applicant is appointed as a lateral entry based upon being a certified civilian
police officer from another jurisdiction, including a requirement of obtaining
Certification as a Police Office pursuant to the Illinois Police Training Act
(Act (50 ILCS 705/1) within 6 months from date of appointment. A lateral entry
Police Officer appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners must
establish residency within Jefferson County Illinois within six months from
date of appointment.
      (2)   An Applicant for appointment as a lateral entry shall meet the
following qualifications:
         (a)   The Applicant must be a citizen of the United States.
         (b)   The Applicant must be 21 years of age at the time of appointment
and must not exceed the maximum age as determined by the provisions of the
Illinois Fire and Police Commissioners Act (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1).
         (c)   The Applicant must be a high school graduate with diploma or its
equivalent.
         (d)   The Applicant must have a valid driver’s license.
         (e)   The Applicant must not have any felony convictions or any
misdemeanor convictions involving moral turpitude, as specified in the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners Act.
         (f)   The Applicant must be a Certified Police Officer (either as a
full time officer or part time officer) pursuant to the Illinois Police
Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1) or be a civilian police officer certified by
another jurisdiction having similar requirements as the Illinois Police
Training Act.
         (g)   The Applicant must be of good moral character, of temperate
habits, of sound health and must be physically able to perform the duties of
the position.
      (3)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may consider qualified
Applicants for appointment as a lateral entry to the Police Department who
successfully complete the following requirements:
         (a)   The Applicant must complete an application approved and
furnished by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
         (b)   The Applicant must file with the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners or its designee the completed Application with all necessary
documents.
         (c)   The Applicant must provide any required Releases and must pass
an in-depth background investigation.
         (d)   The Applicant must pass an oral interview with the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners.
         (e)   The Applicant must pass a psychological evaluation.
         (f)   The Applicant must pass a physical examination and pass a drug
test.
         (g)   The Applicant must comply with all requirements for the position
of Police Officer and have the ability to pass all State of Illinois and/or
local examination and training requirements.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.1) (Ord. 2025-16, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 35.02 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
    There shall be and is hereby established a Police Department in the City
which shall consist of one (1) Chief of Police, one (1) Assistant Chief of
Police, up to four (4) Captains of Police, up to six (6) Sergeants, and up to
six (6) Corporals. The Police Department shall also include Patrolmen up to but
not exceed thirty-two (32) in number as determined by the City Manager. In
addition, to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary
exigencies or to prevent material impairment of the Police Department, the City
Manager may authorize and request the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to
make temporary appointments not to exceed six (6) months in length. The duties
and assignments of each officer below the rank of Chief of Police shall be
determined by the Chief of Police.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be the highest in rank of the Police
Department and shall direct the same and assign to all officers under him their
respective duties and their respective hours of duty. From the records of the
Department, he shall make monthly reports and recommendations to the Fire and
Police Commission and City Manager, setting forth fully all the doing of his
Department for the preceding month. He shall cause the public peace and quiet
to be preserved and see that all laws and ordinances of the City are complied
with.
   (B)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall be acting Chief of Police in the
absence of the Chief of Police, and shall also discharge all his duties and
shall be subordinate to the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Captains of Police shall be subordinate to the Chief and Assistant
Chief of Police and shall perform such duties and functions as shall be
assigned by the Chief of Police and their superiors.
   (D)   Sergeants shall be subordinate to the officers above mentioned and
shall perform such duties as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their
superiors.
   (E)   Corporals shall be subordinate to the officers above-mentioned and
shall perform such duties as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their
superiors. Patrolmen shall be subordinate to the officers above-mentioned and
shall perform such duties as shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and their
superiors.
   (F)   Each member of the Police Department shall receive such salary and
uniform allowance as may be provided for by ordinance, and shall furnish
therefrom his own uniform and revolver.
   (G)   Each member of the Police Department is hereby authorized to arrest
all persons found committing any offense against the laws of the State of
Illinois or Ordinances of the City, and to commit such persons for examinations
or until they can be brought before the proper magistrate or judge, and shall
have the power and authority to serve warrants on persons within or without the
City when necessary, for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged
with the violations of any ordinances or statutes or for examination or trial.
   (H)   Any member of the Department may be removed from his office by the
Fire and Police Commission for cause, upon written charges and after an
opportunity to be heard in his own defense. Cause for removal or discharge are
as follows:
      (1)   Disobedience of the orders of his superiors.
      (2)   Intoxication.
      (3)   Violent, insolent or abusive language to any superior officer or
member of the public.
      (4)   Consuming intoxicating liquor when on duty or reporting for duty
under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
      (5)   Conduct on or off duty unbecoming a member of the Department or
detrimental to the best interests of the City.
      (6)   Absence from duty without leave.
      (7)   Refusal to pay debts.
      (8)   Inefficiency.
      (9)   Lack of good physical or mental condition or inability to perform
duties.
   (I)   All members of the Department in every position shall be retired upon
reaching the age of sixty-five (65) years.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.2) (Ord. 2024-39, passed 11-4-2024)
§ 35.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   There shall be and is hereby established a Fire Department in the City of
Mt. Vernon which shall consists of one Chief of the Fire Department , one
Assistant Chief, one Lieutenant or Captain Inspector - Training Officer - Lead
Paramedic, one Lieutenant or Captain Inspector - Training Officer, three
Captains and nine Lieutenants and/or Lieutenants - Training Officers -
Hazardous Materials Officers; the Department shall also include Fire Fighter -
Paramedics not to exceed fifteen in number as determined by the City Manager.
The Department may also include twenty-eight Auxiliary Firefighters. In
addition, in order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet
extraordinary exigencies or to prevent material impairment of the Fire
Department, the City Manager may authorize and request the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners to make temporary appointments not to exceed six months in
length. The Department shall also have one civilian secretary and one special
skilled equipment mechanic who shall not be members of the Fire Department;
said secretary and mechanic shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be
members of the City’s classified service.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the highest in rank of
the Fire Department and shall direct the operation of same. He shall have
custody of all equipment, apparatus, and property belonging to the Department,
and shall cause same to be kept in good repair. He shall attend all major fires
occurring within the City, have command of the Department at all times, and see
that the members of the Department faithfully perform their respective duties.
He shall maintain a record of all fires occurring within the City, the date and
location of each, the owner of the property destroyed by the fire, the cause of
the fire, the loss incurred thereby, whether same was insured or not, and such
other information as shall be pertinent. He shall examine all buildings and
structures for fire hazards or combustible materials. The Chief of the Fire
Department is hereby authorized to enter any building or structure at any
reasonable time for the purpose of examining such structures or premises or any
part thereof, which may appear to constitute a fire hazard or to be in
violation of any ordinance of the City relating to fires or fire prevention.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall also be charged with the investigation,
inspection, and enforcement of ordinances and regulations of the City relating
to fire control, fire prevention, and fire hazards.
   (B)   The Assistant Fire Chief shall perform the duties of the Chief in the
absence of the Chief and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to
him by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Captains of the Fire Department shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to them by the Fire Chief.
   (D)   Lieutenants of the Fire Department shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to them by the Fire Chief or their superior officers, and shall be
subordinate to the officers above named.
   (E)   Firemen shall perform such duties as may be assigned to them by the
Fire Chief or their superior officers, and shall be subordinate to the officers
above named.
   (F)   The Inspector - Training Officer - Lead Paramedic shall perform such
duties as are provided and required by the provisions of Chapter 91 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, including the duties of
Fire Prevention Inspector and shall perform such duties as are assigned to him
by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (G)   The Inspector - Training Officer shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to him by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (H)   The Maintenance Supervisor shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to that officer by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (I)   All members of the Department shall be paid such salary and uniform
allowances as may be provided by Ordinance and shall provide therefrom their
uniforms and other necessary clothing. They shall serve such hours or shifts as
may be provided by the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (K)   Auxiliary firemen shall not be members of the regular Fire Department
of the City but shall be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of
the Fire Department of the City. Auxiliary firemen shall be a voluntary service
organization, and auxiliary firemen shall receive no wages for services
performed; however, an auxiliary fireman may receive remuneration from third
persons receiving direct benefits from the service of the auxiliary fireman,
provided the written approval and authorization of the Chief of the Fire
Department is obtained prior to the performance by an auxiliary fireman of the
assigned duty. Despite any payments from third parties to auxiliary firemen
paid through the City, auxiliary firemen are not salaried employees of the City
and shall not be entitled to any fringe or other employee benefit unless
required by law; separate accounting and records shall be maintained as to all
payments received from third parties, and all payments paid through the City
shall be paid by the City to the auxiliary firemen by separate check clearly
designating the source of the payments.
   (L)   Any officer or member of the Department may be removed from his
position by order of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners for cause upon
written charges and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. Cause
for removal or discharge are as follows:
      (1)   Disobedience of the orders of superiors.
      (2)   Intoxication.
      (3)   Violent, insolent, or abusive language to any superior or member of
the public.
      (4)   Drinking intoxicating liquors while on duty or reporting for duty
under the influence of intoxicating liquors.
      (5)   Conduct on or off duty unbecoming a member of the Department or
detrimental to the best interests of the city.
      (6)   Absence without leave.
      (7)   Refusal to pay debts.
      (8)   Inefficiency.
      (9)   Lack of good physical or mental condition or inability to perform
his tasks.
      (10)   Failure to obtain and maintain continuously State of Illinois Fire
Fighters II Certification or other fire training or certification required by
the City.
      (11)   If appointed after January l, 1989, failure to obtain and maintain
continuously Emergency Medical Technician/Ambulance (EMT-A) Certification,
Emergency Medical Technician/Intermediate (EMT-I) Certification, Emergency
Medical Paramedic (EMT-P) Certification, Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
Instructor Certification, Emergency Rescue Technician (ERT) Certification, or
other training or certification required by the City, unless excused in writing
by the Chief for good cause.
      (12)   If appointed after January 1, 1989, failure to participate in the
physical fitness training program established by the Department or failure to
meet and maintain such physical fitness, agility, and ability as required and
determined by the Department.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.3)
§ 35.04 POLICEMEN’S PENSION FUND.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a Policemen’s Pension Fund for the
City of Mt. Vernon, pursuant to provisions of 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
      (2)   There is hereby created a Board of Trustees which shall consist of
five (5) trustees who are residents of the City. Two (2) trustees shall be
appointed by the Mayor for a period of two (2) years each, or until their
successors shall be appointed and qualified. The third and fourth members of
the Board shall be elected by the members of the active police force for a term
of two (2) years each, or until their successors shall be elected and
qualified. The fifth member shall be elected by and from beneficiaries of the
Fund for a term of two (2) years or until his successor shall be elected and
qualified.
   (B)   The election provided for elected members of the Board shall be held
biannually on the third Monday in each April hereafter, at such place or places
in the City and under the Australian Ballot System and such other regulations
as shall be prescribed by the appointive members of the Board of Trustees. The
terms of each trustee shall begin on the second Tuesday of May following such
election. The Board of Trustees shall have such power and duties as are
provided by 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
   (C)   (1)   The Policemen’s Pension Fund shall receive 8.5 percent of the
salary of each member of the Police Department and all proceeds from the levy
of a tax provided for such fund under the provisions of the Statutes of the
State of Illinois.
      (2)   The Treasurer of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be the Treasurer and
Custodian of the Fund and shall make disbursements therefrom only by direction
and authority of the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   In the absence of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk of the City of
Mt. Vernon may sign checks authorizing disbursements as directed by the Board
of Trustees, provided said checks are also signed by either the President or
Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.4)
§ 35.05 FIREMEN’S PENSION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established and adopted a Firemen’s Pension Fund
pursuant to provisions of 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. There is hereby created a
Board of Trustees of the Firemen’s Pension Fund which shall consist of the City
Treasurer, City Clerk, Chief of the Fire Department, and Mayor, and also three
(3) Trustees who shall be chosen from the firemen who have been duly retired
under provisions of the statute above set forth. The members of the Board
chosen from the active and retired firemen shall be elected by ballot in an
election held on the third (3rd) Monday in April under the Australian Ballot
System at such place and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the
Board.
   (B)   Each elected member of the Board shall hold office for a period of
three (3) years and until his successor has been duly elected and qualified.
The Board shall have such powers and duties as are provided by provision of 40
ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. There shall be set apart and paid in the fund seven and
three-fourths percent (7-3/4%) of salaries of all members of the Fire
Department and all proceeds of the annual tax levy provided by Statute.
Treasurer of the Board shall be custodian of the fund and shall make
disbursement therefrom only by direction and authority of the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   In the absence of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk of the City of
Mt. Vernon may sign checks authorizing disbursements as directed by the Board
of Trustees, provided said checks are also signed by either the President or
Secretary of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.5)
§ 35.06 COMMUNITY SERVICES PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint 32 Community Services
Personnel, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council. Prior to
appointment, all proposed Community Services Personnel shall be investigated by
the Police Department for any possible crime records. No person shall be
appointed to Community Services if he or she has been convicted of a felony or
any crime involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all Community
Services Personnel may be terminated without cause and without notice or
hearing by the Mayor, subject to the advice and, consent of the City Council.
   (B)   Community Services Personnel shall not be members of the regular
Police Department of the City, nor shall Community Services Personnel carry
firearms. Community Services Personnel shall be residents of Jefferson County.
Identification symbols worn by Community Services Personnel shall be different
and distinct from those used by the regular Police Department and shall be
selected and approved by the Chief of Police of the City. Community Services
Personnel shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject
to the direction and control of the Chief of Police of the City. Community
Services Personnel shall not wear their uniform or identification symbols
except during the performance of their assigned duties under the direction and
control of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Community Services Personnel shall have the following duties and
powers when properly assigned and on duty:
      (1)   To aid or direct traffic in the municipality, including, but not
limited to, during official school functions, or at community sponsored
festivals and gatherings within the municipality, or during events sponsored by
the City.
      (2)   To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters.
      (3)   To aid in case of civil disorder.
   (D)   Community Services Personnel shall not serve as security guards for
private individuals or businesses. Persons who have received an appointment as
Community Services Personnel may accept employment as security guards solely as
private individuals; provided, however, that said persons shall not wear their
Community Services Personnel uniform or symbols and shall not, during the
course of such private employment, perform any act or make any representation
that their employment is being performed pursuant to or is related to their
appointment as Community Services Personnel.
   (E)   Community Services Personnel shall be a voluntary service
organization, and Community Services Personnel shall receive no wages for
services performed; however, Community Services Personnel may receive
remuneration from third persons receiving direct benefits from the services of
the Community Services Personnel, provided the written approval and
authorization of the Chief of Police is obtained prior to the performance of
the Community Services Personnel of the assigned duty. Despite any payments
from third parties to Community Services Personnel paid through the City,
Community Services Personnel are not salaried employees of the City and shall
not be entitled to any fringe or other employee benefit unless required by law;
separate accounting and records shall be maintained as to all payments received
from third parties, and all payments paid through the City shall be paid by the
City to the Community Services Personnel by separate checks clearly designating
the source of the payments.
(Prior Code, Art. 8, § 8.6)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
36.001   Fire insurance companies (tax)
   
36.002   Interested parties registration
Mt. Vernon Municipal and Service Occupation Tax
   
36.015   Title
   
36.016   Tax imposed
   
36.017   Illinois Department of Revenue, State of Illinois to collect tax
Motor Fuel Tax - Diesel
   
36.030   Definitions
   
36.031   Tax imposed
   
36.032   Tax and report transmittal
   
36.033   Records inspection
   
36.034   Liability of corporate officer or employee
   
36.035   Disposition of proceeds
   
36.036   Penalty, interest, fines and costs of collection
   
36.037   Effective date
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
   
36.050   General provisions from Ordinance 2008-27 Simplified Municipal
Telecommunications Tax
Rights and Responsibilities Related to Locally Imposed and Administered Tax
Rights and Responsibility Ordinance
   
36.065   Title
   
36.066   Scope
   
36.067   Definitions
   
36.068   Notices
   
36.069   Late payment
   
36.070   Payment
   
36.071   Certain credits and refunds
   
36.072   Audit procedure
   
36.073   Appeal
   
36.074   Hearing
   
36.075   Interest and penalties
   
36.076   Abatement
   
36.077   Installment contracts
   
36.078   Statute of limitations
   
36.079   Voluntary disclosure
   
36.080   Publication of tax ordinances
   
36.081   Liens
   
36.082   Applications
   
36.083   Severability
   
36.084   Effective date
Motel and Hotel Taxes
Part I: Motel/Hotel Tax
   
36.095   Definitions
   
36.096   Tax
   
36.097   Records to be kept
   
36.098   Returns
   
36.099   Officer liability
   
36.100   Collection
   
36.101   Proceeds of taxes
   
36.102   Certificate of registration
   
36.103   Violation
Part II: Municipal Service Tax
   
36.115   Definitions
   
36.116   Tax
   
36.117   Certificate of registration
   
36.118   Books and records
   
36.119   Tax returns; filing
   
36.120   Officer liability
   
36.121   Proceeds of tax
   
36.122   Fine and cost of collection
Food and Beverage Tax
   
36.135   Definitions
   
36.136   Imposition of tax
   
36.137   Collection of tax by retailer
   
36.138   Books and records
   
36.139   Transmittal of tax collection
   
36.140   Transmittal of excess tax collection
   
36.141   Liability of corporate officer or employee
   
36.142   Disposition of proceeds
   
36.143   Penalty, interest, fines, and costs of collection
   
36.144   Effective date
Amusement Taxes
   
36.155   Applicability of provisions
   
36.156   Definitions
   
36.157   Amusement tax imposed
Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
36.170   Tax imposed; rate
   
36.171   Collection of tax by retailers
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
Procurement Policy for Using CDBG Funds
   
36.185   Code of conduct
   
36.186   Penalties
   
36.187   Procurement procedures (CDBG Funds)
   
36.188   Selection procedures
   
36.189   Methods of procurement
   
36.190   Contract pricing
   
36.191   Procurement of records
   
36.192   Contract provisions
   
36.193   Contract administration
   
36.194   Protest procedure
Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax
   
36.210   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed
   
36.211   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
   
36.212   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.001 FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES (TAX).
   (A)   All corporations, companies, firms and associations in operation under
the laws of the State of Illinois and which are engaged in the City of Mt.
Vernon in effecting fire insurance, shall pay to the City on or before the
fifteenth day of July each year, a sum equal to 2% of the gross receipts of
such corporations, companies, firms and associations in the City for the year
ending on July 1 preceding such report. Every person who shall act in the City
as agent or employee of any such corporation, company, form or association,
shall render to the City Clerk on or before July 15 of each year a true and
verified account of all premiums received by him or any person for him in the
year ending July 1 preceding such report, in behalf of any such corporation,
company, firm or association and shall specify in such report the amounts
received for fire insurance. Such agent shall also pay to the City, upon
rendering such report, the amount required to be paid by such corporation,
company, firm or association represented by him.
   (B)   No corporation, company, firm or association shall transact any
business within the City after July 15 of each year, unless and until the
annual report required hereunder has been made and the fee paid in full. The
failure of any person or of any corporation, company, firm or association to
comply with the requirements of this Article shall be deemed a violation
thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 4)
§ 36.002 INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk or their designee, is hereby authorized and directed to
create an “interested parties" registry in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-
4.2 of the Act for the proposed tax increment financing redevelopment project
areas currently being considered by the city and for each redevelopment project
area created after the date of the adoption of this section.
   (B)   In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2 of the Act, the city hereby
adopts the registration rules attached to Ord. 2025-17 as Exhibit A as
registration rules for each such "interested parties" registry. The city shall
have the authority to amend such registration rules and form from time to time
as may be necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes
intended by the Act.
(Ord. 2025-17, passed 7-7-2025)
MT. VERNON MUNICIPAL AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.015 TITLE.
   This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Mt. Vernon Municipal and
Service Occupation Tax. The tax imposed herein shall be imposed effective
September 1, 1990, and shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
City of Mt. Vernon, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation
of political subdivision thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 23, § 1)
§ 36.016 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business
of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this State’s government, at
retail in this municipality at the rate of 2.75% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in
effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this
municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 2.75%
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
      (2)   This “Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and this “Home
Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sales of
food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is
sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes and needles used by diabetics.
   (B)   The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
   (C)   All proceeds from the imposition of the one half percent (0.5%)
increase in the Mt. Vernon Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Service
Occupation Tax enacted by Ordinance 2012-10 shall be deposited into and
maintained as a separate dedicated fund to be expended solely for economic
development and quality of life activities, acquisitions, and improvements
within the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (D)   All proceeds from the imposition of the one percent (1%) increase in
the Mt. Vernon Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Service Occupation Tax
enacted by Ordinance 2017-42 shall be deposited into and maintained as a
separate dedicated fund to be expended solely for:
      (1)   Expenses incurred for Capital construction projects for the Water
and Sewer Funds,
      (2)   Expenses incurred for Capital equipment purchases for all City
Departments,
      (3)   Expenses incurred for Capital expenditures for road construction or
road maintenance,
      (4)   Early retirement of existing indebtedness, with priority to payment
of debt with the highest interest rate, and
      (5)   Nuisance abatement expenditures, including demolition of dangerous
and dilapidated structures.
   (E)   All proceeds from the imposition of the one fourth percent (0.25%)
increase in the Mt. Vernon Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ and Service
Occupation Tax enacted by Ordinance 2019-50 shall be deposited into and
maintained as a separate dedicated fund to be expended solely for contributions
to the Firefighters’ Pension Fund, to the Police Pension Fund, to the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund, and to Social Security and Medicare obligations
(FICA, Federal Insurance Contributions Act).
(Prior Code, Art. 23, § 2)
§ 36.017 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE, STATE OF ILLINOIS TO COLLECT TAX.
   (A)   The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assesses
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois.
   (B)   The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 23, § 3)
MOTOR FUEL TAX - DIESEL
§ 36.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this Section:
   BULK USER. Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage
facilities located within the City of Mt. Vernon, which facilities are owned,
leased or controlled by said person, for subsequent dispensing into the supply
tanks of internal combustion engines operated by said person.
   DIESEL FUELS. Any petroleum diesel, bio diesel, or any liquid suitable for
fuel in a diesel - powered motor vehicle or a diesel-powered train; said term
excludes gasoline, gasohol, kerosene, aviation gasoline, or mixtures used in
the heating of buildings.
   MOTOR FUEL. Diesel fuels as defined in this Section.
   PERSON. Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business
trust, institution agency contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator, user
or owner, or any officers, agents, employees, or other representative, acting
either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
   RETAIL MOTOR FUEL DEALER. Any person who engages in the business of selling
motor fuel in the City of Mt. Vernon to a purchaser for use or consumption and
not for resale in any form.
   SALE, or RESALE, SELLING. Any transfer of ownership or possession, or both,
exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for valuable consideration.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 1)
§ 36.031 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of
motor fuel, or fraction thereof sold at retail within the corporate limits of
the City of Mt. Vernon, a tax at the rate of two cents ($.02) per gallon. In
the event motor fuel is dispensed in a unit of measure other than the gallon,
the tax shall be imposed at the same ratio to two cents as the unit is to the
gallon. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to
be borne by the retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this Article shall
be construed to impose a tax upon the occupations of persons engaged in the
retail sale of motor fuel.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every retail motor fuel dealer to secure the
tax from the purchaser at the time the dealer collects the purchase price for
the motor fuel and to pay over the tax to the City of Mt. Vernon Finance
Department as provided in this Article.
   (D)   A retail motor fuel dealer may make tax free sales only when the sale
is made to the federal government, the State of Illinois, any municipality or
unit of local government as those terms are defined by § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois, or any school district.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 2)
§ 36.032 TAX AND REPORT TRANSMITTAL.
   (A)   Every retail motor fuel dealer shall transmit to the Finance
Department of the City of Mt. Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar
month a sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax collected for the
preceding calendar month, accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the
City, which indicates the gross gallons of motor fuel sold for the preceding
calendar month and such other information as the Finance Department may require
for the enforcement of this Article.
   (B)   Every bulk user shall transmit to the Finance Department of the City
of Mt. Vernon on or before the last day of each calendar month a sum of money
equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding calendar month,
accompanied by a report upon forms supplied by the City, which indicates the
gross gallons of motor fuel purchased for the preceding calendar month and such
other information as the Finance Department may require for the enforcement of
this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 3)
§ 36.033 RECORDS INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every retail motor fuel dealer shall keep complete and accurate books
and records, including but not limited to records showing all purchases,
receipts, sales and losses through any cause.
   (B)   Every bulk user shall keep complete and accurate records of purchases
of motor fuel, including the dates of purchases, the gross gallons purchased on
each of the dates and the names and addresses of the motor fuel dealers from
which each of the purchases were made.
   (C)   For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Article, the
Finance Department shall have the right to inspect all books, records and
reports of retail motor fuel dealers and bulk users during their normal
business hours.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 4)
§ 36.034 LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions
of this Article who has the control, supervision, or responsibility of filing
returns or collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed
and who fails to file such returns or to collect and to make payment to the
City shall be personally liable for such amounts, including costs of
collection.
   (B)   The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein
shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 5)
§ 36.035 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including penalties, interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into
the Treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited into the
General Corporate Fund of the City; all proceeds shall be expended solely for
capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 6)
§ 36.036 PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES AND COSTS OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each day during which the violation
continues shall be recorded as a separate punishable offense.
   (B)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of two
percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added
and collected.
   (C)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an
action to enforce the payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt.
Vernon in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and
collect any delinquent tax, interest, and penalties and also the reasonable
attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the City in
enforcing any provision of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 7)
§ 36.037 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Ordinance and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on September 1,
2008.
(Prior Code, Art. 24A, § 8)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
§ 36.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS FROM ORDINANCE 2008-27 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   Whereas, the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act created a
simplified municipal telecommunications tax and repealed the municipal tax on
transmitting messages under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, the municipal telecommunications
tax under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17, the optional infrastructure maintenance fee under
35 ILCS 635/15, and the municipal infrastructure maintenance fee under 35 ILCS
635/20 effective January 1, 2003; and
   (B)   Whereas, the Illinois Department of Revenue was required under 35 ILCS
636/5-25 and 5-30 of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act to
publish a list and calculate a rate for the imposition of a simplified
municipal telecommunications tax for each municipality that had in place one or
more of the following: a municipal tax on transmitting messages under 65 ILCS
5/8-11-2, a municipal telecommunications tax under 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17, or a
municipal infrastructure maintenance fee under 35 ILCS 635/20 as of July 1,
2002; and
   (C)   Whereas, the list published by the Illinois Department of Revenue
listed the City of Mt. Vernon and calculated a rate for the simplified
municipal telecommunications tax of 1 % to be collected on gross charges by
telecommunications retailers beginning January 1, 2003;
   (D)   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois that:
      (1)   The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
under the authority of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35
ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.) upon the act or privilege of originating in the
municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate or interstate
telecommunications by a person is hereby changed to 2% of the gross charges for
such telecommunications purchased at retail.
      (2)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance.
      (3)   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law,
provided, however, that Section 1 of this Ordinance shall take effect for all
gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after the first day
of January 2009. The City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of
this Ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before September
20, 2008.
      (3)   All ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of the conflict, expressly
repealed.
(Prior Code, Art. 26)
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELATED TO LOCALLY IMPOSED
AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE
§ 36.065 TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 1)
§ 36.066 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the City’s procedures in
connection with all of the City’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 2)
§ 36.067 DEFINITIONS.
   Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows:
   ACT. The “Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, being 50 ILCS 45/
1 et seq.”
   CITY. The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The City’s Mayor and City Council.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the City
that is collected or administered by the City not an agency or department of
the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the City other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City’s Finance Director, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such authority
by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this ordinance
and the Act.
   NOTICE. Means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the City’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
City.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 3)
§ 36.068 NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 4)
§ 36.069 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the City on or before the due date, or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the City, with adequate postage prepaid.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 5)
§ 36.070 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 6)
§ 36.071 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the City.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   the taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the City.
      (2)   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   grant the claim; or
         (b)   deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum, based on
a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 7)
§ 36.072 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   the tax;
      (2)   the time period of the audit; and
      (3)   a brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer, which term
includes the tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit
within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of
the best estimate of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the City’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 8)
§ 36.073 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   the reason for the assessment;
      (2)   the amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   (1)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed,
the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall
give written notice to the taxpayer.
      (2)   The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days
of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer
requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty-five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five
day period.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 9)
§ 36.074 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under § 36.104, above, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   (1)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator
shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing.
      (2)   The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 10)
§ 36.075 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
twelve percent (12.0%) per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of
days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 11)
§ 36.076 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 12)
§ 36.077 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 13)
§ 36.078 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
maximum years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later:
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for
the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return
for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 14)
§ 36.079 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has
not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with
the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount
of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before
the date of filing the application.
   (B)   A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be
liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void.
   (C)   The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety
(90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed
as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
Section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 15)
§ 36.080 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 16)
§ 36.081 LIENS.
   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   timely remove the lien at the City’s expense; correct the taxpayer’s
credit record; and
   (B)   correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 17)
§ 36.082 APPLICATIONS.
   This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the City’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be
controlling.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 18)
§ 36.083 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph or provision of this ordinance shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 19)
§ 36.084 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2001 after
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 27, § 20)
MOTEL AND HOTEL TAXES
PART I: MOTEL/HOTEL TAX
§ 36.095 DEFINITIONS.
   CITY. Shall mean and refer to the City of Mt. Vernon, an Illinois municipal
corporation.
   DEPARTMENT. Shall mean and refer to the City Finance Department of the City
of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   HOTEL (WHICH INCLUDES A MOTEL), OPERATOR, OCCUPANCY, ROOM OR ROOMS,
PERMANENT RESIDENT, RENT OR RENTAL, DEPARTMENT and PERSON. Defined and shall
have the meanings provided in 35 ILCS 145/2 as that section may be in force
from time to time.
   RETURN. Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this
ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.1)
§ 36.096 TAX.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of five percent (5%) of
the gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting a hotel or motel
room within the City of Mt. Vernon for each 24-hour period or any portion
thereof for which a daily room charge is made: provided, however, that a tax
shall not be levied or imposed upon any person who shall be a permanent
resident.
      (2)   A permanent resident is hereby defined to be a person who rents a
hotel or motel room in the same establishment for more than 30 consecutive days
or to a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
   (B)   Persons subject to the tax hereby imposed may reimburse themselves for
their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination and in single
amount with the state tax imposed under “The Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax
Act” as provided in 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.
   (C)   (1)   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be paid in addition to
any and all other taxes and charges.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the operator to pay the amount of the tax
to the Department under procedures prescribed by the Department or as otherwise
provided in this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.2)
§ 36.097 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as may be
required by regulation prescribed by the Department or as otherwise provided in
this ordinance. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination
for any proper purpose at any reasonable time upon demand by the Department or
a duly authorized agent or employee of the City and shall be preserved for a
period of three years unless the Department shall prescribe a shorter period of
time. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the Department or the duly authorized deputy or representative of the
Department in the discharge of the duties of the Department.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.3)
§ 36.098 RETURNS.
   (A)   Every operator shall file monthly with the Department a return of
occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon on forms prescribed by
the Department and consistent with returns required under The Hotel Operators’
Occupation Tax Act found in 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq. on or before the 15th day of
the calendar month succeeding the end of the month filing period. A separate
return shall be filed for each place of business within the City regardless of
ownership.
   (B)   The first taxing period for the purpose of this ordinance shall
commence on August 1, 2005, and the tax return and payment for such period
shall be due on or before September 15, 2005. Thereafter reporting periods and
tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. At
the time of filing such tax returns, the operator shall pay the full amount of
all tax due hereunder.
   (C)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of one percent per 30-day period or portion thereof from the date of
delinquency shall be added and collected.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.4)
§ 36.099 OFFICER LIABILITY.
   Any officer or employee of any corporation which is an operation subject to
the provisions of this Article who has control, supervision or responsibility
of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and/or transmitting collected tax
proceeds of the tax herein imposed by this Article and who fails to collect
such tax or to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to
the City shall be personally liable for any such amounts required to be
collected or collected, including penalties thereon and all costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided
herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.5)
§ 36.100 COLLECTION.
   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax due hereunder or penalty, the
Department shall bring or cause to be brought in the name of the City an action
to enforce payment of the tax in any court of competent jurisdiction, together
with the costs of such collection.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.6)
§ 36.101 PROCEEDS OF TAXES.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax hereunder, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Mt. Vernon and shall
be credited to and deposited in the corporate funds of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.7)
§ 36.102 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for any person
to establish, operate or maintain or permit to be established, operated or
maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him a hotel or motel within
the City without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration from the
Department or without complying with all provisions of this Article. Such
registration shall be issued by the Department and shall be subject to
revocation by the Department. If the Department shall find that any person has
failed to pay the tax imposed by this Article or any fines and/or penalties
assessed or costs assessed for the nonpayment or late payment of such tax, the
Department may suspend or revoke the Certificate of Registration held by such
evader.
   (B)   The owner, manager or operator of the hotel or motel shall have an
opportunity to be heard at a hearing to be held by the Finance Director not
less than 5-days after mailing of a notice of the time and place of the hearing
to the address appearing upon the Certificate of Registration. Any person who
shall operate without a Certificate of Registration or who shall continue to
operate after revocation of same shall be subject to a preliminary or permanent
injunction issued by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois upon
petition by the City to discontinue conducting business, and shall be subject
to the other penalties provided herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.8)
§ 36.103 VIOLATION.
   (A)   If any person shall violate the provisions of this ordinance in
addition to any and all other penalties provided herein shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day in which such
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay the taxes provided herein, an
action to enforce payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon
in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any
delinquent tax, interest and penalties and also the reasonable attorneys’ fees,
court costs, and other costs incurred by the City in enforcing any provision of
this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part I, § 28.9)
PART II: MUNICIPAL SERVICE TAX
§ 36.115 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Article shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Finance of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses,
rooming houses and apartment houses.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to use or possession of
the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and
possession of the room or rooms.
   OPERATOR. Any person owning or operating a hotel.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a
hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   ROOM or ROOMS. Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
One room offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be
considered as a single hotel or motel room; the number of hotel or motel rooms
within a suite shall be computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the
purpose of sleeping.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 1)
§ 36.116 TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of
renting a hotel or motel room within the City of Mt. Vernon a tax of $2.00 per
room for each 24-hour period or any portion thereof for which a daily room
charge is made, provided that the tax shall not be levied and imposed on any
person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than 30 consecutive days or to
a person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel; the tax must be
charged for the initial 30 consecutive days, unless a signed rental contract is
on file with the tax collector; upon the 31st consecutive day of rental, the
renter is due a refund or credit from the tax collector for the 30 consecutive
days of tax paid. Persons engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel only to permanent residents are exempt from the
provision of §§ 36.150 through
36.157 of this Article.
   (B)   The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of the tax imposed
herein shall be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying any
such hotel or motel room, such person being hereinafter referred to as
“renter”. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of
every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the City and to
secure such tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and pay over to the
City of Mt. Vernon such tax under procedures prescribed by the Department of
Finance of the City or as otherwise provided in this article. Every person
required to collect the tax levied by this Article shall secure such tax from
the renter at the time he collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel
room. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement of memorandum, if the rent is
given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount due under the tax
provided in this Article shall be stated separately on such documents.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 2)
§ 36.117 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for any person to
establish, operate or maintain or permit to be established, operated or
maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him a hotel or motel within
the City without first obtaining a Certificate of Registration from the
Department or without complying with all provisions of this Article. Such
registration shall be issued by the Department and shall be subject to
revocation by the Department. If the Department shall find that any person has
failed to pay the tax imposed by this Article or any fines and/or penalties
assessed or costs assessed for the nonpayment or late payment of such tax, the
Department may suspend or revoke the Certificate of Registration held by such
evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel or motel shall have an
opportunity to be heard at a hearing to be held by the Finance Director not
less than 5-days after mailing of a notice of the time and place of the hearing
to the address appearing on the Certificate of Registration. Any person who
shall operate without a Certificate of Registration or who shall continue to
operate after revocation of same shall be subject to a preliminary or permanent
injunction issued by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois upon
petition by the City to discontinue conducting business, and shall be subject
to the other penalties provided herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 3)
§ 36.118 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Every operator shall keep accurate and complete books and records of
every occupancy and of all rent paid and which shall include a daily sheet
showing (1) the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour
period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such shall
occur and (2) the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination for
any proper purpose at any reasonable time upon demand by the Department or a
duly authorized agent or employee of the City and shall be preserved for a
period of 3-years unless the Department shall prescribe a shorter period of
time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere
with the Department or the duly authorized representative of the Department or
of the City in the discharge of his/her duties and the performance of this
Article. Every hotel or motel operator shall keep separate books or records of
his business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable
under this Article separately from transactions which are not taxable
hereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 4)
§ 36.119 TAX RETURNS; FILING.
   (A)   (1)   Every operator shall file monthly with the Department a return
of occupancy showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during each
calendar month and of the municipal service motel/hotel tax payable thereon on
forms prescribed by the Department. The return shall be due on or before the
15th day of the calendar month succeeding the end of the month filing period. A
separate return shall be filed for each place of business within the City
regardless of ownership.
      (2)   The first taxing period for the purpose of this Ordinance shall
commence on July 1, 2003, and the tax return and payment for such period shall
be due on or before August 15, 2003. Thereafter, reporting periods and tax
payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. At the
time of filing such tax returns, the operator shall pay the full amounts of all
tax due hereunder.
   (B)   If for any reason any tax is paid when due, a penalty at the rate of
one percent (1%) per 30-day period or portion thereof from the date of
delinquency shall be added and collected.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 5)
§ 36.120 OFFICER LIABILITY.
   Any officer or employee of any corporation which is an operation subject to
the provisions of this Article who has control, supervision or responsibility
of collecting tax proceeds, filing returns, and/or transmitting collected tax
proceeds of the tax herein imposed by this Article and who fails to collect
such tax or to file such return or to transmit any tax proceeds so collected to
the City shall be personally liable for any such amounts required to be
collected or collected, including penalties thereon and all costs of
collection. The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided
herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 6)
§ 36.121 PROCEEDS OF TAX.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax hereunder, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Mt. Vernon and shall
be credited to and deposited in the corporate funds of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 7)
§ 36.122 FINE AND COST OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be
punishable by fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day
during which a violation continues shall be recorded as a separate punishable
offense.
   (B)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay the taxes provided herein, an
action to enforce payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon
in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and collect any
delinquent tax, interest and penalties and also the reasonable attorneys’ fees,
court costs, and other costs incurred by the City in enforcing any provision of
this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 28, Part II, § 8)
FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
§ 36.135 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following words or terms shall have the meanings respectively applied to them:
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more
than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR FACILITY. Any establishment licensed under Chapter 111 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, representative, or entity.
   PREPARED FOOD.
      (1)   PREPARED FOOD means and includes any solid, liquid (including both
alcoholic and nonalcoholic liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used
for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed and which has
been prepared for immediate consumption.
      (2)   PREPARED FOOD may be purchased for consumption within or upon the
premises where it is sold or it may be purchased for consumption off the
premises where it is sold. PREPARED FOOD does not mean or include any food
which is sold in a closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container of the
manufacturer or wholesaler or which has not been prepared for immediate
consumption.
   PREPARED FOOD FACILITY.
      (1)   Any person or establishment which sells food at retail which has
been prepared for immediate consumption, whether or not such prepared food
facility use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premises or
business establishment.
      (2)   A PREPARED FOOD FACILITY includes, but is not limited to, those
establishments commonly called an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in
restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, café, lunch counter, fastfood outlet,
catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern,
bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tearoom,
delicatessen, movie theater, mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle,
hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which sells at retail food
which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
      (3)   A PREPARED FOOD FACILITY does not include churches, public or
private schools, boarding houses, daycare centers, nursing homes, retirement
centers or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central
preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of
invalids or the elderly, or other facilities of not for profit associations or
not for profit corporations.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. To obtain for use or consumption in exchange for
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
nature, and not for resale.
   RETAILER. Any person who sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption
and not for resale.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.1)
§ 36.136 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the purchaser
for the purchase of prepared foods and alcoholic liquor at retail at any
prepared food facility or alcoholic liquor facility within the City, at a rate
of one percent (1.0%) of the purchase price of such prepared food and alcoholic
liquor. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of which shall be
borne by the purchaser thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.2)
§ 36.137 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER.
   The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic
liquor facility within the City shall jointly and severally have the duty to
collect and account for said tax from each purchaser at the time that the
consideration for such purchase is paid.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.3)
§ 36.138 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each alcoholic
liquor facility within the City shall jointly and severally have the duty to
maintain complete and accurate books, records, and accounts showing the gross
receipts for sales of prepared food and alcoholic liquor and the taxes
collected each day, which shall be made available to the city for examination
and for audit by the city upon reasonable notice and during customary business
hours.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.4)
§ 36.139 TRANSMITTAL OF TAX COLLECTION.
   (A)   The owner and the operator of each prepared food facility and each
alcoholic liquor facility within the City shall jointly and severally, have the
duty to cause to be filed a sworn return with the Finance Department for each
such facility and for each such licensed premises located in the City. The
return shall be prepared and submitted on forms prescribed by the City.
   (B)   The return shall be filed with the City by the filing date and at the
same time intervals or frequencies as the Retailers Occupation Tax Return, Form
ST-1 is due to be filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue. The return
shall also be accompanied by payment to the City of all taxes imposed by this
Article which are due and owing for the period covered by said return. The
return shall also be accompanied with a copy of the return filed with the
Illinois Department of Revenue for sales within the City of Mt. Vernon covering
the same reporting period.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.5)
§ 36.140 TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTION.
   If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed
hereby but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a
person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so
imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who
paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred,
said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the City along with
the tax properly collected.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.6)
§ 36.141 LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions
of this Article who has the control, supervision, or responsibility of filing
returns or collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed
and who fails to file such returns or to collect and to make payment to the
City shall be personally liable for such amounts, including costs of
collection.
   (B)   The personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein
shall survive the dissolution of the corporation.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.7)
§ 36.142 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including penalties, interest, fines and costs of collection shall be paid into
the Treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited into the
General Corporate Fund of the City; all proceeds shall be expended solely for
capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.8)
§ 36.143 PENALTY, INTEREST, FINES, AND COSTS OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Each day during which the violation
continues shall be recorded as a separate punishable offense.
   (B)   If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, a penalty of two
percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added
and collected.
   (C)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax as provided herein, an
action to enforce the payment shall be brought on behalf of the City of Mt.
Vernon in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article and
collect any delinquent tax, interest, and penalties and also the reasonable
attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred by the City in
enforcing any provision of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.9)
§ 36.144 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This Ordinance and the tax imposed herein shall be effective on September 1,
2008.
(Prior Code, Art. 31, § 31.10)
AMUSEMENT TAXES
§ 36.155 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this Article, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all amusements as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this Article or other ordinances, or not.
(Prior Code, Art. 34, § 1)
§ 36.156 DEFINITIONS.
   AMUSEMENT. Means:
      (1)   Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance,
motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition for public entertainment,
including, without being limited to, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing,
swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling,
billiard and pool games.
      (2)   Any entertainment offered for public participation, including,
without being limited to, dancing, carnival, amusement park rides and games,
bowling, billiard and pool games, or any Video Gaming Terminal.
   PERSON. Any natural individual that participates in an amusement, including
a firm, organization, society, foundation, institution, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company,
public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other
representative appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized
by law.
   PLAY. Each individual push of the Video Gaming Terminal which initiates the
simulation provided by the Video Gaming Terminal. PLAY shall not include the
push of individual wager amounts, selection of types of games on the Video
Gaming Terminal or entry of any information or printing of winning receipts.
   TERMINAL OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq., and that owns, services, and maintains Video Gaming Terminals for
placement in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments,
licensed large truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or
licensed veterans establishments.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only.
(Prior Code, Art. 34, § 2)
§ 36.157 AMUSEMENT TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Push Tax.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by this Article, an amusement tax is
imposed upon any person who participates in the Play of a Video Gaming Terminal
that takes place within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Mt.
Vernon.
      (2)   The rate of the tax shall be equal to $0.01 (one cent) per Play on
a Video Gaming Terminal.
      (3)   The Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal may separately
itemize and charge each Person who Plays a Video Gaming Terminal.
   (B)   Tax Additional. The tax imposed in this Article is in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
   (C)   Registration.
      (1)   Every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal(s) located in
the City of Mt. Vernon shall apply for registration as a tax collector with the
City of Mt. Vernon no later than thirty (30) days after commencing such
business or thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance
imposing the Push Tax, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   The application shall be submitted to the City of Mt. Vernon on the
forms provided by the City of Mt. Vernon and contain such information as
reasonably required by the City of Mt. Vernon to impose, collect, and audit all
amounts related to the Push Tax.
   (D)   Collection, Payment, and Accounting.
      (1)   It shall be the joint and several duty of every Terminal Operator
of a Video Gaming Terminal(s) to secure from each Person participating in the
Play of a Video Gaming Terminal the Push Tax imposed by this Article.
      (2)   For purposes of this Article, it shall be presumed that the amount
of the Push Tax imposed on each Person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector
provides otherwise with books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been
collected from the Person by the Terminal Operator.
      (3)   Push Tax payments accompanied by tax returns prescribed by the City
of Mt. Vernon shall be remitted to the City of Mt. Vernon on or before the 20th
day of the month following the month in which payment for the Push Tax is made.
      (4)   Every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming Terminal who is required
to collect the Push Tax by this Article shall be considered a tax collector for
the City of Mt. Vernon. All Push Tax amounts collected shall be held by the
Terminal Operator as trustee for and on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon. The
failure of the Operator to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the
Person from the obligation to pay the tax.
      (5)   The ultimate incidence of the Push Tax shall remain on the Person
and shall never be shifted to the Terminal Operator.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the City of Mt. Vernon, no person
shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the Push Tax imposed by this
Article unless the person files a claim for a refund or credit within one (1)
year after the date on which the Push Tax was paid or remitted to the City of
Mt. Vernon.
      (7)   The Terminal Operator of any Video Gaming Terminal(s) shall be
subject to audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions of this Article.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful for any Terminal Operator and/or Person to
prevent, hinder, or interfere with the City of Mt. Vernon’s Officials,
employees, and/or agents designated to discharge their respective duties in the
performance and enforcement of the provisions of this Article.
      (9)   It is the duty of every Terminal Operator of a Video Gaming
Terminal(s) to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the City
of Mt. Vernon’s officials, employees, and/or agents will at all times have full
access.
   (E)   Rules and Regulations; Authorized. The City of Mt. Vernon is
authorized to adopt, promulgate, and enforce any additional rules and
regulations pertaining to the interpretation, collection, administration, and
enforcement of this Article.
   (F)   Application of Mt. Vernon Revised Code of Ordinances. Any citation
under this Article may be in addition to any other citations issued by the City
of Mt. Vernon under any and all applicable sections of the City of Mt. Vernon
Revised Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 34, § 3)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.170 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from the sales of such
cannabis made in the course of that business.
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/8-11-23.
(Prior Code, Art. 35, § 1) (Ord. 2023-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 36.171 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article.
(Prior Code, Art. 35, § 2) (Ord. 2023-14, passed 3-20-2023)
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM (CDBG)
PROCUREMENT POLICY FOR USING CDBG FUNDS
§ 36.185 CODE OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   (1)   No employee, officer, or agent of the City of Mt. Vernon shall
participate in the selection or in the award or administration of a contract
supported by Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG) funds if a
conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved.
      (2)   Such a conflict could arise if the employee, officer or agent; any
member of his/her immediate family; his/her partner; or an organization which
employs or is about to employ any of the above, has a financial or other
interest in the finli selected for award.
   (B)   No officer, employee or agent of the City of Mt. Vernon shall solicit
or accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors or
firms, potential contractors or firms, or parties to sub-agreements, except
where the financial interest is not substantial or the gift is an unsolicited
item of nominal intrinsic value.
   (C)   (1)   Any alleged violations of these standards of conduct shall be
referred to the City of Mt. Vernon Attorney.
      (2)   Where violations appear to have occurred, the offending employee,
officer or agent shall be subject to disciplinary action, including but not
limited to dismissal or transfer; where violations or infractions appear to be
substantial in nature, the matter may be referred to the appropriate officials
for criminal investigation and possible prosecution.
   (D)   The prohibition against conflicts of interest and gratuities and
kickbacks shall be conspicuously set forth in every local public agency written
contract and solicitation therefor.
   (E)   It shall be a breach of ethical standards for any public employee or
former employee knowingly to use confidential infollnation for his actual or
anticipated personal gain, or the actual or anticipated personal gain of any
other person.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.186 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any elected official, employee or designated agent of the City of Mt.
Vernon who knowingly and deliberately violates the provisions of this code will
be open to civil suit without the legal protection of the City of Mt. Vernon.
Furtheunore, such a violation of these procurement standards maybe grounds,
subject to the City of Mt. Vernon discretion, for dismissal by the City of Mt.
Vernon.
   (B)   Any contractor or potential contractor who knowingly and deliberately
violates the provisions of these procurement standards will be barred from
future transactions with the City of Mt. Vernon where federal funds are
involved.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.187 PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES (CDBG FUNDS).
   (A)   For the purposes of implementing this policy; the City Manager of the
City of Mt. Vernon is the procurement officer. The procurement officer is
responsible for procurement of services, supplies, equipment, or construction
obtained with CDBG fiends shall review all proposed procurement actions to
avoid the purchase of unnecessary or duplicative items. Such reviews shall
consider consolidation or breaking out to obtain a more economical purchase.
When determined appropriate by the procurement officer, an analysis to
determine which approach would be the most economical shall be undertaken.
   (B)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall take affirmative steps to assure that
small and minority firms, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus firms
are solicited whenever they are potential qualified sources. The City of Mt.
Vernon shall also consider the feasibility of dividing total requirements into
smaller tasks or quantities so as to permit maximum participation by small and
minority firms, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus firms. Where
permitted by regulations, delivery schedules will be developed which will
include participation by such businesses.
   (C)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall assist the prime contractor whenever
possible by providing copies of lists which identify qualified small and
minority fines, women’s business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.188 SELECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   ALL procurement carried out with CDBG finds, where the City of Mt.
Vernon is a direct party, shall be carried out in a manner that provides
maximum free and open competition. Procurement procedures will not restrict or
eliminate competition. The City of Mt. Vernon shall not place unreasonable
requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do business. Nor will the
City of Mt. Vernon encourage or participate in noncompetitive practices among
firms. The City of Mt. Vernon is alert to organizational conflicts which would
jeopardize the negotiation process and limit competition. The City of Mt.
Vernon will not require unnecessary experience or bonding requirements.
   (B)   Pursuant to state law and federal regulations (24 CFR 85.36(b)), all
solicitations shall incorporate a clear accurate description of the technical
requirements for the material, service, or product to be procured. In
competitive procurements, these descriptions shall not contain features which
unduly limit competition. The description may include a statement of the
qualitative nature of the material, product, or service and the minimum
essential characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to
satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications shall be avoided
whenever possible. A “brand name or equal” description may be used to define
the performance or other salient requirements of procurement. The specific
features of the named brand which must be met by offerors shall be clearly
stated.
   (C)   All solicitations shall clearly set forth all requirements which
bidders or offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in evaluating
bids, proposals, or statements of qualifications.
   (D)   Contracts shall be awarded only to responsible contractors/firms that
possess the potential ability to perform successfully under the terms and
conditions of the proposed procurement.
   (E)   Consideration shall be given to such factors as the contractor’s/
firm’s capacity, integrity, compliance with public policy, record of past
perfoimance, and financial and technical resources. The contractor’s/firm’s
capacity will not only include consideration of its inherent capabilities but
also take into consideration all its existing commercial and governmental
business commitments.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.189 METHODS OF PROCUREMENT.
   Direct procurement by the City of Mt. Vernon shall be made by using one of
the following methods depending on the type of service to be procured.
   (A)   Small purchase procedures. Relatively simple, informal procurement
procedures will be used where the purchase of materials, single task services,
supplies, equipment, and/or other property will not cost in the aggregate more
than $100,000, except where further limited by state law or local policy. The
procurement officer must obtain a minimum of three oral or written price or
rate quotations from qualified sources. Documentation on all quotations
received (whether oral or written) shall be made a part of the file. Selections
shall be made principally on price. Payment shall be made upon delivery or
completion.
   (B)   Competitive sealed bids/formal advertising. Under this procedure bids
are publicly advertised in accordance with the applicable laws and the City of
Mt. Vernon sealed bid procedures. A firm fixed price contract (either lump sum
or unit price) shall be awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid is lowest
in price and that conforms to all the material teams and conditions of the
advertisement for bids.
   (C)   Competitive sealed bids can be used ONLY when the following criteria
are met: (1) there are complete, adequate, and realistic specifications or
purchase descriptions; (2) there are two or more responsible bidders who are
willing and able to compete effectively; (3) the procurement can be made on a
firm fixed-price contract and selection of the successful bidder can
appropriately be made principally on the basis of price.
   (D)   When formal advertising is used the following conditions shall be met.
      (1)   The advertisement for bids shall be publicly advertised.
      (2)   The advertisement for bids, including the specifications and
pertinent attachments, shall clearly define the items, end products or services
needed in order for the bidders to properly respond to the advertisement.
      (3)   (a)   All bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place
specified in the advertisement for bids.
         (b)   A firm fixed-price contract award shall be made by written
notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid conforms to
the advertisement for bids. Notwithstanding the above, any or all bids may be
rejected when there are sound documented business reasons in the best interest
of the Community Development Assistance Program.
         (c)   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER refers to the character or quality of the
bidder -- whether it is an entity with which the City of Mt. Vernon is safe
doing business.
         (d)   RESPONSIVE BIDDER refers to whether or not the bidder has
offered the City of Mt. Vernon in its bid what was asked for in the
specifications.
         (e)   Disqualification of a bidder for lack of responsibility will
require notice to the bidder and the opportunity for a hearing. Rejection of a
bid because of unresponsiveness requires only that bidder be informed of why
bid was rejected. [See ATTACHMENT A]
   (E)   Competitive negotiation: requests for proposals/qualification
statements.
      (1)   The technique of competitive proposals is normally conducted with
more than one source submitting an offer. All competitive proposals shall be
conducted using a foinial RFP/RFQ containing at least the minimum items in the
attached RFP/RFQ Outline (See Attachment A). Architectural and engineering
services must be procured via requests for qualification statements;
administrative consulting and other professional services must be procured via
requests for proposals. Other professional services may also be procured by
requests for proposals. The following procedures will be used for competitive
negotiation:
         (a)   Requests for proposals or qualification statements will be
adequately publicized to achieve sufficient competition. All submittals will be
honored and entered into the competition.
         (b)   Request for proposals or qualification statements shall contain
a detailed list of tasks in the proposed scope of work that is expected to be
accomplished.
         (c)   The request for proposals or qualification statements shall
identify all significant evaluation factors or selection criteria, including
the corresponding point system that will be used to rate the proposals/
qualification statements. Requests for proposals shall always include cost and
at least one non-cost qualitative evaluation factor.
         (d)   The selecting official (or committee, if one is designated)
shall review all proposals and statements received and make a technical
evaluation of each. This shall also include a written statement that identifies
the basis upon which the selection was made; including the importance of cost
(for RFPs).
         (e)   Contract award will be made to the responsible offeror whose
submission is deemed most appropriate to the City of Mt. Vernon with
consideration for price, qualifications, and other factors set by the City of
Mt. Vernon. Unsuccessful offerors shall be notified in writing within [ten]
working days of contract award. The notification will include a copy of the
protest and debriefing procedures (See ATTACHMENT A). Documentation of
notification shall be maintained in the contract selection file for the
individual project.
      (2)   For qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering
(AlE) professional services whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated
and the most qualified competitor is selected, at least three films will be
solicited. Following the review of the qualification statements received, the
most qualified competitor will be selected to enter into contract negotiation.
This shall always include negotiation of price to insure cost reasonableness.
At the conclusion of successful negotiation, the competitor shall be invited to
enter into a contract.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.190 CONTRACT PRICING.
   (A)   (1)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall perfoiln cost or pricing analysis
in connection with EVERY procurement action including contract modifications in
accordance with the requirements of “Cost and Price Analysis for HUD Grantees
and Funding Recipients”. Costs or prices based on estimated costs for Community
Development Assistance Program projects shall be allowed only to the extent
that the costs incurred or the cost estimates included in negotiated prices are
consistent with federal cost principals[ 48 CFR Part 31].
      (2)   Lump sum prices will only be utilized when there is a definable
work product and the quantity to be provided is certain and the contractor
assumes all the risk for costs incurred. Unit prices can be utilized when there
is a definable work product and the contractor assume all the risk for costs
incurred, but the quantity is estimated. Cost reimbursement will be utilized
when the task does not result in a definable work product or the contractor
will not assume the risk of incurring the cost to complete the task. Cost
reimbursement, unit or lump sum price, or a combination thereof may be utilized
as appropriate.
   (B)   A cost reimbursement type contract is most appropriate when the scope
and extent of the work to be performed are not clearly defined, such as a
professional services contract. A cost reimbursement contract MUST clearly
establish a cost ceiling which may not be exceeded without a contract
modification, increasing specific dollar amounts for the tasks set forth in the
existing scope of the work and in accordance with the original solicitation.
   (C)   A fixed price contract is appropriate when the scope of work is very
well defined and product oriented. A fixed price contract can only be awarded
when fair and reasonable prices can be established through adequate price
competition and the solicitation is based principally on price. A fixed price
contract MUST establish a guaranteed price that may not be increased.
   (D)   Cost plus percentage of cost and percentage of construction cost
methods of contracting MUST NOT be used.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.191 PROCUREMENT OF RECORDS.
   The City of Mt. Vernon shall maintain records sufficient to detail the
history of the procurement. The records will include the following: rationale
for the method of procurement, selection of contract type, contractor selection
or rejection and the basis for the contract price.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.192 CONTRACT PROVISIONS.
   The records shall include the following contract provisions and conditions:
   (A)   Contracts other than small purchase shall contain provisions that
allow for administrative, contractual, or legal remedies if contractors violate
or breach contract terms, and provide for sanctions and penalties as
appropriate.
   (B)   All contracts in excess of $10,000 shall provide for termination for
cause and for convenience by the City of Mt. Vernon including the manner in
which it will be done and the basis for settlement.
   (C)   All construction contracts and subcontracts in excess of $10,000 shall
include provisions which require compliance with Executive Order 11246, Equal
Employment Opportunity, as amended by Executive Order 11375, and as
supplemented in DOL regulations (41 CFR Part 60).
   (D)   All contracts and subcontracts for construction or repair shall
include a provision for compliance with the Copeland “Anti-Kick-Back” Act (18
USC 874) as supplemented by DOL regulations (29 CFR Part 3).
   (E)   All contracts or subcontracts in excess of $2,000 for construction or
repair shall include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40
USC 276a to a-7) as supplemented by DOL regulations (29 CFR Part 5).
   (F)   All construction or repair contracts or subcontracts in excess of
$2,000, and in excess of $2,500 for other contracts which involve the
employment or mechanics or laborers, shall include a provision for compliance
with Sections 103 and 107 of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act
(40 USC 327-330) as supplemented by DOL regulations (29 CFR Part 5).
   (G)   Each contract shall include a notice of the City of Mt. Vernon
requirements and regulations pertaining to reporting and patent rights under
any contract involving respect to any discovery or invention which arises or is
developed in the course of or under such contract, and of the state
requirements pertaining to copyrights and rights in data.
   (H)   All negotiated contracts shall include a provision that makes it
possible for the City of Mt. Vernon, HUD, the Comptroller General of the United
States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, to have access to any
books, documents, papers, or records of the contractor/firm that are directly
pertinent to the contract, for the purpose of making audit examination excerpts
and transcriptions. Further, the contract must include a provision that all
required records will be maintained by the contractor/firm for a period of four
years after the City of Mt. Vernon formally closes out each Community
Development Assistance Program.
   (I)   All contracts, subcontracts, and sub grants in amounts in excess of
$100,000 shall contain a provision which requires compliance with the
requirements of Section 306 of the Clean Air Act (42 USC 1857 h), Section 508
of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1368), Executive Order 11738, and Environmental
Protection Agency regulations (40 CFR part 15).
   (J)   Contracts shall recognize mandatory standards and policies relating to
energy efficiency that are contained in the State Energy Conservation Plan
issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (P.L. 94-163).
   (K)   The City of Mt. Vernon will be permitted to require changes, remedies,
changed conditions, access and record retention, and suspension of work clauses
approved by the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.193 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION.
   The City of Mt. Vernon shall maintain contract administration systems that
insure contractors/fines perform in accordance with the terms, conditions, and
specifications of their contracts or purchase orders. The accepted performance
of contractors firms will be a factor in subsequent contract negotiations and
award. Remedial action by the City of Mt. Vernon through legal processes shall
be considered in instances of identified significant nonperformance.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 36.194 PROTEST PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or
award of a contract shall make a protest to the procurement officer.
   (B)   Protest with respect to a solicitation shall be submitted in writing
at least two (2) working days prior to the opening of bids or the closing date
for receipt of proposals. Protest with respect to the award of a contract shall
be submitted in writing within ten (10) calendar days after the contract award.
   (C)   All protests will be made in accordance with the procedures outlined
in ATTACHMENT A.
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.210 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 2025-23, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 36.211 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in §
36.210. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
(Ord. 2025-23, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 36.212 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2025-23, passed 9-3-2025)
ATTACHMENT A
Rejection of Bids and Offers
(a)   Any bid or offer that fails to confoilu to the essential requirements of
the invitation for bids (IFB) or request for proposal (RFP) shall be rejected.
(b)   Any bid or offer that does not confoiiu to the applicable specifications
or requirements shall be rejected unless the IFB or RFP authorized the
submission of alternate bids and the supplies offered as alternates meet the
requirements specified in the IFB or RFP.
(c)   Any bid or offer that fails to confoini to the delivery schedule or
permissible alternates stated in the IFB or RFP shall be rejected.
(d)   A bid or offer shall be rejected when the bidder/offeror imposes
conditions that would modify requirements of the invitation or limit the
bidder’s liability to the City of Mt. Vernon, since to allow the IFB or RFP to
impose such conditions would be prejudicial to other bidders/offerors. For
example, bids shall be rejected in which the bidder/offeror—
(1)   Protects against future changes in conditions, such as increased costs,
if total possible costs to the City of Mt. Vernon cannot be determined;
(2)   Fails to state a price and indicates that price shall be price in effect
at time of delivery;
(3)   States a price but qualifies it as being subject to price in effect at
time of delivery;
(4)   When not authorized by the IFB or RFP, conditions or qualifies a bid or
offer by stipulating that it is to be considered only if, before date of award,
the bidder/offeror receives (or does not receive) award under a separate
solicitation;
(5)   Requires that the City of Mt. Vernon is to determine that the bidder’s/
offeror’s product meets applicable specifications; or
(6)   Limits rights of the City of Mt. Vernon under any contract clause.
(f)   Any bid/offer may be rejected if the procurement officer deteilnines in
writing that it is unreasonable as to price. Unreasonableness of price includes
not only the total price of the bid, but the prices for individual line items
as well.
Bids or offers received from any person or concern that is suspended, debarred,
proposed for debarment, or declared ineligible as of the bid opening date shall
be rejected.
Further considerations for sealed bids:
A low bidder may be requested to delete objectionable conditions from a bid
provided the conditions do not go to the substance, as distinguished from the
form, of the bid, or work an injustice on other bidders. A condition goes to
the substance of a bid where it affects price, quantity, quality, or delivery
of the items offered.
When a bid guarantee is required and a bidder fails to furnish the guarantee in
accordance with the requirements of the invitation for bids.
Low bids received from concerns determined to be not responsible shall be
rejected.
After submitting a bid, if all of a bidder’s assets or that part related to the
bid are transferred during the period between the bid opening and the award,
the transferee may not be able to take over the bid/offer. Accordingly, the
procurement officer shall reject the bid unless the transfer is affected by
merger, operation of law.
Notification: Any bid or offers that are rejected or otherwise excluded from
the competitive range shall be notified promptly in writing by the procurement
officer. The notice shall state the basis for the determination and that a
proposal revision will not be considered.
Record Keeping: The originals of all rejected bids/offers, and any written
findings with respect to such rejections, shall be preserved with the papers
relating to the acquisition.
Solicitation and Award Protest Procedures
1.   The following procedures are established to resolve agency protests
effectively, to build confidence in the City of Mt. Vernon procurement system,
and to reduce protests outside of the City of Mt. Vernon:
A.   Protests shall be concise and logically presented to facilitate review by
the City of Mt. Vernon. Failure to substantially comply with any of the
requirements of paragraph (1)(B) of this section may be grounds for dismissal
of the protest.
B.   Protests shall include the following infoiniation:
i.   Name, address, and fax and telephone numbers of the protester.
ii.   Solicitation or contract number.
iii.   Detailed statement of the legal and factual grounds for the protest, to
include a description of resulting prejudice to the protester.
iv.   Copies of relevant documents.
v.   Request for a ruling by [city, town, county, organization].
vi.   Statement as to the form of relief requested.
vii.   All information establishing that the protester is an interested party
for the purpose of filing a protest.
viii.   All information establishing the timeliness of the protest.
C All protests filed directly with the City of Mt. Vernon will be addressed to
the procurement officer or other official designated to receive protests.
D. Interested parties may request an independent review of their protest as an
appeal of the procurement officer’s decision on a protest. The City of Mt.
Vernon shall designate the official(s) who are to conduct this independent
review.
2.   Protests based on alleged apparent improprieties in a solicitation shall
be filed two (2) working days before the advertised opening of sealed bid or
the closing date for receipt of proposals. In all other cases, protests shall
be filed no later than ten (10) calendar days after the basis of protest is
known or should have been known, whichever is earlier. The agency, for good
cause shown, or where it determines that a protest raises issues significant to
the City of Mt. Vernon procurement system, may consider the merits of any
protest which is not timely filed.
3.   Action upon receipt of protest:
A.   Upon receipt of a protest before award, a contract may not be awarded,
pending the City of Mt. Vernon resolution of the protest, unless contract award
is justified, in writing, for urgent and compelling reasons or is determined,
in writing, to be in the best interest of the City of Mt. Vernon. Such
justification or determination shall be approved at a level above the
contracting officer, or by another official pursuant to agency procedures.
B.   If award is withheld pending the City of Mt. Vernon resolution of the
protest, the procurement officer will inform the bidders or offerors whose bids
or offers might become eligible for award of the contract. If appropriate, the
bidders or offerors should be requested, before expiration of the time for
acceptance of their bids or offers, to extend the time for acceptance to avoid
the need for resolicitation. In the event of failure to obtain such extension
of bids or offers, consideration should be given to proceeding with award
pursuant to paragraph (3)(1) of this section.
C.    Upon receipt of a protest within 10 days after contract award or within 5
days after a debriefing date offered to the protester under a timely debriefing
request in accordance with competitive proposals debriefing procedure (below),
the procurement officer shall immediately suspend performance, pending
resolution of the protest within the agency, including any review by an
independent higher level official, unless continued performance is justified,
in writing, for urgent and compelling reasons or is detenliined, in writing, to
be in the best interest of the City of Mt. Vernon. Such justification or
determination shall be approved at a level above the procurement officer, or by
another official pursuant to agency procedures.
D.   The City of Mt. Vernon shall make their best efforts to resolve protests
within thirty-five (35) days after the protest is filed. To the extent
peiiuitted by law and regulation, the parties may exchange relevant
information.
E.   The City of Mt. Vernon protest decisions shall be well-reasoned, and
explain the City of Mt. Vernon position. The protest decision shall be provided
to the protester using a method that provides evidence of receipt.
Competitive Proposal Debriefing Procedure
An offeror, upon its written request received by the agency within three (3)
working days after the date on which that offeror has received a notification
to of award, shall be debriefed and furnished the basis for the selection
decision and contract award.
To the maximum extent practicable, the City of Mt. Vernon will conduct the
debriefing within five (5) working days after receipt of the written request.
Debriefmgs of successful and unsuccessful offerors may be done orally, in
writing, or by any other method acceptable to the procurement officer.
The procurement officer should noinially chair any debriefing session held.
Individuals who conducted the evaluations shall provide support.
At a minimum, the debriefing infoiivation shall include--
(1)   The City of Mt. Vernon evaluation of the significant weaknesses or
deficiencies in the offeror’s proposal, if applicable;
(2)   The overall evaluated cost or price (including unit prices), and
technical rating, if applicable, of the successful offeror and the debriefed
offeror, and past performance information on the debriefed offeror;
(3)   The overall ranking of all offerors, when any ranking was developed by
the agency during the source selection;
(4) A summary of the rationale for award;
(5)   For acquisitions of commercial items, the make and model of the item to
be delivered by the successful offeror; and
(6)   Reasonable responses to relevant questions about whether source selection
procedures contained in the solicitation, applicable regulations, and other
applicable authorities were followed.
The debriefing shall not include point-by-point comparisons of the debriefed
offeror’s proposal with those of other offerors. Moreover, the debriefing shall
not reveal any information concerning:
(1)   Trade secrets;
(2)   Privileged or confidential manufacturing processes and techniques;
(3)   Commercial and financial information that is privileged or confidential,
including cost breakdowns, profit, indirect cost rates, and similar
information; and
(4)   The names of individuals providing reference information about an
offeror’s past performance.
An official summary of the debriefing shall be included in the contract file.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 3-4-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   PUBLIC WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT
      
51.   FATS, OILS, GREASES AND OTHER SUBSTANCES
      
52.   PRETREATMENT
      
53.   STORM DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
CHAPTER 50: PUBLIC WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT
Section
City Waterworks System
   
50.001   Public water system
   
50.002   Director of Public Works
Regulations for Water System
   
50.015   Definitions
   
50.016   Application; connection
   
50.017   Rules governing the use of city water
   
50.018   Rules governing plumbing work
   
50.019   Annexation; installation of city water service
   
50.020   Water services; meter
   
50.021   Hydrants
   
50.022   Connection charge
   
50.023   Rates and charges for use and service of water system
   
50.024   Meters; to be read monthly
   
50.025   Rules regarding city supplying water
   
50.026   Liability to pay for service
   
50.027   Meter deposit
   
50.028   Stoppage of water service
   
50.029   Delinquent payment
Cross-Connection Control
   
50.040   Application
   
50.041   Purpose
   
50.042   Policy
   
50.043   Definitions
   
50.044   Water system
   
50.045   Cross-connection prohibited
   
50.046   Survey and investigation
   
50.047   Protection required
   
50.048   Type of protection
   
50.049   Backflow prevention devices
   
50.050   Inspection and maintenance
   
50.051   Booster pumps
   
50.052   Violations
City Sewer Works System
   
50.065   Public sewer system
   
50.066   Director of Public Works
   
50.067   Sewer treatment plant
Regulations for Sewer System
   
50.080   Definitions
   
50.081   Unlawful deposits
   
50.082   Connections
   
50.083   Prohibition; privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool and the like
   
50.084   Requirement; suitable toilet facilities
   
50.085   Private sewage disposal systems
   
50.086   Permission
   
50.087   Prohibited discharges
   
50.088   Grease, oil, sand and the like
   
50.089   Prohibited admissions
   
50.090   Prohibitions
   
50.091   Permission to enter premises
   
50.092   Rates and charges
   
50.093   Charges payable
   
50.094   Termination
   
50.095   Delinquent payment
   
50.096   Funds
   
50.097   Application
   
50.098   Handling of prohibited discharges
Industrial Cost Recovery
   
50.110   Industrial cost recovery required
   
50.111   Determination of industrial cost recovery
   
50.112   Cost for industrial user
   
50.113   Charge for industrial cost recovery
   
50.114   Length of industrial cost recovery period
   
50.115   Payments and billing periods for industrial cost recovery
   
50.116   Delinquency and termination of service
   
50.117   Time of first payment
   
50.118   Adjustment of charge due to plant improvement utilizing federal grant
funds
   
50.119   No charge for unused or unreserved capacity
   
50.120   Commitment for increased use
   
50.121   Payment to United States of America required
   
50.122   Disposition of retained amounts
   
50.123   Investment of retained amounts required
   
50.124   City Clerk’s responsibility
   
50.125   City Treasurer’s responsibility
   
50.126   Monitoring required
 
   
50.999   Penalty
CITY WATERWORKS SYSTEM
§ 50.001 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The existing waterworks system in its entirety, together with all
additions, improvements and extensions thereto, that may hereafter be made, are
hereby declared to be a public water system to be known as the Department of
Public Works Water Division. Such waterworks systems of the City shall be
maintained and operated as a Division of Public Works; except, however, that
all receipts and expenditures, budgets and other financial transactions shall
be reported and kept separate as to the water system and all requirements of
any bonding ordinances heretofore or hereafter in force shall be complied with
separately as to said system.
   (B)   Charges or rates shall be established separately for water use and
such rates shall be reasonable and commensurate with the water services
performed by such utility system, and sufficient to maintain and operate such
system and provide adequate depreciation funds and pay the principal and
interest on any revenue bonds which may have been or may hereafter be issued,
which bonds are by their terms payable from the revenues of the water system.
   (C)   Any charges or rates as hereinafter stated for the water system of the
City of Mt. Vernon may be paid in cash, by check or by other approved medium of
exchange; provided, however, that a payor by check thereby expressly agrees to
pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a $25.00 charge for each check returned or
dishonored by the payor’s bank. Said charge is immediately due and payable upon
demand by the City therefor. Each statement for service charges shall contain
the phrase: “An additional service charge of $25.00 is assessed upon any check
being returned or dishonored by payor’s bank.”
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.1)
§ 50.002 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the City Manager. The
Director of Public Works shall have the administration and supervision over the
management, maintenance and control of the water system of the City, and the
repair, and improvement of same. He shall also exercise general supervision
over the water maintenance, and procedure, pumping stations, maintenance and
operation of the Public Works Department Water Division of all property
pertaining thereto and connected therewith. He shall perform such other duties
as are presented by the City Council and or City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.2)
REGULATIONS FOR WATER SYSTEM
§ 50.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this Ordinance shall be as follows:
   BUILDING MAIN OR SERVICE. The extension from any building or structure to
the Public Main.
   CITY. The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Utilities of the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois.
   IDPH. The Illinois Department of Public Health.
   PUBLIC MAIN. A water main in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   WATERWORKS. All facilities for collecting, storing, pumping, treating and
provision of water.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(a))
§ 50.016 APPLICATION; CONNECTION.
   (A)   Each applicant for water supply or service shall file with the
Building Inspector of the City an application therefor, in writing, setting
forth the name of such applicant, the location of the premises for which such
supply or service is sought, the name of the owner of the premises, if other
than the applicant, the nature and size of such service, or the extent of such
supply and proposed use thereof. Upon receipt of an application as provided
herein, a permit may be issued by the Building Inspector of the City for the
installation of water service or the supplying of water in accordance with the
provisions of this Article; provided that no permit shall be issued to any
applicant while in default through nonpayment of any past due amount owing to
the City for any water service, sewer service, or garbage service, or
installation theretofore rendered or made, or any other debt to the City.
   (B)   Except as to premises currently receiving water service which were
connected to the Water System before the City imposed a policy requiring
premises to be within the corporate limits, no premises outside the corporate
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon as of May 2021 shall connect to the water
supply or receive water service unless said premises shall first annex to the
City of Mt. Vernon so as to be within the corporate limits or said premises
shall be subject to an Agreement to Annex, in the form required by City, so
that the premises may be annexed and within the corporate limits upon the
premises becoming contiguous to the corporate limits. Any premises subject to
an Agreement to Annex shall have water service disconnected if the premises is
not annexed to the City within 60 days of the premises becoming contiguous to
the corporate limits of the City.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall keep or cause to be kept a record
of all such permits issued, showing the date when issued, the name and
residence of the person to whom issued, and the location of the property
connected therewith. He shall also keep or cause to be kept a record of all
water service pipes connected with any water main or water pipes forming a part
of the water works system of the City, which record shall show the exact
location of the City, which record shall show the exact location of said
service pipes. The Director of Public Works shall also cause to be prepared a
full and complete map or chart showing the location of all public mains and
distribution pipes belonging to the system of waterworks, together with the
location of all valves, fire hydrants and fire plugs connected therewith and
shall keep same erected to date. The Director of Public Works and City Engineer
shall also keep a record of each Agreement to Annex and shall enforce each
Agreement according to its terms.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(b))
§ 50.017 RULES GOVERNING THE USE OF CITY WATER.
   The following rules governing the use of City water are hereby adopted:
   (A)   The material used for service pipe must conform to the standards
required by the §
154.01 of the Mt. Vernon Plumbing Code.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall connect water pipe or conduct water into any two
distinct premises or tenements unless separate and distinct meter setter, angle
meter valves, and meters shall be placed for each such premises or units
served; nor shall such pipe be allowed to cross lots into adjoining premises.
All meters and angle meters valves must be located outside of any structure.
Every service pipe must be provided with an angle meter valve, so situated
outside the structure, so that the water may be shut off to prevent its
freezing.
      (2)   In the event a structure is required to have a fire suppression
system, the domestic service connection shall be within two feet of the
system’s back flow device. Said service connection shall have the meter, the
angle meter valve, and the meter pit placed in a green space located outside
the structure adjacent to said connection.
   (C)   (1)   Persons taking water must keep their service pipes connected
with mains or supply pipes, and all fixtures connected therewith, in good
repair and protected from freezing at their own expense and must prevent all
unnecessary waste of water. If it shall be found that there is an unreasonable
or unnecessary waste of water in any building, structure, or premises to which
water is supplied from the City’s waterworks system, through or by means of a
leak in any water pipe located in any such building, structure, or in or on any
premises, the Superintendent of Public Utilities may cause the water supply to
be cut off from such building, structure, or premises unless such waste shall
be stopped or shall cease within twenty-four hours after he shall have given
notice to the owner, occupant, or person in possession, charge or control of
such building, structure, or premises, to stop such waste.
      (2)   In cases where the water supply is cut off from any building,
structure, or premises on account of a neglect, failure, or refusal of any
person so notified to stop such leak, the water supply shall not again be
turned on until the cost and expense to the City of cutting off and again
turning on such water supply shall have been paid by such owner, occupant, or
person in possession, charge or control.
      (3)   Persons who shall reasonably attempt to keep their service pipes
connected with mains (i.e. from the meter to exterior of structure) in good
repair and protected from freezing and in such condition as to prevent
unnecessary waste of water and who shall suffer a water leak arising from a
concealed leak from said pipes which leak was not immediately discovered or
preventable upon exercise of reasonable alertness or diligence and which leak
was not the fault of the occupant or owner of the premises shall be entitled to
an adjustment to the water and sewer charges imposed herein for a period (a)
not greater than the billing month during which the discovery of the leak is
made and the period between the meter reading date for said month and the date
of discovery, if the leak is discovered by comparison of water usage for said
month with water usage for previous months, or (b) not greater than that part
of the billing month immediately preceding discovery of the leak, if the leak
is otherwise discovered. Provided, however, that such adjustment shall be made
only if discovery of the leak is reported and a request for adjustment is made
on or before the due date of the charges for the month during which an
adjustment is sought. The charge for water and sewer services during the month
that the adjustment is made shall be determined by adding the total water and
sewer charges for the six months prior to adjustment and dividing that sum by
six and by adding to that sum the actual costs incurred by the City for the
purchase of water from Rend Lake Conservancy District for the water usage
during the month of adjustment over and above the six-month average water
usage; if water and sewer charges for six months prior to adjustment are not
available, then the charge for water and sewer services during the month that
the adjustment is made shall be determined by estimating the charges for the
month of adjustment to be equal to the charges for the first month’s water and
sewer usage following repair of the leak and by adding to that amount the
actual costs incurred by the City for the purchase of water from the Rend Lake
Conservancy District for the water usage during the month of adjustment over
and above the estimated monthly water usage. Adjustments for part of a month
shall be made on a pro rata basis and made in accordance with the foregoing
provisions. No adjustments shall be made hereunder unless and until
satisfactory proof of repair of the water leak is presented to the Director of
Finance or his designee. In addition, no adjustment shall be made hereunder
unless and until satisfactory proof that the repair has been effected by a
licensed plumber, an owner-occupant of a single-family residence, or a lessee-
occupant of a single-family residence is also presented to the Finance Director
or his designee. Satisfactory proof shall consist of the completed work order
of a licensed plumber if applicable and a statement under oath signed by the
occupant of the real estate which contains a description of the leak, the date
of discovery of the leak, the name and address of the individual making the
repair, the date of repair, a description of the repair, the address of the
property where the repair is effected, the name of the property owner, the
names of the occupants of the property, and a statement that the repair has
been effected in compliance with all state and local regulations and
requirements. The Finance Director or his duly designated agent shall make the
determination as to whether the person requesting an adjustment is entitled to
any adjustment and, if so, the amount of the adjustment. Each person who shall
request an adjustment shall be considered to have authorized the Finance
Director or his duly authorized agent to inspect the premises, if necessary, to
assist in the determination. If any person does not agree with the decision of
the Finance Director or his duly designated agent, said person may appeal the
decision to the City Manager within five (5) days of being notified of the
decision regarding the adjustment; the City Manager shall then make the final
decision.
   (D)   No addition to or alteration whatever of any tap, pipe, watercock, or
other fixture shall be made or caused to be made by any person except through a
duly licensed plumber, and a permit first shall be obtained from the
Superintendent.
   (E)   Hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, baths, or other fixtures
shall not be kept running when not in use.
   (F)   The Mayor may at any time during an emergency, when in his judgment
the public interest requires it, prohibit the use of City water for street or
lawn sprinkling purposes, for washing cars or for fountains, for such time as
he may deem proper. No person shall so use City water during the time for which
such use shall have been so prohibited.
   (G)   In any case where the water has been turned on without the proper
application or authorization, or in any case where the water has been turned
off for any reason provided in this Article and the water is found on again, or
in any case where in the opinion of the City the turning off of the water on
the curb stop-cock or angle stop-cock is not a sufficient protection against
the further use of water, the City may take such steps as are necessary to
prevent further use of the water including but not limited to the locking of
the meter, the removal of the meter, the crimping of a supply pipe or
disconnection at the corporation cock. Upon application or re-application for
water service when the water has been so turned off by the City, an additional
charge of not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) covering all expenses of so
turning off the water shall be imposed and said charge shall be recoverable
from the owner of the property, the applicant for the service at the time the
unauthorized water service was used, any occupant of the property or any user
of the service; until payment of the charge, no water service shall be provided
to the property, except upon the determination by the City that none of the
persons listed above nor any person associated with the unauthorized water
service is receiving any service or benefits from re-connection of the water
service.
   (H)   Where the water supply to any building, structure, or premises shall
have been cut off or stopped on account of the nonpayment of water rates or on
account of the violation of any of the provisions of this Article, or for any
reason or cause whatsoever, where such cutting off or stopping shall have been
done by the Superintendent of Public Utilities, the water shall not again be
supplied to such building, structure, or premises or permitted to be turned on
therein without a permit first issued as above provided.
   (I)   (1)   No person shall in any manner obstruct, or cause to be
obstructed, the free access of any officer or employee of the Water Department
to any hydrant of said system or to any stopcock, water meter, shutoff box or
connection with any water main or service pipe by means of any coal, lumber,
brick, building material, or by any other means, shift or device whatsoever, or
refuse or prevent free access thereto by such officer or employee whenever such
officer or employee shall desire access thereto.
      (2)   The officers, agents, and employees of the Department of Public
Utilities shall have free access to all and every part of any building,
structure, or premises to which water is supplied from the City’s waterworks
system, for the purpose of examining the water pipes, taps, and fixtures
therein or thereon, whenever such examination is deemed necessary to determine
whether there is occurring any waste of water or whether the provisions of this
Article are being complied with.
      (3)   Any person in possession, charge, or control of any such building,
structure, or premises, into which any such officer or person shall desire to
make entry or to have access for the purpose herein specified who shall refuse
to permit such entry or access or who shall do or cause to be done any act or
thing for the purpose of preventing such entry or access, shall be punished as
provided herein.
   (J)   No service shall be rendered to any premises where storm water and
sanitary drainage are not separated as required by the ordinance governing
sewers and sewage disposal.
   (K)   No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the
plumbing does not comply with the Plumbing Code of the City; provided that
water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject
to the provisions of this Article.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in any manner to
interfere with any main or service water pipe of the water system without first
being authorized by the proper authorities of the City, and at the same time
procuring a permit from the proper department of the City government, as
required in the ordinances of the City or any that may hereafter be passed by
the City concerning such matters.
   (M)   No person shall use or distribute, or permit to be used or
distributed, any water supplied directly or indirectly by the City, to any
person not now being supplied directly or indirectly with water produced by the
City.
   (N)   In case of making repairs or constructing new work, the City reserves
the right to shut off water without notice and keep it shut off as long as may
be necessary to accomplish such purpose or by giving such reasonable notice
thereof to its customers as shall be practicable.
   (O)   All plans pertaining to utilities shall be submitted to the Technical
Review Board for their review and recommendation at least 15 days before
presentation to the respective commission.
   (P)   All water mains shall be a minimum of 6” in size. Mains serving
residential districts shall consist of mains at least 6” in size, arranged so
they form a good gridiron. Where long lengths of pipe are necessary, 8” or
larger mains should be used. Mains should be looped if feasible.
   (Q)   In new construction, 8” or larger pipe should be used where dead ends
and a poor gridiron are likely to exist for a considerable time or where the
layout of streets are not well adapted to a good gridiron.
   (R)   In commercial districts, the minimum size main should be 8” in size,
arranged so they form a good gridiron. Twelve inch (12”) or larger mains should
be used on principal streets and for all long lines that are not connected to
other mains at intervals close enough for mutual support.
   (S)   The use of dead-end 6” mains to provide fire protection shall not be
allowed.
   (T)   Fire hydrants shall be spaced a maximum of 600’ apart in single family
residential areas.
   (U)   (1)   Fire hydrant spacing and requirements in multifamily, commercial
or industrial areas shall be determined by an evaluation of the required fire
flow for fire protection for those areas. Construction plans and data shall be
submitted to the Mt. Vernon Fire Department and for review and evaluation. The
evaluation shall be performed by the Fire Chief or his duly designated
representative. Requirements for fire hydrant spacing shall be indicated on the
subject plans during the review and evaluation process.
      (2)   The review shall include consideration of such items as type of
construction, area, occupancy, number of stories, density, special hazards,
accessibility, water supply, availability, and other factors. There shall be
sufficient hydrants installed to provide the required fire flow around any
building with no hose line exceeding 500 feet in length. The Insurance Service
Office’s “Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow”, December, 1974
Edition, shall be used as the primary guideline for determination of required
fire flow and for fire hydrant spacing and requirements; three copies of said
Guide shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of
Mt. Vernon.
      (3)   Any water main or fire loop on private property used for the
purpose of fire protection shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
maintain; all maintenance, repair, and upkeep shall be the responsibility of
the property owner. However, the City shall have the authority to maintain safe
drinking water according to Illinois Environmental Protection Agency guidelines
to ensure water quality; the City to safeguard the public water supply shall
have the authority to terminate or to repair a water service having any
damaged, broken, or other water line, hydrant, or valve that poses a threat to
public health or safety; in addition, in the event that the City elects to make
a repair to any fire protection line or facility to ensure the safety of the
public, the property owner shall be liable for all costs and the City shall
bill the property owner for all cost associated with said repair; which costs
shall be due and payable 30 days from invoicing.
   (V)   Fire Hydrants shall be of Brand, Size and Specifications as required
by the Fire Chief.
   (W)   Valves shall be installed at least every 1300’ on arterial mains;
every 500’ in commercial districts and every 800’ in residential districts.
Valves may be required at closer intervals in specific situations.
   (X)   Specific locations of fire hydrants shall be determined by the Fire
Chief or his duly designated representative. The cost of fire hydrants and
installation shall be borne by the developer.
   (Y)   Water main extensions and fire hydrant installations shall be
inspected by the City during construction. Immediately upon completion, the
system shall be tested, EPA approval obtained and the system placed in service
at the direction of the City.
   (Z)   Water main extensions and fire hydrants may be installed on private
property only with the written approval of the City; for the purpose fire
protection, the service connection for a property may be placed within two feet
of a dead end. Said service connection shall have the meter, and meter pit
installed in a green space adjacent to the water main. The City shall only be
responsible for the condition of the meter. The property owner shall be
responsible for all maintenance and repair of the service line.
   (AA)   The Insurance Service Office Grading Schedule for Municipal Fire
Protection shall be used as a primary guideline for water and fire protection.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(c))
§ 50.018 RULES GOVERNING PLUMBING WORK.
   The following rules and regulations governing plumbing work in connection
with the City Waterworks System are hereby adopted:
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm, or corporation, except licensed plumbers shall
make any connections to or attachments with the pipes of the water system of
the City, nor make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any tap, pipe,
cock, or other fixture connected with said pipes on the outside or street side
of the water meter or upon the service between the water meter and any
structure or plumbing fixture except as permitted within Chapter 154 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not
apply to authorized employees of the City.
      (2)   Each licensed plumber making any connection to or attachment with
the pipes of the water system of the City of Mt. Vernon or with any private
service line shall file and keep on file the bond required by Chapter 154 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances to the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois in the sum
of Twenty-Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) conditioned upon a full indemnity to
the City of Mt. Vernon against damage to the City or to any persons to whom the
City may be liable by reason of: (1) failure of the plumber to observe
Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon relating to plumbing; (2) failure of the
plumber to observe all rules and regulations established under the authority of
any Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon relating to plumbing; (3) failure of
the plumber to observe all rules and regulations established by or under the
Plumber’s License Law of the State of Illinois; and (4) negligence of the
plumber in performing or protecting any plumbing work. Such bond shall be
renewed annually or more often in the event of the impairment of the surety.
   (B)   No connection shall be made between pipes carrying City water and
pipes carrying water from another source such as a cistern, well, bond or
creek.
   (C)   Every service shall have a meter pit containing a meter setter located
in the right-of-way. All angle meter valves used for service pipes of two (2)
inch waterway or less shall be heavy brass inverted meter setters or angle
meter valves; all angle meter valves used on service pipes of three (3) inch
waterway or more may be of the gate valve type. All meter setters shall be
equipped with a check valve and angle meter valve. All meters setters shall be
placed in a meter pit as laid out by the Building Inspector said meter pit
shall be set at the permanent earth grade. Adequate aggregate drainage shall be
placed at the bottom of the meter pit.
   (D)   (1)   No service pipe between City water mains and the building shall
be laid less than four (4) feet below the surface of the street grade or lawn.
The material used for such pipe shall, in each and every case, be subject to
the inspection by the Illinois Plumbing Inspector or his agent, and if found
defective or below the standard, its use will not be permitted.
      (2)   All services shall be laid straight from the meter setter to the
building and shall be firmly bedded on solid earth. Water services shall not be
backfilled until the Department has inspected the service. Water and sewer
service shall not be run in the same trench, except by permission of the
Department.
   (E)   All service pipes from the City water mains to the water meter shall
be of IDPH approved material with the ability to trace said material type K
copper or Pex or other material approved by IDPH and the City of Mt. Vernon.
All nonmetallic service pipes shall have attached a usable tracing wire made of
minimum of 14 gauge braided copper wire.
   (F)   No tap greater than three-fourths of an inch shall be made in any
water main or distributing pipe. No feeder main having a waterway of twelve
inches or larger may be tapped without special permission from the Director of
Public Works. Multiple taps shall be at least eighteen inches apart and shall
not be in the same line along the length of the main.
   (G)   All taps in the mains or distributing pipes of the waterworks system
shall be made on the side of said mains and not higher up than 22-1/2 degrees
above horizontal. Service pipes from said taps shall be securely blocked with
masonry materials to prevent damage from earth settlement.
   (H)   No taps less than three-quarters of an inch shall be made in any main
or distributing pipe, and no service pipe shall be connected therewith of less
than three-quarters of an inch waterway. All corporation cocks used for any tap
on the water mains must be approved by the Department.
   (I)   The location of all service pipes placed within a public street,
alley, right-of-way, or upon other public property shall be determined and must
be approved in writing by the Department.
   (J)   All water meters shall be so located that they will be easily
accessible to the meter reader and City personnel. No meter shall be installed
within a building. All meters shall be adjacent to the City main. Any meter set
on private property along fire suppression lines or dead end fire hydrant lines
shall be placed within a green space adjacent to the City main and easily
accessible to City personnel. All meters shall be equipped with angle meter
setter that contains both a check valve and an angle meter valve and shall be
enclosed in a meter pit made of a Department approved material not less than 18
inches in diameter and all meter pits shall be subject to approval by the
Department.
   (K)   No plumber or other person shall, after making any connection with the
street mains, or after making repairs or putting in any new attachment, leave
the angle meter valve open and the water turned on in the premises unless a
meter is set and a new service has been established with the City or unless a
permit has been issued by the City to temporarily use the water and all
required fees have been paid.
   (L)   All new services shall be provided with new meters. All new services
constructed shall serve one and only one residence or place of business. All
water meters shall be approved by the Department. All discontinued services
shall be shut off at and disconnected from the main.
   (M)   No residence or place of business will be allowed a water service
unless there is a water main or distributing pipe in the street or alley
adjacent to the property to be served. Said water main or distributing pipe
shall be of four inch (4”) size or larger in the case of existing mains, and no
water main construction will be allowed of less than six inches (6”) in size.
   (N)   Any plumber or other person violating any of the rules contained in
this Section shall for each offense a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or such greater penalty as permitted by any applicable Code described within §
154.01 of the Plumbing Code of the City and shall in addition be liable in
damages to any person, including the City, for injuries resulting from the
violation of said rules; said damages shall include any cost incurred by the
City, including reasonable attorney fees, to enforce or correct the violation
For any injury or damage to said waterworks or fixtures caused by the
carelessness, neglect, or want of skill or other act or omission of any plumber
or plumbers or his or their employees, he or they shall be liable to an action
on his or their bond for the damages as described above sustained by said City
by reason of the breach or breaches of the condition of said bond.
   (O)   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the piping of
the municipal water supply system of said City, either within or outside any
building or structure or upon public or private property wherein any water
derived from any source other than said municipal water supply or any water
derived from said municipal water supply and theretofore used or stored, may be
forced, drawn, siphoned or otherwise taken into said municipal water supply
system, either directly or indirectly or through the manipulation of valves,
stops, pipes, or fixtures or because of ineffective check or back pressure
valves; or in any other manner whatsoever.
      (2)   This Article shall not be construed to apply to the discharge of
water derived from said municipal water supply system into an elevated tank
cistern, or suction well at an elevation above the high water line of any such
elevated tank, system or suction well.
   (P)   Any Plumber who shall neglect, refuse, or fail to make good any
defects or faults discovered in his work shall not be permitted to do any
further or additional work until the defects or faults so discovered have been
made good in a manner satisfactory to the Department.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(d))
§ 50.019 ANNEXATION; INSTALLATION OF CITY WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever the property owner or owners of a tract or tracts of land,
seventy-five percent (75%) of which are improved, signify their intention of
using City water service, and if such tracts are not within the corporate
limits of the City, but subject to lawful annexation, their intention to annex
said tract or tracts, and further signify their desire to install extensions of
City water mains at their own cost, on a cash basis, they may submit to the
City Council an application requesting that the City ascertain the probable
cost and feasibility thereof.
   (B)   Upon submission of such application to the City Council, the City
Manager, City Engineer, and Director of Public Works shall investigate the
proposed extension and advise the Council of the estimated probable cost
thereof, the feasibility thereof, the recommended manner of construction and
payment thereof, and whether or not in their opinion, such extension is in the
public interest.
   (C)   The Council may thereupon authorize such extension upon the terms and
conditions, which, in their opinion, shall promote the public welfare, provided
that at least seventy-five percent of all such tracts are improved by water-
using structures.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(e))
§ 50.020 WATER SERVICES; METER.
   (A)   All permanent water services hereafter installed, whether for domestic
or commercial purposes, shall be metered. No meter shall be placed within a
building. The meter shall be placed outside of the building in a suitable pit
to be located at the curb or at some other suitable location as approved by the
Department. All water meters shall be purchased from the Department at cost.
   (B)   When a water meter is damaged in any premises by freezing or by hot
water backing through the meter or by other physical injury, the consumer, and
not the City, shall be required to pay the cost of repairs and labor. Any
municipal water meter shall be taken out and tested upon complaint of the
consumer, upon payment of a fee of Fifty Dollars. If upon test, the meter is
not within three percent (3%) of being accurate, it shall be repaired or
replaced and the Fifty Dollar fee shall be returned to the consumer. Every
meter shall have a shut-off valve at the inlet side, and every meter larger
than one (1) inch in size shall be followed immediately by a shut-off valve.
   (C)   All persons using water for any purpose, including sprinkling lawns
and yards, will be required to have their piping so arranged that water used
for any such purposes will be measured through their meters. All meters shall
be sealed. No person shall break or cause to be broken, the seal on any water
meter, unless authorized to do so by the Superintendent of Public Utilities.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(f))
§ 50.021 HYDRANTS.
   No person or persons other than the members of the Fire Department of the
City for the uses and purposes of said Department, and those duly authorized by
the Code of the City, shall open any of the hydrants of the waterworks system
or attempt to take water therefrom or in any manner interfere with or injure
any of said hydrants, except as follows:
   (A)   The Field Supervisor of Department shall instruct such person or
persons as designated by the Director of Public Works in the proper use and
procedure in using hydrants and water in the Public Works Department for their
necessary work and that the said Field Supervisor of the Department shall
instruct all persons that no water shall be drawn from any hydrant, nor shall
any person operate any hydrant other than the firemen, except those designated
by the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation not coming within paragraph (A) shall
use any hydrants without first securing permission from the Director of Public
Works.
   (C)   It shall not be lawful for anyone to possess hydrant wrenches and the
Fire Chief shall collect all hydrant wrenches wherever found from any and all
persons and shall issue approved type wrenches to those parties entitled to the
said wrenches. Said wrenches shall at all times be under the custody of the
Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(g))
§ 50.022 CONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   Each applicant for a new service shall pay a connection charge for
tapping or connecting to the City water main in the amount of $500.00 per tap-
on or connection (as set forth within §
154.04 of the City Plumbing Code, which sum includes the applicable inspection
fee described below. In addition, commercial, multi-family, and industrial
applicants and residential applicants shall pay a charge for the water meter of
the necessary size for water service from the City of Mt. Vernon equal to the
purchase price of the City for said meter. The applicant shall have the meter
installed at the expense of the applicant by a licensed plumber bonded with the
City, which installation shall be subject to inspection by an authorized
representative of the City prior to the City’s furnishing water. There shall be
a $25.00 inspection fee for single-residential connections and a $50.00
inspection fee for multi-family connections, commercial connections and
industrial connections. Relocation of an existing service shall not constitute
a new service, and no tap-on or connection fee shall be payable; although the
meter fee (if a new meter is installed) and the inspection fee shall be
payable. No existing service tap located on a vacant lot or located on any
property not having water service on or after May 1, 2018 shall be used; the
owner of said property shall be required to install a new service tap, although
the tap fee shall be waived and the new tap shall be treated as a tap
relocation.
   (B)   Each applicant for a new water service which taps or connects to a
water main extension constructed hereunder shall also pay an extension
connection charge for tapping or connecting to the water main. The extension
connection charge shall be computed by multiplying the charge per lineal foot
times the lineal front feet of the applicant’s real estate upon the extension.
The charge per lineal foot shall be determined by dividing the total cost of
construction for the extension by the total lineal footage of the extension (or
by twice the lineal footage, if the extension may serve property on either
side).
   (C)   The City may extend water mains adjacent to previously unserved
property and may collect the above extension connection charge from the owner
of the previously unserved property upon said owner’s requesting water service
for the property. The City of Mt. Vernon may also enter into a written
agreement with landowners (for the extension by the landowners) of water mains
adjacent to previously unserved land owned by a third party in order to serve
the landowner’s property; said agreements may provide that the City will
collect the extension connection charge upon the third party’s requesting water
service for his property fronting on the extension constructed by the landowner
and provided that the City will pay the charge collected to the landowner,
provided, however, that no agreement shall be executed unless the landowner
provides a verified and itemized statement of the construction costs, a plat or
description of the extension constructed by the landowner, and an accurate
record of the ownership of each property adjacent to the extension.
   (D)   Before any new connection is made, the customer shall deposit with the
City a sum equal to the connection charge, inspection fees, the extension
connection charge described above if any, and any meter deposit which may now
or hereafter be required by appropriate Ordinance of the City. After depositing
such sum, service may then be installed.
   (E)   The connection charges and extension connection charges above set
forth are only for the privilege of making connections to new water mains or to
tapping onto existing mains and do not include any costs of excavation and
installation of buildings, main services, or other costs of bringing water from
the connection or tap to the structure served.
   (F)   (1)   Immediately upon connection or tapping, the liability of the
applicant for water charges shall commence, whether the applicant shall then be
receiving water or not.
      (2)   An applicant shall not be excused from payment of monthly water
charges but shall be charged at least the minimum amount even though he shall
choose not to receive water immediately.
   (G)   In the event that the City installs a water main in a previously
unserved area within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, each
property adjacent to the main shall, within 90 days, connect to the City water
system; said connection shall be at the owner’s expense and shall be subject to
all new connection permits, rules and fees.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(h))
§ 50.023 RATES AND CHARGES FOR USE AND SERVICE OF WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Rates and charges for the use and service of the water system of the
City of Mt. Vernon are hereby established as follows:
Consumption Rates
Consumption          Rates
First 2,000 gallons  $13.93 minimum charge
Next 2,000 gallons   $9.38 per 1,000 gallons
Next 11,000 gallons  $8.38 per 1,000 gallons
Next 35,000 gallons  $7.77 per 1,000 gallons
Next 50,000 gallons  $6.17 per 1,000 gallons
Next 100,000 gallons $5.20 per 1,000 gallons
Next 300,000 gallons $4.57 per 1,000 gallons
Over 500,000 gallons $3.87 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   The cost for use of City water shall be ascertained according to the
amount of water used during each billing period. The rates for water service in
no case shall be less than the monthly minimum bill set forth above.
   (C)   The rate for bulk sales of water not made through metered sources to
one purchaser shall be 25¢ per 28.77 gallons.
   (D)   Whenever water is supplied to premises outside of the corporate limits
of the City, the rates charged shall be a minimum of $25.11 for the first 2,000
gallons and thereafter shall be 130% times the rates above set forth for
residential use.
   (E)   (1)   Each of the foregoing rates established above shall be increased
annually by 2% each year, effective on November 1 of each year beginning 2017.
      (2)   The proceeds from the 2% rate increase effective on November 1,
2016 (which increase is reflected within the above rates) and each 2% annual
increase thereafter (as enacted by Ordinance 2016-27) shall be expended solely
for capital construction projects or for capital equipment purchases for the
Public Utility Department.
   (F)   The proceeds from the 3% rate increase effective on May 1, 2009
enacted by Ordinance 2009-14 and all proceeds from each increase effective
November 1 of 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 enacted by Ordinance 2009-30 shall
continue to be expended solely for capital construction projects or for capital
equipment purchases for the Public Utility Department.
   (G)   In the event that any charge for water service shall not be paid
within sixteen (16) days of the rendition of the bill statement therefor, there
shall be added to such charge 10% of the amount thereof as computed on the
above rates as a penalty for late payment.
   (H)   During the construction of any building and before any water is
installed as is hereby provided, the contractor so constructing such building
may be permitted to use the City water supply by making application therefor
and paying the fee prescribed by the Director of Public Works.
   (I)   In addition to a meter deposit, all customers shall pay a hook-up fee
of $25.00 per hook-up prior to any water service being provided to said
customer; provided, however, that said hook-up fee shall not be required to be
paid under the following circumstances:
      (1)   annual re-connection of service for a summer or other seasonal
home;
      (2)   a change only in the name of the applicant for a water service
account; and
      (3)   a temporary service not to exceed 5 calendar days, provided a
disconnect request is executed at the time of re-connection.
   (J)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall review the user charges annually and
shall revise them periodically to reflect water purchase costs, operation
costs, and maintenance costs.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(i))
§ 50.024 METERS; TO BE READ MONTHLY.
   (A)   All water meters shall be read monthly unless circumstances prevent
otherwise, in which case water usage shall be estimated based upon prior usage.
Notice shall be sent to the property on which the meter is located, unless
other directions are given. Said notice shall state the amount of payment due,
the previous reading and the gallons used. All bills shall be due and payable
on the date stated on the bill; and, if unpaid on said date, said bill shall be
delinquent and the City at any time after a charge becomes delinquent shall
have the full power and authority to terminate water service. Upon any charge
for water service becoming delinquent or upon a service being terminated, all
delinquent charges for water services, sewer services, and garbage collection
services must be paid in full before water service is continued or resumed.
Payment must be actually received by the City prior to the due date; deposit of
payment in the U.S. mails does not constitute payment until actually received
by the City.
   (B)   All bills shall be rendered at the rates hereinabove fixed. Failure to
receive the monthly bill shall not be an excuse for nonpayment of the bill. In
all cases in which a meter fails to work for all or any part of the month, the
payment for said month in which the meter failed shall be an amount estimated
from the records of the office of the Billing Department of City for said
services of past usage for the same period in other years.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(j))
§ 50.025 RULES REGARDING CITY SUPPLYING WATER.
   (A)   No City water shall be supplied to any premises except upon the
application of the owner, the lessee, or occupant of the premises; and proof of
ownership, tenancy, or occupancy may be required by the City before service is
provided. No City water shall be supplied to any premises upon any application
submitted after January 1, 1987, unless the premises shall have its street
address properly posted upon the premises in a conspicuous place so that the
address is in plain view and is clearly visible from the street. No City water
shall be supplied to any premises occupied by any person who is in default as
to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the City regardless of
whether said person is the applicant, nor shall any City water be supplied to
any premises upon the application of any applicant who is in default as to any
water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the City no matter at which
premises said default occurred, until such applicant has paid such back water
charges, and garbage collection charges in full, including all charges and
penalties.
   (B)   The City shall be under no obligation to furnish or to continue to
furnish water to any applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer or
garbage collection charges due the City no matter at which premises said
default occurred, nor to any premises occupied by any person who is in default
as to any water, sewer or garbage collection charges due the City regardless of
whether said person is the applicant, and the City at any time after said bill
or bills become due shall have the full power and authority to enter any
premises and to turn off, disconnect, discontinue, or otherwise terminate water
service; said water service shall not be resumed until all delinquent charges
for water service, sewer service, and garbage collection service are paid in
full.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions are solely for the benefit of the City and
shall not constitute a defense to sewer, water, or garbage collection charges
for any owner or other person jointly liable for said charges. Except for
disconnection effected by the City for reason of default or other reason, only
the applicant in whose name service is provided or someone on his behalf may
demand disconnection of service.
   (D)   Whenever it is necessary for the City to disconnect water service
because of nonpayment of charges, a $25.00 reconnect fee shall be assess and
paid prior to resumption of water service; said fee shall defray the costs of
disconnection and reconnection of service.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(k))
§ 50.026 LIABILITY TO PAY FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The applicant and the occupants of the premises receiving water
service and the user of the water service of said system shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for such service on said premises; and the services
shall be furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the
applicant, the occupant of the premises, and users of the service are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the City.
   (B)   City may require each applicant to provide the name and address of the
owner of the property, name and address of the lessee of the property, names
and addresses of all occupants of the property, and names and addresses of
users of the service as well as all addresses of the applicant and each
occupant during the preceding twelve (12) months.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(l))
§ 50.027 METER DEPOSIT.
   (A)   (1)   A meter deposit shall be required and collected from all new
customers to insure the payment of water and sewer charges to the City of Mt.
Vernon, which deposit shall be held in escrow for the purposes of paying any
utility charges of that customer.
      (2)   The terms NEW CUSTOMER shall include all persons hereafter
connecting to the water or sewer system and also shall include persons who
shall have had their services disconnected or terminated for any reason,
including lack of payment and who shall thereafter reconnect.
   (B)   The required deposits shall be in the following amount:
Meter size Deposit Required
Meter size    Deposit Required
Residential
3/4” meter  $100.00
Commercial
3/4” meter  $200.00
1” meter    $250.00
1-1/4” meter$350.00
1-1/2” meter$400.00
2” meter    $450.00
3” meter or Deposit based upon 2-1/2 times the cost of one month’s estimated consumption
larger        of water
 
   (C)   Interest shall be paid on deposit accounts commencing on the date of
such deposit at the rate of 1% per annum from date of deposit, which interest
shall be payable only upon termination of water and sewer service to such
depositor on the balance of the deposit remaining after payment of all amounts
due the City: said interest shall be computed as of the last day of the month
if paid on said date or the last day of the full month preceding payment if
paid otherwise. The meter deposit shall be returned to any customer who
discontinues service as above set forth and who has paid all water and sewer
charges and delinquent charges due and garbage collection charges as provided
within §
32.002 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The terms of the within subsection
for meter deposit shall be applied to any customer whether such customer shall
be an owner or renter of the premises served. The foregoing customer shall be
an owner or renter of the premises served. The foregoing provisions for meter
deposits shall be subject, however, to the following exceptions:
      (1)   Whenever a customer shall be the owner of the property served,
shall present evidence of having paid all water and sewer charges for services
to the premises without being in arrears for the prior 12-month period, such
customer shall be entitled to a refund of the customer deposit with accrued
interest. Such refunds shall be made semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of
each year thereafter.
      (2)   Whenever such customer shall have established credit in the manner
above described and shall request service to a new or additional location and
shall present evidence of ownership of such location and of his continued
payment of all water and sewer charges without arrears, no meter deposit shall
be required for such new service.
   (D)   In addition to a meter deposit, all customers shall pay a hook-up fee
of $25.00 per hook-up prior to any water service being provided to said
customer; provided, however, that said hook-up fee shall not be required to be
paid under the following circumstances: (a) annual re-connection of service for
a summer or other seasonal home; (b) a change only in the name of the applicant
for a water service account; and (c) a temporary service not to exceed 5
calendar days, provided a disconnect request is executed at the time of re-
connection.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(m))
§ 50.028 STOPPAGE OF WATER SERVICE.
   Any person who in any manner violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this section or with the orders and
regulations issued by the department pursuant thereto shall be subjected to
having the supply of water stopped at once, without preliminary notice; and no
person shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from which the supply
has been turned off by the City except as authorized by the Superintendent of
Public Utilities or the Finance Director or a designee of either and payment of
the turn-off and turn-on charges prescribed herein. This remedy shall be
concurrent with all other remedies and penalties herein provided for the
enforcement off this Section. The City of Mt. Vernon shall be entitled to
recover all costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in
effecting or defending the remedy herein provided.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(n))
§ 50.029 DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
   (A)   In the event charges, including penalty charges, for water service or
sewer service are not paid on or before the due date of the bill for such
services, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be
delinquent. Thereafter such delinquent charges shall constitute a lien upon the
real estate for which such water and sewer services are supplied regardless of
whether such service has been supplied upon the application of the owner, and
occupant or other user; provided, however, that the owner of the real estate
shall have no personal liability for the delinquent charges unless said owner
was also the applicant for or user of the services giving rise to the charges.
The Superintendent of Public Utilities or the Finance Director or a designee of
either is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such
delinquencies and claiming such herein in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
of Jefferson County, Illinois, after first giving seven (7) days’ notice by
regular mail of such delinquency to the owner and occupant of said real estate.
This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount, as well as for all charges for water and sewer service subsequent to
the period covered by the bill; that the lien for water service and sewer
service against the premises upon or for which water furnished by the City is
used or supplied shall be enforced and foreclosed by a suit in Chancery in the
Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois according to the rules and practice
of said court; and that the City shall recover all costs including the
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in preparing, filing, and
foreclosing the lien.
   (B)   Said lien may also be enforced and foreclosed by intervention in any
suit already commenced in said Court or any other Court, whenever said
intervention is proper under law. Whenever the City is made a defendant in any
suit in account of any lien, it shall have for the furnishing of water full
power to enforce its said lien in said proceedings.
   (C)   The method herein provided for enforcing and foreclosing the lien for
water and sewer service charges shall not be considered as excluding any other
remedy or any other method of collecting said water and sewer service charges
but shall be concurrent with all other remedies and methods. The City shall
recover all costs including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in
effecting collection for water and sewer service charges or incurred by the
City in effecting or defending any remedy.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(o))
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 50.040 APPLICATION.
   All premises served by the public potable water supply system of the City of
Mt. Vernon shall provide protection of the potable water system from
contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants through the
water service connection in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and in
accordance with this Subsection which is enacted pursuant to said Illinois
Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(A))
§ 50.041 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Subsection is:
   (A)   to protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   to promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures, and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety;
   (C)   to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination of pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(B))
§ 50.042 POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The owner, custodian, or occupant of each premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be
responsible for protection of the public water supply from contamination due to
backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants, through the customer’s water
service connection. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or if in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works or his authorized representative,
an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the
public water supply system, the Director of Public Works shall give notice to
the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each
service connection to the premises.
      (2)   The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his own expense at a location and in a manner in accordance with the
Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and this
Ordinance and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
upon installation; failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer
to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have
been installed.
      (3)   The consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance,
testing, and repair as hereinafter required for a period of at least five
years. The Director of Public Works may require the consumer to submit a cross-
connection inspection report to the City of Mt. Vernon to assist in determining
whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection
inspections shall be conducted by a Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector
certified by the Environmental Protection Agency.
   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation, shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois may enter the supply or
distribution system of said City.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial, and other properties
served by the public water supply that may pose an actual or potential hazard,
including premises described within §§
50.047(B) and (C) and
154.07 herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(C))
§ 50.043 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Subsection:
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineer, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute, or certified by the
National Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a CUSTOMER’S WATER
SYSTEM.
   CONTAMINATION. Any impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown an or questionable safety or quality, whereby
there may be a flow from one system into the other.
   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance
   DOUBLE-CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE-CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum, or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances, and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use
was determined by the requirements of 77 Ill. Adm. Code 900.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration, or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley, or
at the curb to, within, and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work, or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge
of pumping unit to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems.
PLUMBING includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a
building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any
buildings where a person or persons live, work, or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, radiological, or
biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 77 Ill. Adm. Code 900
for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
      (1)   polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   process waters;
      (3)   used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   cooling waters;
      (5)   questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (6)   chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes, and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks, and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
“community water supply” or a “non- community water supply”
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal the pressure between these two checks shall be less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operates to maintain the
pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit
must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device,
and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user. SERVICE
CONNECTION shall be the point at which an individual service line connects to
the City’s public main or the point at which a private water main connects to
the City’s public main.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include location, type, and most recent inspection and testing
date of all cross- connection control devices and methods located within that
customer’s piping system. The survey must be in written form and should not be
an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(D))
§ 50.044 WATER SYSTEM.
   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the public
water supply system and the consumer’s water system. The public water supply
system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and
shall include all those facilities of the potable water system under the
control of the Director of Public Works up to the point where the consumer’s
water system begins. The source shall include all components of the facilities
utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system. The public water supply distribution
system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the
source to the consumer’s water system. The consumer’s water system shall
include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection which are
used to convey water from the public water supply distribution system to points
of use.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(E))
§ 50.045 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment
containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are
prohibited. No physical connection shall be permitted between potable portion
of a supply and any water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and
chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency. There
shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a
supply. There shall be no direct connections between potable water lines and
any lines; equipment, or any part of the sewage system, except only such
connections as shall be made through a minimum fixed air gap as detailed within
§ 890.1040 of 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890 or the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(F))
§ 50.046 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The approved Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the City of Mt. Vernon for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections within
the consumer’s premises and testing, repair, and maintenance of cross-
connection control devices within the consumer’s premises; and that the
Director of Public Works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter
at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system of the City of Mt. Vernon for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-
connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees, or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the Director of Public Works any
information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or
water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded,
shall, within the discretion of the Director of Public Works, be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this Ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions.
      (4)   Testing and Records.
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4
(e).
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            1.   date of each test;
            2.   name and approval number of person performing the test;
            3.   test results;
            4.   repairs or servicing required;
            5.   repairs and date completed; and
            6.   servicing performed and date completed.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(G))
§ 50.047 PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency’s regulations. In addition, an approved backflow prevention
device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system
serving premises, where in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, actual
or potential hazards to the public water supply water system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water, unless such auxiliary supply is
accepted as an additional source by the Director of Public Works and the source
is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Public Utilities.
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Director of Public Works and the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 890 and the Agency’s regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Director of Public Works
determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      (2)   Laboratories.
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants.
      (6)   Chemical plants.
      (7)   Metal plating industries.
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      (10)   Carwashes.
      (11)   Pesticide, or herbicide, or extermination plants and trucks.
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(H))
§ 50.048 TYPE OF PROTECTION.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
50.047(B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(3) shall depend on the degree of hazard which
exists as follows:
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
50.047(B)(4) and (B)(5) shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or
an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   the fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
      (2)   water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      (3)   water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
      (4)   there is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double-check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double-detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(I))
§ 50.049 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be
in compliance with applicable industry specification. Installation of approved
devices shall be made in accordance with 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890,
and only as specified by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control
of the University of Southern California or applicable industry specifications.
Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the device shall be
performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be available onsite.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(J))
§ 50.050 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance, and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
      (2)   Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within fifteen days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a licensed cross-connection control
inspector.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   test results;
      (4)   repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Public Utilities.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(K))
§ 50.051 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any
premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. It shall be the duty of
the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working
order and to certify to the Director of Public Works, at least once a year,
that the device is operable.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(L))
§ 50.052 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Utilities is hereby authorized and
directed to disconnect, after reasonable notice not to exceed 30 days, to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any backflow
prevention device required by this Ordinance is not installed, tested,
maintained, and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Director of Public
Works; or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed
or bypassed; or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises; or
if a low pressure cutoff required by this Ordinance is not installed and
maintained in working order; or if any connection in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance is known to exist; and said Director of Public
Works is authorized to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination to the public water supply
distribution mains.
   (B)   Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works and
until the required reconnection fee is paid to the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (C)   Immediate disconnection with a verbal notice can be effective when the
Director of Public Works is assured or has determined that eminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action
shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent
actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply,
provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Director of Public Works or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
   (D)   Neither the City of Mt. Vernon, the Director of Public Works, its
agents, nor assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages, or
lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s water supply
in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance, whether or not said termination
was with or without notice.
   (E)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance or
any customer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of
the potable water supply system; and said customer shall be responsible for all
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in enforcing the terms of this
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.3(p)(M))
CITY SEWER WORKS SYSTEM
§ 50.065 PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The existing sewerage system in its entirety, together with all
additions, improvements and extensions thereto, that may hereafter be made, are
hereby declared to be a public sewerage system to be known as the Department of
Public Works Sewer Division. Such sewerage system of the City shall be
maintained and operated as a Division of Public Works; except, however, that
all receipts and expenditures, budgets and other financial transactions shall
be reported and kept separate as to the sewer system and all requirements of
any bonding ordinances heretofore or hereafter in force shall be complied with
separately as to said system.
   (B)   Charges or rates shall be established separately for sewer use and
such rates shall be reasonable and commensurate with the sewer services
performed by such system, and sufficient to maintain and operate such system
and provide adequate depreciation funds and pay the principal and interest on
any revenue bonds which may have been or may hereafter be issued, which bonds
are by their terms payable from the revenues of the sewer system..
   (C)   Any charges or rates as hereinafter stated for the sewer system of the
City of Mt. Vernon may be paid in cash, by check or by other approved medium of
exchange; provided, however, that a payor by check thereby expressly agrees to
pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a $25.00 charge for each check returned or
dishonored by the payor’s bank. Said charge is immediately due and payable upon
demand by the City therefor.
   (D)   Each statement for service charges shall contain the phrase: “An
additional service charge of $25.00 is assessed upon any check being returned
or dishonored by payor’s bank.”
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.4)
§ 50.066 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The office of Director of Public Works, in and for the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall have the
administration and supervision over the management, maintenance and control of
the sewer system of the City, and the repair, cleaning, and improvement of
same; and he shall have supervision over the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage and facilities of the City. He shall also exercise general supervision
over the shop maintenance, sewer maintenance, and procedure, pumping stations,
maintenance and operation of the Public Works Department Sewer Division of all
property pertaining thereto and connected therewith. He shall perform such
other duties as are presented by the City Manager. The Director of Public Works
shall cause all ordinances of the City in relation to sewer treatment and sewer
matters to be enforced and shall prosecute all persons for violation thereof;
and he shall carry into effect all orders, general or special, which he may
receive from the City Council and or City Manager, and report promptly on same
with recommendations.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.5)
§ 50.067 SEWER TREATMENT PLANT.
   The City of Mt. Vernon has designated a third party contractor to manage,
maintain, oversee and direct the Sewer Treatment Plant and waste water
treatment for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. It shall be the duty of such
Private Contractor to keep the sewage treatment facilities of the City in good
working condition, order and repair and to protect the same from unnecessary
damage or loss. The Private Contractor shall maintain and operate the sewage
treatment facilities of the City and sewer treatment plant and the Private
Contractor shall superintend and maintain all work pertaining to all repairs
upon the same of every kind, nature and description. The Private Contractor
shall keep in good state of repair at all times the sewage treatment facilities
and plant of the City and they shall do and perform such other duties as may be
required by contract and ordinances of the City. The contract with the Private
Contractor shall be established and directed by the City Council. It shall be
the duty of the Private Contractor to keep a correct record of all history,
implements, materials and other property of the City in the Private
Contractor’s charge and possession, or in the charge and possession of any
persons under employment or contract with said Private Contractor; and upon
termination of said contract the Private Contractor shall deliver such records
to the City of Mt Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.6)
REGULATIONS FOR SEWER SYSTEM
§ 50.080 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used shall be as follows:
   B.O.D. (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20ºC, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BACKWATER VALVE. A device installed on a private sewer lateral designed to
prevent water or sewage from coming back up a private sewer lateral.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning 3 feet outside the outer face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any user of the treatment works not classified as an
Industrial User or a Residential User.
   COMMON LATERAL. Any private sewer lateral that services two or more separate
structures or properties that may or may not cross properties and or City owned
easements and right-of-ways.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal, and coverage outstanding, and shall be assigned as per
§
50.092 hereof.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
foods, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   Non-governmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management
and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
         (a)   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry, & Fishing.
         (b)   Division B - Mining.
         (c)   Division D - Manufacturing.
         (d)   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric and
Sanitary Services.
         (e) Division I - Services
      (2)   A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined
that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
      (3)   Industries subject to Industrial Cost Recovery which discharge the
equivalent of 25,000 gallons a day, or less, of sanitary wastes, are exempt
from Industrial Cost. Recovery, provided that the discharges of the industry do
not contain pollutants which (1) interfere with the treatment process, (2) are
toxic or incompatible, or (3) contaminate or otherwise reduce the utility of
the sludge production.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid, gaseous. or solid wastes resulting from
industrial processes as distinct from segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   INSPECTOR. The Superintendent of Sewers of the City of Mt. Vernon, or his
authorized deputy agent, or representative.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage with a BOD-5 strength of 300 mg/l and a
suspended solids strength of 350 mg/l, and which shall not contain toxic
wastes, oil, grease, paint, flammables, explosives, or heavy metals.
   NPDES. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, by the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972 to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. Those costs required for the normal
operation and maintenance of the sewage system, but shall not include items of
capital expenditure.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL. The pipe that connects a structure’s plumbing to the
publicly-owned sanitary sewer.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewer, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   REPLACEMENT.
      (1)   Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are
designed and constructed.
      (2)   The term “Operation and Maintenance” includes REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any user of the treatment works not classified as an
Industrial User whose property is used solely for residential purposes and for
auxiliary purposes permitted by the zoning ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon
in residential zones.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per month levied upon all users of the
sanitary sewer system of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   SHALL. Is mandatory;
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension, in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(a))
§ 50.081 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
City of Mt. Vernon, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(b))
§ 50.082 CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any sanitary sewer,
including house connections, cesspools, septic tanks, or other sanitary sewer
to any storm sewer, now or hereafter constructed or maintained by the City of
Mt. Vernon.
   (B)   Sump pumps shall not be permitted to be attached to a sanitary sewer
main. In the event that a sump pump is determined to be connected to a sanitary
sewer main it shall be the owner’s liability and expense to remove said sump
pump discharge line; if the owner fails to remove the connection of the sump
pump to the sanitary sewer main, the owner shall be liable to the City for all
costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by City in effecting
removal of the connection. Regardless of the point of water sump pump
discharge, it shall be located on private property and shall not be directed to
any area or location which will create a nuisance or hazard on the property in
question, or allow the collection of water to remain on any adjacent or
downstream property. All sump pump discharge lines shall be directed towards an
appropriate storm water system or natural water way. Sump pump water discharge
lines may be connected to a storm sewer system when approved in writing by the
City.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(c))
§ 50.083 PROHIBITION; PRIVY, PRIVY VAULT, SEPTIC TANK, CESSPOOL AND THE LIKE.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(d))
§ 50.084 REQUIREMENT; SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the City,
is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within 60 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet
of the property line.
   (B)   All structures in the City of Mt Vernon shall have a backflow
prevention “Backwater Valve” to eliminate potential flooding of the premises
with sewage. Further, all such valves shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner to install and maintain in working order. The City of Mt. Vernon shall
not be responsible for the installation or operation of Backwater Valves, nor
for damage caused by sewerage backflow.
   (C)   When a new sewer main is installed in a previously unserved areas
within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, each residential,
commercial, and industrial building or other building having or requiring sewer
facilities located on, or accessible to such main, shall within 90 days connect
to the main at the owners expense and shall be subject to all new connection
permits, rules and fees.
   (D)   In the event that the City shall hereafter determine, and the City
Council of the City of Mt. Vernon shall provide by resolution or ordinance,
that capacity is not available for new sewer connections in the sewers, lift
stations, and treatment plant of the City, then and in that event, connection
to a public sanitary sewer of the City is not required, as provided herein,
during such time as such determination shall remain in effect. In the event
that a public sewer thereafter becomes available in the future, said property
shall to connect to the City sewer at the owner’s expense in accordance with
this ordinance within 90 days from written notice from City to connect.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(e))
§ 50.085 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
hereof, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this Article and all State or Federal
law and regulations. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Inspector. The application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Inspector. A permit and
inspection fee of $12.50 shall be paid to the City at the time the application
is filed. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Inspector when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice
by the Inspector.
   (B)   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health
of the State of Illinois. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural
outlet. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled
with suitable material. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
City. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(f))
§ 50.086 PERMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   No unauthorized person shall uncover any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Inspector. The owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Inspector.
      (2)   A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the City at
the time the application is filed. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. A separate
and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; All new
sewer laterals shall be constructed to meet minimum standards set forth by the
Illinois Plumbing Code and constructed to meet all Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency Guidelines and City Ordinances.
   (B)   Sewer Connections and Private Sewer Laterals shall be subject to the
following:
      (1)   Sewer Connections.
         (a)   Taps to sewer mains shall be made only in accordance Illinois
Plumbing Code and Illinois Environmental Protection agency Guidelines. All
sewer taps shall be made using a mechanical, or epoxy tap saddle on top of the
City sewer main. All private sewer laterals shall be constructed of IDPH
approved materials.
         (b)   When a connection to a sewer main described in §
50.084 herein is made, all existing septic tanks, vaults, cisterns or cesspools
(waste receptacles) used on the premises shall be abandoned pursuant to the
Illinois Public Health Code, (77: Public Health, Part 905 Private Sewage
Disposal Code, § 905.40 Septic Tanks). The contents of an abandoned waste
receptacle shall be disposed of in a manner as prescribed by state Law.
         (c)   1.   Whenever a building sewer service line or lateral located
on a property is obstructed or is found to be broken, fractured, and/or
defective, so that sewage or drainage escapes into surrounding soil or into
adjacent properties, repair and/or replacement shall be required.
            2.   Upon a determination by the Inspector that an existing sewer
connection is not properly discharging sewage flow into the sewer main, the
owner shall be required to replace the existing sewer connection system. In the
instance where the owner is not connected directly and separately to the sewer
main, it shall be required, upon determination of improper discharge, that the
owner connect separately to the sewer main. All repairs, replacements, and
connections shall be at owner’s expense.
         (d)   Common Laterals shall not be permitted in the City. In the event
that a common lateral is determined to be in use, serving more than one
structure said common lateral shall be removed. Separate private sewer laterals
for each structure served by the common lateral shall then be installed.
Removal, abandonment of old lateral, and installation of the new lateral shall
be at the property owner’s expense.
         (e)   1.   Whenever a sewer lateral is replaced, removed, or abandoned
said connection with the public main shall be properly capped. A cap inspection
by City is required.
            2.   Use of a mechanical cap at the main or replacement of the
public main shall be the preferred method. All mechanical caps shall be made
directly at the main to leave as little of the abandoned lateral attached to
the main. Clamps should be used to fasten the inserted fitting and hold it
firmly in place. Concrete shall be poured over the area to a level at least
four inches (4”) thick and to an eight-inch (8”) radius in all directions.
            3.   The removal of an entire section of sewer main and replacement
shall require a pipe cutter be used to neatly and accurately cut out the
desired length of pipe for insertion of a proper fitting. Couplings, shear
rings and clamps should be used to fasten the inserted fitting and hold it
firmly in place. Concrete shall be poured over the broken area to a level at
least four inches (4”) thick and to an eight-inch (8”) radius in all
directions.
      (2)   Installation of Private Sewer Lateral.
         (a)   Residential sewer services or connections shall be composed of a
minimum of four (4”) of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) piping material. The joints
shall meet the specifications IDPH, and the sewer lines shall be laid in a
straight line from the main sewer to the building in a continuous minimum grade
from the sewer main to the building.
         (b)   A circular saw cut of the sewer main using the appropriate
tools, and the proper installation of a hub wye saddle or hub tee saddle, in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and/or specifications.
         (c)   The removal of an entire section of sewer main and replacement
of the section with a wye or tee branch. After the wye or tee branch is
inserted, concrete shall be poured over the broken area to a level at least
four inches (4”) thick and to an eight-inch (8”) radius in all directions. A
pipe cutter should be used to neatly and accurately cut out the desired length
of pipe for insertion of a proper fitting. Couplings, shear rings and clamps
should be used to fasten the inserted fitting and hold it firmly in place.
         (d)   If another method is desired, a complete detail of the
alternative shall be submitted for review and approval by the City before the
connection is made.
         (e)   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3)
feet of any bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction can be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings. In all buildings in which any building drain
is too low to permit gravity to flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged to the building sewer.
         (f)   1.   All excavations required for the installation of a building
sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Inspector.
Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
Specification C-12-19, and except that no backfill shall be placed until the
work has been inspected by the City. All joints and connections shall be made
gas-tight and water-tight.
            2.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Director of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of an Inspector of the City; any connection made without such
supervision shall be an illegal connection and shall be subject to removal at
owner’s expense. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactorily to the
City.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(g))
§ 50.087 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Inspector.
   (B)   Cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon
approval of the Inspector, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. Except as
hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (A)    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150ºF.
   (B)    Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil, or grease.
   (C)    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (D)    Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0,or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   (H)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant.
   (I)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
   (J)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substance
which shall be in violation of the NPDES permit issued to the City, or shall
otherwise violate any other Federal or State law or regulation relating to
discharges to the sanitary sewer system of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(h))
§ 50.088 GREASE, OIL, SAND AND THE LIKE.
   Grease, oil, sand, and similar type interceptors shall be required as
provided within
Chapter 51 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(i))
§ 50.089 PROHIBITED ADMISSIONS.
   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having:
      (1)   A 5-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per
million by weight, or
      (2)   Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics
described in §
50.087, or
      (3)   having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the City shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Inspector. Where necessary in the opinion of the Inspector, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to, (a)
reduce the Biochemical Oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended
solids to 350 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight, or (b) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents
to within the maximum limits, provided for in §
50.087 or, (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
   (B)   (1)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Inspector and of the Sanitary Water Board of the State of
Illinois, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said
approvals are obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
      (2)   When required by the Inspector, the owner of any property that is
served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
approved by the Inspector. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
      (3)   All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in
accordance with “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage” and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided for herein or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected.
   (C)   (1)   Testing procedures provided herein shall, be consistent with the
October 16, 1973, “Federal Register” 40 C.F.R. Part 136 entitled “Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants”, any Federal
Regulations regarding Pretreatment, and any other appropriate Federal
Regulations.
      (2)   No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby any industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(j))
§ 50.090 PROHIBITIONS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently, break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(k))
§ 50.091 PERMISSION TO ENTER PREMISES.
   The Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, and
testing, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(l))
§ 50.092 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Rates and charges for the use and service of the sewage system of the
City of Mt. Vernon are hereby established as follows:
 
Consumption         Rates
First 1,000 gallons $10.82 minimum charge
Next 1,000 gallons  $11.37 per 1,000 gallons
Next 4,000 gallons  $9.89 per 1,000 gallons
Next 9,000 gallons  $8.39 per 1,000 gallons
Next 35,000 gallons $6.38 per 1,000 gallons
Over 50,000 gallons $5.41 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   Wherever sewer service is supplied to premises outside of the
corporate limits of the City, the rates charged shall be a minimum of $13.37
for the first 1,000 gallons and thereafter shall be 130% times the rates above
set forth for residential use.
   (C)   The foregoing gallonage compilation shall be based upon water service
gallonage of the user; provided, however, that if the user does not receive
city water service, the charges for the use and service of the sewage system
shall be $67.85 per month.
   (D)   Pursuant to Ordinance 2016-27, each of the foregoing rates established
above have been, and are, increased annually by 2% each year, effective on
November 1 beginning 2017; each 2% annual increase enacted by Ordinance 2016-27
shall continue to be expended solely for capital construction projects or for
capital equipment purchases for the Water and/or Sewer Systems of the City.
(The rate increases arising from Ordinance 2016-27 through November 1, 2019 are
reflected within the above rates.)
   (E)   The proceeds from 3% of the rate increase effective on May 1, 2009
enacted by Ordinance 2009-14 and all proceeds from each increase effective
November 1 of 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 enacted by Ordinance 2009-30 shall be
expended solely for capital construction projects or for capital equipment
purchases for the Public Utility Department.
   (F)   In the event that any charge for sewer service shall not be paid
within sixteen (16) days of the rendition of the bill statement therefor, there
shall be added to such charge 10% of the amount thereof as computed on the
above rates as a penalty for late payment.
   (G)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall review the user charges annually and
shall revise them periodically to reflect actual treatment works operation and
maintenance costs.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(m)) (Ord. 2023-19, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 50.093 CHARGES PAYABLE.
   (A)   Charges for sewer service shall be made monthly and shall be payable
sixteen days after rendition. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be charged
on all bills if not paid within sixteen (16) days of rendition as aforesaid.
   (B)   The applicant for sewer service, the occupants of the premises served,
and the user of the sewage system shall be jointly and severally liable to pay
the sewage service charges set forth for services to said premised.
   (C)   (1)   No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises except upon the
application of the owner, the lessee, or occupant of the premises; and proof of
ownership, tenancy, or occupancy may be required by the City before service is
provided. No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises upon any application
submitted after January 1, 1987, unless the premises shall have its street
address properly posted upon the premises in a conspicuous place so that the
address is in plain view and is visible from the street.
      (2)   No City sewer shall be supplied to any premises occupied by any
person who is in default as to any water, sewer or garbage collection charges
due the City regardless of whether said person is the applicant, nor shall any
City water be supplied to any premises upon the application of any applicant
who is in default as to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the
City no matter at which premises said default occurred, until such applicant
has paid such back water charges, sewer charges, and garbage collection charges
in full, including all charges and penalties.
   (D)   The City shall be under no obligation to furnish or to continue to
furnish sewer to any applicant who is in default as to any water, sewer, or
garbage collection charges due the City no matter at which premises said
default occurred, or to any premises occupied by any person who is in default
as to any water, sewer, or garbage collection charges due the City regardless
of whether said person is the applicant, and the City at any time after said
bill or bills become due shall have the full power and authority to enter any
premises and to turn off, disconnect, discontinue or otherwise terminate sewer
service; said sewer service shall not be resumed until all delinquent charges
for water service, sewer service, and garbage collection service are paid in
full.
   (E)   (1)   There shall be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon from its General
Revenue Fund or other revenues available to it, for the use and service of the
sewerage system of the City of Mt. Vernon to the City of Mt. Vernon, user fees
in the amount equal to all amounts of costs for the operation and maintenance
of the sewer collection system and the wastewater treatment system for the
payment of which the user fees collected from other users of the system and
other income of the system shall be insufficient after the payment of all bonds
and other obligations which are pledged from the revenues of the system.
      (2)   Rates and charges to be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon shall
include all amounts required to be collected by the users of the system in
order to comply with the requirements of Ordinance No 75-38.
   (F)   (1)   The foregoing provisions are solely for the benefit of the City
and shall not constitute a defense to sewer, water, or garbage collection
charges for any owner or other person jointly liable for said charges.
      (2)   Except for disconnections effected by the City for reason of
default or other reason, only the applicant in whose name service is provided
or someone on his behalf may demand disconnection of service.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(n))
§ 50.094 TERMINATION.
   Any person who in any manner violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this section or with the orders or
regulations issued by the Department pursuant thereto shall be subjected to
having his sewage service terminated at once without notice, and no person
shall cause sewage service to be resumed, except as authorized by the Director
of Public Works, the Finance Director, or a designee of either and upon payment
of the costs of termination and resumption of service as set by the City. Such
remedies shall be concurrent with all other remedies and penalties provided
herein. The City of Mt. Vernon shall be entitled to recover all costs including
reasonable attorney fees in effecting or defending the remedy provided herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(o))
§ 50.095 DELINQUENT PAYMENT.
   In the event charges, including penalties for water or sewer services, are
not paid on or before the due date of the bill for such services, such charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. Thereafter such
delinquent charges shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such
services are supplied, regardless of whether such service has been supplied
upon the application of the owner, an occupant or other user; provided,
however, that the owner of the real estate shall have no personal liability for
the delinquent charges unless said owner was also the applicant for or user of
the services giving rise to the charges. The Superintendent of Public
Utilities, the Finance Director, or a designee of either is hereby authorized
and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies and claiming
such lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois
after first giving notice of seven (7) days by regular mail of such delinquency
to the owner or occupant of such real estate. The statement of claim shall
contain such information as shall be required for claims for lien for water
services heretofore set forth. The method herein provided for enforcing and
foreclosing the lien for sewer services shall not be considered as excluding
any other method or remedy for collecting such sewer charges but shall be
concurrent with all other remedies and methods. The City shall recover all
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City in effecting
collection for charges for sewer, water, or garbage collection services or
incurred by the City in foreclosing its lien or incurred by the City in
effecting or defending any remedy.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(p))
§ 50.096 FUNDS.
   All revenues derived from the operation of the sewage system shall be held
separate and apart from other funds of the City in compliance with provisions
of any Sewer Revenue Bonds and Ordinances of the City authorizing issuance of
such bonds.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(q))
§ 50.097 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any owner, lessee, or occupant of a premises desiring sewer service
from the City sewer system shall make written application therefor to the
Superintendent. Any person who is not the owner of record of the premises and
who applies for sewer service to said premises shall be required to pay a cash
deposit as heretofore provided within §
50.027.
   (B)   The connection charge for tapping or connecting to a sewer mains shall
be $500.00 per dwelling unit, which sum includes a $25.00 inspection fee
referred to in §
50.086 plus each applicant for a new sewer service which taps or connects to a
sewer main extension constructed hereunder shall also pay an extension
connection charge computed by multiplying the charge per lineal foot times the
lineal front feet of the applicant’s real estate upon the extension; the charge
per lineal foot shall be determined by dividing the total cost of construction
for the extension by the total lineal footage of the extension (or by twice the
lineal footage if the extension may serve property on either side). Relocation
of an existing service shall not constitute a new sewer service, and no
connection charge shall be payable; although the inspection fee shall be
payable.
   (C)   The City may extend sewer mains adjacent to previously unserved
property and may collect the above extension connection charge from the owner
of the previously unserved property upon said owner’s requesting sewer service
for the property. The City of Mt. Vernon may also enter into written agreements
with landowners for the extension by the landowner of sewer mains adjacent to
previously unserved land owned by a third party in order to serve the
landowner’s property; said agreements may provide that the City will collect
the above described lineal foot extension connection charge upon the third
party’s requesting water service for his property fronting on the privately
developed main extension and provided that the City will pay the lineal foot
extension connection charge collected to the landowner, provided however that
no agreement shall be executed unless the landowner provides a verified and
itemized statement of the construction costs, a plat or description of the
extension constructed, and an accurate record of the ownership of each property
adjacent to the extension.
   (D)   The term, DWELLING UNIT shall be defined to mean each premises served
by a service main from a single tap, plus each separate living unit within an
apartment, duplex, or other multiple occupancy building, but as to hotels and
motels only, the term DWELLING UNIT shall be defined to mean each three motel
or hotel rooms. The same connection charges shall be made for each other tap or
connection to a sewer for separate office, commercial, or industrial uses. The
same connection charges shall be made for each restaurant, lounge, or other
separate commercial use at any hotel or motel. Before any new connection is
made, the customer shall deposit with the Department a sum equal to the
connection charges plus any customer deposit which may now or hereafter be
required by any Ordinance of the City. After the deposit of any such sum, the
services may then be installed.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(r))
§ 50.098 HANDLING OF PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
50.087 of this ordinance, and which, in the judgement of the Inspector, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Inspector may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or,
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the following
provisions:
   (B)   In the event that any person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
into the sanitary sewers any wastes containing over 300 parts per million BOD-
5 or 350 parts per million suspended solids content, then that person shall pay
to the City the following surcharges, over and above the regular sewer rates as
set forth in §
50.092:
      (1)    Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or,
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the following
provisions: In the event that any person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the sanitary sewers any wastes containing over 300 parts per
million BOD-5 or 250 parts per million suspended solids content, then that
person shall pay to the City the following surcharges, over and above the
regular sewer rates as set forth in §
50.092:
         (a)   For each pound of BOD-5 in excess of that amount which would be
contained in sewage with a BOD- 5 strength of 300 mg/l, a surcharge rate per
excess pound of BOD-5 as determined by the City Council, which rate shall be
reviewed as often as needed; as of December 1, 2017, the surcharge rate is
$1.25 per excess pound. The surcharge rate shall be due and payable on such
dates as determined by the City Manager.
         (b)   For each pound of Suspended Solids in excess of that amount
which would be contained in sewage with a Suspended Solids strength of 250 mg/
l, a surcharge rate per excess pound of Suspended Solids as determined by the
City Council, which rate shall be reviewed as often as needed; as of December
1, 2017, the surcharge rate is $1.25 per excess pound. The surcharge rate shall
be due and payable on such dates as determined by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(t))
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY
§ 50.110 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY REQUIRED.
   Industrial Cost Recovery Required: Each industrial user shall pay that
portion of any Federal Grant which has been obtained by the City for the
financing of the construction of wastewater treatment works allocable to the
treatment of the wastewater from such user. Such user’s share shall not include
an interest component.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
Editor’s note:
   No Grant outstanding as of December 1, 2017.
§ 50.111 DETERMINATION OF INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   An Industrial user’s portion of any Federal Grant shall be based on the
loadings attributable to wastewater of such user tributary of the wastewater
treatment works of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.112 COST FOR INDUSTRIAL USER.
   The costs to be recovered for an industrial user anywhere within the service
area of the City, shall be determined as follows:
   (A)   For normal strength wastewater (ie: BOD-5 equal to or less than 300
mg/l) and/or suspended solids equal to or less than 250 mg/l an amount for each
l,000 gallons as determined by the City Council.
   (B)   For extra strength wastewater (ie: BOD-5 greater than 300 mg/l and/or
suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l) a surcharge, in addition to (A) above,
shall be charged for each pound of BOD-5 introduced into the sanitary sewer
system in excess of the amount contained at BOD-5 = 300 mg/l at a rate as
determined by the City Council and, for each pound of suspended solids
introduced into the sanitary sewer system in excess of the amount contained at
SS = 250 mg/l at a rate as determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.113 CHARGE FOR INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Each year during the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial
user of the treatment works shall pay the cost recover amount determined for
each industry, divided by the recovery period.
   (B)   Where an industry is connected to a public sewer after the start-up of
the facilities constructed under a Federal Grant for each quarter remaining in
the recovery period, such industry will not be required to pay for those
quarters of the recovery period for connection to a public sewer.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.114 LENGTH OF INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD.
   The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to the useful life of the
sewers or treatment works, which shall be 30 years from the beginning of full
use of the facility.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.115 PAYMENTS AND BILLING PERIODS FOR INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   For the purpose of industrial cost recovery, the year shall be divided into
quarterly periods, said periods to begin on the first day of July, October,
January, and March, and all industrial users of the City of Mt. Vernon shall
pay the cost as determined for industrial cost recovery and such payment shall
be made quarterly on the fifteenth day of the month immediately following the
expiration of the quarterly period for which service has been supplied, and
such charge shall be payable within ten (10) days after rendition thereof, and
in the event such bills are not paid within said ten (10) days, a service
charge of ten percent (.10010) shall be added thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.116 DELINQUENCY AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   In the event the charges for industrial cost recovery are not paid
within ten days after the rendition of that bill, then such service charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such
delinquent charge shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such
sewer services were supplied.
   (B)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed each quarter to file
sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Jefferson County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements shall be
deemed notice of a lien for the payment of such charges for sewer service. If
the delinquency in the payment of the recovery cost continues for a period of
more than sixty (60) days, the sewer service shall be discontinued.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.117 TIME OF FIRST PAYMENT.
   The initial payment made by an industrial user which is connected to a
public sewer after the start-up of the treatment works or sewer line
constructed with a Federal Grant, shall be made by the next scheduled due date
as defined above and shall be equal to one quarter of the amount due.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.118 ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGE DUE TO PLANT IMPROVEMENT UTILIZING FEDERAL GRANT
FUNDS.
   If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works utilizing a
Federal Grant, each existing industrial user’s share shall be adjusted
accordingly.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.119 NO CHARGE FOR UNUSED OR UNRESERVED CAPACITY.
   An Industrial user’s portion of any Federal Grant shall not include any
portion of the grant amount allocable to unused or reserved capacity.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.120 COMMITMENT FOR INCREASED USE.
   An industrial user’s portion of any Federal Grant shall include allowance
for the cost of any firm commitment to the City of Mt. Vernon for any increased
use by such user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.121 PAYMENT TO UNITED STATES OF AMERICA REQUIRED.
   The City of Mt. Vernon shall retain fifty percent (50%) of the amounts
recovered from industrial users. The remainder, together with any interest
earned thereon, shall be returned to the Treasury of the United States Anti-
Pollution Fund on an annual basis.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.122 DISPOSITION OF RETAINED AMOUNTS.
   (A)   Eighty percent (80%) of the retained amounts, together with interest
earned thereon, shall be used solely for the eligible cost of the expansion or
reconstruction of treatment works associated with the project and necessary to
meet the requirements of the Federal Act and the State of Illinois.
   (B)   (1)   The City of Mt. Vernon, prior to commitment of the retained
amounts, shall obtain written approval of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency for any expansion or reconstruction.
      (2)   The remainder of the retained amounts may be used for such
expenditures as the City deems appropriate.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.123 INVESTMENT OF RETAINED AMOUNTS REQUIRED.
   Pending use, the grantee shall invest the retained amounts for
reconstruction and expansion in:
   (A)   obligations of the U.S. Government, or
   (B)   obligation guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S.
Government or any agency thereof, or
   (C)   shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by
obligations of the U.S. Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to
principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.124 CITY CLERK’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The City Clerk shall maintain the necessary records for determination of
user share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection services.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.125 CITY TREASURER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The City Treasurer or Finance Director shall be responsible for the
investment and expenditure of all monies collected for industrial cost
recovery.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.126 MONITORING REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Council shall maintain a program of monitoring industrial
user discharges as the City Council deems necessary, provided that any major
contributing industry shall be monitored no less than twelve (12) times
annually. All other industrial users shall be monitored at such frequency as
deemed necessary by the City Council for determination of the population
equivalent of the industrial user. The monitoring data collected shall be used
to determine industrial cost recovery surcharge.
   (B)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Section shall
be served by the City of Mt. Vernon with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.7(u))
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter 50 shall be liable to the City of Mt. Vernon for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the City of Mt. Vernon by reason of such violation; said
person shall also be liable for reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City
to recover any expense, loss, or damage or incurred to compel compliance with
Chapter 50. The provisions of this Section shall be in addition to any other
penalty or provision provided within
Chapter 50.
(Prior Code, Art. 16, § 16.8)
CHAPTER 51: FATS, OILS, GREASES AND OTHER SUBSTANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Scope and purpose
   
51.002   Prohibited discharge
   
51.003   Solvents prohibited
Fats, Oils, Greases and Food Wastes
   
51.015   Definitions
   
51.016   Grease interceptor or trap requirements
   
51.017   Variance
   
51.018   Best management practices
   
51.019   Grease interceptor and trap cleaning and maintenance requirements
   
51.020   Grease interceptor and grease trap maintenance, record keeping and
grease removal
   
51.021   Right of entry and inspection
Sand, Soil and Oil
   
51.035   Sand, soil and oil interceptors
Gasoline, Oil and Flammable Liquids
   
51.050   Gas and oil interceptors
Laundries
   
51.065   Interceptors
Bottle Establishments, Slaughterhouses and
Other Commercial Establishments
   
51.080   Bottling establishments
   
51.081   Slaughterhouses
   
51.082   Sand interceptors in commercial establishment
   
51.083   General requirements
   
51.084   Maintenance
Enforcement and Remedies
   
51.095   Suspension of services
   
51.096   Notice of violation
   
51.097   Administrative penalty
   
51.098   Recovery of costs
   
51.099   Fines
   
Appendix A:    Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance Record Verification Form
   
Appendix B:    Waste Hauler Manifest Form
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   The scope and purpose of this Ordinance is to aid in the prevention of
sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulations
of fats, oils, greases and other substances into the sanitary sewer system from
industrial or commercial establishments or other users, particularly food
preparation and serving facilities, as the discharge of fats, oils, greases and
other substances into the sanitary sewer system interfere with the operations
of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with normal
operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or
form that is beyond the treatment capability of the sewer treatment plant.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A)
§ 51.002 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.
   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no user shall discharge any
water or wastewater containing non-emulsified fats, wax, grease or oils, in
excess of one-hundred parts per million by weight (100 mg/L) or containing any
substance which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and
150° Fahrenheit.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IA)
§ 51.003 SOLVENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The use of degreasing or line cleaning products containing petroleum
based solvents, or containing any solvent, caustic, or acid which dissolves
grease or containing any enzyme or any chemical or other agent which dissolve
grease is prohibited, regardless of whether same is added directly into the
grease trap or grease interceptor or same is added to floor drains or other
kitchen fixtures. All such solvents are also prohibited for use with any oil
and water separator or other separator.
   (B)   Bacteria or other microbial agents which contain no other prohibited
agent may be used only if such agent does not interfere with the performance of
the grease trap or grease interceptor. The use of such agents is prohibited if
there is any sign that the use of the agent is interfering with the grease
trap’s or grease interceptor’s performance. Prima facie signs of such
interference include:
      (1)   The use of any such agent is accompanied by an emulsification of
oil and/or grease in the grease trap that causes a shift in the consistency of
the grease contents from a stratified layer with a dense greasy crust on top to
an almost uniform pancake batter-like consistency.
      (2)   The use of any such agent is accompanied by an accumulation of
grease or the appearance of free-floating oil or grease downstream of the
grease trap.
      (3)   The use of any such agent is accompanied by any end-of-pipe grab
sample result for fats, oils and greases above the instantaneous maximum
concentration limit of 100 mg/L.
    (C)   Any user utilizing bacteria or microbial agent shall remain
responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease numerical limit
and responsible for maintaining an effective volume of the interceptor or
separator. Any user utilizing biological additives must notify the City not
less than 30-days prior to such use and must provide the manufacturer’s
Material Safety Data Sheets, and submit a report with product name, quantity
purchased, date purchased, and dosage to be used for such additives. In
addition, during all periods of use, a maintenance record of the use of such
agent must be maintained showing the date and dosage each time an additive is
used. The exclusive use of biological additives is not an acceptable grease
management or maintenance practice. Bacteria or microbial agents shall not be
employed as the sole method of treating or maintaining a grease trap’s or
interceptor’s effluent. The use of any bacteria or microbial agent shall not
excuse compliance with each and every other provision of this Ordinance,
including the installation and maintenance of the required grease interceptor
or trap and all provisions relating thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IB)
FATS, OILS, GREASES AND FOOD WASTES
§ 51.015 DEFINITIONS.
   In the interpretation and application of this Section the following words
and phrases shall have the indicated meanings:
   COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments which are primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption
foodstuffs and which use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing,
rotisserie cooking, broiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also
included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food
preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a
receptacle that requires washing. COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS do not include those
establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of pre-cooked foodstuffs
that do not include any form of cooking, nor do cooking establishments include
cold dairy and frozen foodstuff preparation and serving establishments.
   EPA 2 PROCEDURE FORMULA. (# of seats)X(storage factor-SF)X1/2 # of hours
open = interceptor volume (gal)
 
Storage Factor  SF
0—8 hours/day 1
8—16 hours/day2
16—24 hours/da3
Example: 50 seat restaurant open 24 hours/day - calculation: (50)X(3)X 1/2
(24)=1,800 gal interceptor
 
   EXISTING STRUCTURES. Any structure constructed prior to July 1, 2005 for
which no structural renovation or addition has been made subsequent to August
1, 2005.
   FOOD WASTE GRINDER OR DISPOSAL. A device which shreds or grinds up solid or
semi-solid waste materials into smaller portions.
   GREASE. Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources
that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are
detectible and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the
United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 C.F.R. 136, as may be amended from
time to time; said definition includes fats, oils and greases.   
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. An interceptor whose rated flow exceeds 55 gallons per
minute and is located outside the building.
   GREASE TRAP. An interceptor whose rated flow is not less than 20 gallons per
minute nor more than 55 gallons per minute and is typically located inside the
building.
   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed to separate and retain for
removal, by automatic or manual means, deleterious, hazardous or undesirable
matter from normal wastes while permitting normal sewage or waste to discharge
in to the drainage system by gravity.
   MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET. A fact sheet developed by manufacturers for all
products that contain a chemical. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) include
brand-specific information such as physical data (solid, liquid, color, melting
point, flash point, etc.), health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage,
handling, disposal, personal protection and spill/leak procedures.
   MINIMUM DESIGN CAPACITY OR CAPABILITY. The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewer.
   USER.
      (1)   Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the City, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the sanitary sewer, including persons who
contribute such wastewater from mobile sources such as those who discharge
hauled wastewater.
      (2)   For purposes of this Ordinance only, USER does not include an owner
or occupant of a single family or multi-family dwelling used solely for
residential use unless said dwelling experiences a grease or similar blockage
or problem within its service line or within an adjoining sewer main more than
twice during any 12-month period.
   WASTE HAULER. An entity which transfers wastes from the site of a user to an
approved site for disposal or treatment. The waste hauler, in addition to the
user, is responsible for insuring that all federal, state and local regulations
are followed regarding waste transport and disposal.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIA)
§ 51.016 GREASE INTERCEPTOR OR TRAP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Upon any new construction or renovation subsequent to July 1, 2005,
all sewer users, including but not limited to all restaurants, cafeterias,
hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons,
jails, churches, camps, caterers, bakery, butcher shops, and meat or food
processors, who discharge fats, oils or greases shall install, maintain and
properly operate a grease interceptor whose rated flow equals or exceeds 100
gallons or meets the rate of flow required by EPA 2 Procedure Formula,
whichever is greater. If the EPA 2 Procedure Formula calculation requires a
grease interceptor in a size greater than 2,000 gallons then multiple
interceptors in a series shall be installed for each 2,000 gallons required or
part thereof.
   (B)   All sewer users occupying and utilizing an existing structure,
including but not limited to all restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels,
hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches,
camps, caterers, bakery, butcher shops, and meat or food processors, who
discharge fats, oils or greases shall be required to install on or before
January 1, 2006 a grease interceptor which meets or exceeds the requirements
for new construction and renovation unless said user at said existing structure
either (i) currently meets the requirements stated within paragraph (A) above
or (ii) obtains a variance under §
51.017 herein and thereafter installs a grease trap(s) meeting the following
trap requirements and also strictly complies with “Best Management Practices”
hereinafter set forth within §
51.018:
      (1)   the minimum size of a grease trap installed on the same floor as
the fixture shall have one-half of the liquid holding capacity of the fixture.
      (2)   A grease trap located on a floor beneath the fixture shall have 60%
of the liquid holding capacity of the fixture. To determine the liquid holding
capacity in gallons of a plumbing fixture, multiply the length by the width, by
the height in inches, and divide by 231.
      (3)   The grease trap must have a flow restrictor which is fully
operational and the grease trap must be fully functional and operating at all
times.
      (4)    Where 2 or more sinks or receptacles are connected to a trap the
liquid holding capacity shall be based on the combined volume of the fixture
served.
      (5)   The fact that a grease trap or traps are currently installed at an
existing establishment shall not excuse an establishment from meeting the
requirements of paragraph (A) if no physical barrier or restraint prevents
same.
   (C)   All cooking establishments subject of the provisions of this
Ordinance, whether new construction or renovation or existing structures shall
implement and strictly comply with the “Best Management Practices” hereinafter
set forth.
   (D)   Grease interceptors or traps shall be constructed of durable,
corrosion resistant materials and shall have watertight covers fastened in
place.
   (E)   No grease interceptor or trap shall receive the discharge from a food
waste grinder or disposal.
   (F)   No grease interceptor or trap shall receive the discharge from a
dishwashing machine except as hereinafter provided. No dishwasher shall be
discharged into any grease trap nor into any grease interceptor less than 100
gallons in size. In addition, no dishwasher shall be discharged into any grease
interceptor 100 gallons or larger, except as may be provided by the State of
Illinois Plumbing Code, provided, however, that not-withstanding any other
language herein dishwasher may be discharged into any grease interceptor 100
gallons or larger if said grease interceptor shall be separate and apart from
all other grease interceptors required by this Ordinance and shall serve and
receive discharge only from the dishwasher and no other source. All new
construction beginning on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be
required to install and provide a separate grease interceptor as provided
herein for all dishwashers and, in addition, any user having a dishwasher which
experiences a grease or similar blockage or problem within its service line or
within an adjoining sewer main shall be required to install and provide a
separate grease interceptor as provided herein for all dishwashers.
   (G)   The flow rate of the interceptor or trap shall be sufficient to handle
the maximum demand of the connected system.
   (H)   Each grease interceptor shall be so installed and connected that it
shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of
the intercepted grease.
   (I)   Each interceptor or trap shall be designed and installed with proper
venting so that it does not become air bound.
   (J)   An effluent sampling port shall be provided at the exit pipe for each
interceptor so that the interceptor effluent can be sampled prior to combining
with other untreated flows. Said sampling port shall be not less than 8” in
diameter.
   (K)   Water-cooled grease interceptors or traps are prohibited.
   (L)   In areas where additional weight loads may exist the grease
interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load bearing capacity.
   (M)   No water or wastewater in excess of 140° Fahrenheit shall be
discharged into any grease trap or interceptor; no discharge effluent shall be
greater than 85° Fahrenheit.
   (N)   No non-grease laden source shall be connected to any interceptor or
trap or to any line intended for grease interceptor service.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIB)
§ 51.017 VARIANCE.
   (A)   Grease interceptors required under this Ordinance shall be installed
unless the City Building Inspector authorizes the installation of a grease trap
or other alternative pre-treatment technology after determination that the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. The user bears the burden
of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor in not feasible.
The City Building Inspector may authorize the installation of a grease trap
where the installation of a grease interceptor is not possible due to physical
barriers, physical constraints, space constraints or other considerations not
within control of user and not subject to feasible correction or remedy.If an
establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible
because of documented space constraints, a written request for a grease trap or
alternate grease removal device shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available
exterior space outside building; and
      (2)   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all
services at that site.
   (B)   Alternate pre-treatment technology includes but is not limited to
devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and
prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system.
   (C)   (1)   A user of an existing structure subject to the provisions of
this Ordinance which is not a cooking establishment and which demonstrates that
the discharge from its food service and/or preparation activities contain less
than 100 mg/L of grease may receive a variance from minimum sizing requirements
or installation and maintenance requirements.
      (2)   The sampling and testing to demonstrate the concentration of grease
in the discharge must be conducted annually at times selected by City, all at
the user’s expense, by an independent testing organization and measured in
accordance with the analytical test procedures established in 40 C.F.R. 136 as
amended from time to time.
   (D)   No variance shall be granted to any new construction. Each user
granted a variance shall implement and comply with Best Management Practices to
the extent that same are applicable to user’s activities. Variances are not to
be liberally granted and shall be denied absent strict compliance with variance
requirements.
   (E)   (1)   The user seeking the variance shall submit a written request to
the City Building Inspector, which written request shall include sufficient
technical data provided by the manufacturer of the grease trap or alternate
pre-treatment technology, including but not limited to capacity, operation and
maintenance so as to permit a thorough review of the request for variance.
      (2)   Granted variances shall be valid only for the use proposed by the
user and the variance shall be non-transferable. The variance shall be rendered
null and void in the event of the transfer of ownership of the user’s
establishment or any change in the methods of operation by user.
      (3)   Failure to strictly implement and comply with Best Management
Practices shall also render a variance null and void.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIC)
§ 51.018 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   All cooking establishments subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
any user who utilizes a grease trap or who receives a variance shall implement
and strictly comply with the following management practices:
   (A)   All kitchen staff shall be trained in management practices and methods
to reduce the volume of grease discharged into the sanitary sewer system. No
foods, fats, cooking oil or grease shall be emptied or placed into any sink,
drain, floor drain, dishwasher or other drain. All food wastes, food scraps and
food scrapes shall be disposed of as solid waste in a trash can or dumpster.
   (B)   All cooking oils shall be discarded into containers for recycling and
shall be disposed of by a recycling facility; receipts and records evidencing
such disposal shall be maintained for 3-years by the cooking establishment and
made available to City Inspectors upon request.
   (C)   Oil and grease recycle containers shall be placed in a location
convenient for the employees or agents of user to place the oil into the
container.
   (D)   “No Grease” signs shall be posted above each sink, on dishwashers,
over each drain, and near all other potential grease discharge points.
   (E)   All foods, fats, cooking oil and grease remaining in pots and pans
shall be dry-wiped and scraped out into the trash container or dumpster.
   (F)   No food waste disposal or grinder shall be utilized. All food scrapes
and food wastes shall be disposed as solid waste in a trash container or
dumpster.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IID)
§ 51.019 GREASE INTERCEPTOR AND TRAP CLEANING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A grease interceptor or trap shall be considered to be at its maximum
level and shall not be considered operative if the grease layer and solids
(sludge pocket) combined measures 50% of the depth of the interceptor or trap;
a grease interceptor or trap shall be considered in operating condition only if
the combined measurement of the grease layer and solids is less than 50% of the
total interior depth measurement of the interceptor or trap. In no event shall
the grease layer extend below the bottom of the effluent tee regardless of the
depth of the grease layer.
   (B)   All grease interceptors and grease traps shall be routinely and
regularly cleaned and inspected to insure proper operation. If the grease level
is at its maximum, the grease interceptor or trap shall be immediately cleaned
or discharge into same shall be prohibited. If any grease interceptor or trap
is determined to be at its maximum upon inspection then cleaning frequencies
shall be increased. A grease trap or interceptor is recommended to be cleaned
when the grease layer and solids combined measure 30% of the depth of the
grease interceptor or trap.
   (C)   The on-duty manager of user must witness all cleaning of grease traps
and interceptors to insure that the cleaning is performed completely and
properly. To properly clean a grease interceptor the entire contents must be
removed, including grease layer cap (floating grease) and sludge pocket
(settled solids); failure to remove the sludge pocket (settled solids) from the
bottom will result in lower capacity and reduced detention. The manager must
also be sure removable baffles are replaced after cleaning.
   (D)   Grease interceptors shall be cleaned by removing the grease layer,
solids layer, and water; the sides and bottom of the grease interceptor shall
be cleaned with a scraper and all tees, baffles, and the bottom shall be
inspected for problems. All water shall be removed from the grease interceptor
and shall be replaced with clean water and no water which has been skimmed or
pumped from the grease interceptor or from any other grease interceptor shall
be reintroduced back into the grease interceptor. Separator trucks which pump
the contents of the grease trap into the truck, separate the water layer from
the fats, oil and grease and then returns water into the grease trap are
prohibited.
   (E)   The grease interceptors during maintenance must be inspected and great
care must be taken to insure that the baffles are in place and properly
positioned.
   (F)    The cover of the grease interceptor must fit properly so it does not
leak. All in-ground interceptors should be examined for cracks which could
allow wastewater to leak out or groundwater to leak in.
   (G)   Maintenance and cleaning records shall be kept in strict accordance
with §
51.020 below.
   (H)   Upon any grease interceptor or grease trap being inspected by the City
and upon it being determined that the grease interceptor or trap shall be at
its maximum level the user shall be immediately subject to all remedies
provided within §§
51.095 through
51.099 of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIE)
§ 51.020 GREASE INTERCEPTOR AND GREASE TRAP MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING AND
GREASE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Subject to §
51.019(A) and (B) above, all grease interceptors and grease traps shall be
serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as often as required in order
to maintain minimum design capacity and effective volume of grease interceptor,
provided that in all events grease interceptors shall be inspected at least
once each week and grease traps shall be inspected at least once each day. In
addition to the above requirements, a grease trap shall be serviced and emptied
within one hour of a written notice from the City Building Inspector to clean
same and a grease interceptor shall be serviced and emptied within 24-hours of
a written notice from the City Building Inspector to clean same.
   (B)   A maintenance record in the form (Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance
Record Verification Form) designated within Appendix A to this Ordinance shall
be maintained by the user indicating maintenance and cleaning of grease
interceptors and traps. The record shall indicate: each date and time of
inspection and/or cleaning; each date and time of cleaning or maintenance; name
of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing
cleaning or maintenance; estimated volume of grease removed; method of grease
disposal; verification signed by owner or manager of user. The maintenance
record shall be maintained for a period of 3-years and shall be available for
inspection by the City. In addition, the Grease Interceptor/Trap Maintenance
Record Verification Form shall be filed with the City Inspection Office on a
regular and recurring basis not less often than quarterly.
   (C)   In addition, all users shall complete, obtain and maintain signed
copies of a Waste Hauler Manifest in the form designated within Appendix B to
this Ordinance for each time that the grease interceptor is cleaned. The user
shall certify that its representative witnessed the grease interceptor being
cleaned or that user inspected the interceptor afterward to insure that the
interceptor was cleaned properly. The Manifest shall be signed by the user and
shall also be required to be signed by a representative of the organization
that receives the grease from the hauler, after the Manifest has been signed by
the user, the hauler and the disposal entity, a copy of the Manifest shall be
filed with the City Inspection and Building Department within 5-days of the
interceptor being cleaned.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIF)
§ 51.021 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   The City Building Inspector or his authorized designees shall have such
right of entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine
compliance with this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IIG)
SAND, SOIL AND OIL
§ 51.035 SAND, SOIL AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, automobile
dealerships, other similar businesses that have any type of automotive or
equipment washing facilities, and other users who are a source of sand, soil
and oil shall install effective sand, soil and oil interceptors. SAND
INTERCEPTOR shall mean a concrete or other approved structure installed outside
a building designed to collect sand, grit or other inorganic particles prior to
admission to the sanitary sewer. Such interceptors shall be sized to
effectively remove sand, soil and oil at the expected flow rates. These
interceptors shall be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the
wastewater collection and treatment system of the City. Any owner or operator
whose interceptor is deemed to be ineffective shall be required to change the
cleaning frequency or to increase the size of the interceptor. Owners or
operators of washing facilities shall have an affirmative duty to prevent the
inflow of rainwater into the sanitary sewers.
   (B)   In all motor vehicles wash racks drainage shall discharge into
watertight catch basin at least 36” in diameter or 3’ x 2-1/2” rectangular
shape. The bottom shall be not less than 27” below the invert of the outlet
pipe. The outlet pipe shall be trapped with a catch basin trap and shall be of
cast iron or schedule 40 PVC with a seal of at least 6” and a clean out of
least 4”.
   (C)   Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an
operative sand, soil and oil interceptor which met all applicable laws and
standards at time of installation and which effectively collects sand, grit,
oil, and other inorganic particles so as to prevent entry of same into the
sanitary sewer may, upon request to and approval of the City Building
Inspector, continue to use said existing interceptor until such approval shall
be revoked for cause, including but not limited to inadequate maintenance,
failure to maintain or clean, disrepair, change of standards, discharge of
sand, soil or oil into the sanitary sewer, inadequate capacity, or blockage
within the sewer line or main.
   (D)   A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating
maintenance and cleaning of the sand, soil and oil interceptor. The record
shall indicate each date and time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and
time of cleaning or maintenance; name of person performing cleaning or
maintenance; name of person witnessing cleaning or maintenance; estimated
volume of sand, soil, oil, and other materials removed; method of disposal of
the sand, soil, oil, and other materials removed, and verification signed by
the owner and manager of the user. The maintenance records shall be filed with
the City Inspection Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often
than quarterly; maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and
shall be available for inspection by the City. The City Building Inspection or
his authorized designee shall have such right of entry and inspection as may be
necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § III)
GASOLINE, OIL AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
§ 51.050 GAS AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   Commercial vehicle repair garages and gasoline stations with grease racks or
pits, storage garages, enclosed parking garages, fire stations, emergency
vehicle garages, and all facilities which generate oil and/or flammable waste
shall be provided with floor drains or trench drains connected to an approved
gas and oil interceptor. Residential garages with floor drains shall have a gas
and oil interceptor if they have four (4) or more vehicle bays or exceed 900
square feet in size.
   (A)   General Requirements.
      (1)   Gas and oil interceptors shall be of cast iron, steel,
polyethylene, polymer concrete or equally durable fiberglass materials suitable
for gas and oil fiberglass interceptors shall not be used for receiving any
substance other than gas and oil. Poured concrete interceptors are prohibited.
      (2)   Each interceptor or basin shall be provided with a heavy metal
cover which shall be bolted into place and made gas and watertight.
      (3)   Each interceptor and, if provided with separate compartments, each
compartment and basin shall be provided with a vent of at least two 2”, which
shall extend independently to the outer air. Two or more vents may be connected
to a header which shall be 6” or higher than the lowest floor drain served.
      (4)   The inlet of the interceptor or the first basin shall be trapped
except when floor drains are individually trapped.
      (5)   Floor drains above the level of the interceptor or basins shall
connect to a separate stack vent.
      (6)   Interceptors must be constructed in accordance with the Illinois
State Fire Marshal’s rules and regulations for underground storage tanks (41
Ill. Adm. Code 174), where applicable, and shall be maintained to prevent loss
of gas, oil, etc. interceptors utilizing an automatic draw off feature must
install a separate U.L. approved underground storage tank or storage tank
integral with the interceptor.
      (7)   Minimum Dimension. Oil interceptors shall have a depth of at least
2’ below the invert of the discharge drain.
      (8)   Performance. The oil interceptor shall have at least a 12” water
seal with a minimum 90 percent efficiency rating or have a minimum of an 18”
water seal. Gas and oil in the effluent from the interceptor or triple basin
shall not exceed the levels specified by the sewage treatment authority having
jurisdiction, as promulgated by local ordinances and regulations.
      (9)   Trench drains shall be of cast iron, steel, polymer concrete or
fiberglass material comparable to schedule 40 PVC. Poured concrete trench
drains for gas/oil discharges are prohibited.
   (B)   Commercial Requirements. For all commercial facilities specified in
this Section, a minimum of one (1) floor drain for each 500 square feet shall
be installed. Where trench drains are used to carry wastes to the gas/oil
interceptor, the trench drain shall either extend the entire length of the work
(stall) area or shall be installed in each working stall. Continuous trench
drains shall have a trapped and vented opening no less than every 40 lineal
feet. Intermittent trench drains shall be treated as individual floor drains
and shall meet the trap and venting requirements for floor drains. Floor drains
for such areas shall be provided with an interceptor or a series of three (3)
basins before discharging into the building drainage system.
   (C)   Sizing.
      (1)   Motor Vehicle Servicing. Interceptors are required for motor
vehicle servicing areas. The minimum size interceptor shall be six (6) cubic
feet (45 gallons) for the first 100 square feet of garage floor area plus one
(1) cubic foot for each additional 100 square feet to be drained into the
interceptor. (One (1) cubic foot equals seven and one-half (72 gallons.)
      (2)   The minimum size interceptor for all facilities, except those
facilities required to conform to subsection (C)(1) of this Section, shall be
six (6) cubic feet (45 gallons) for the first 500 square feet of floor area
plus one (1) cubic foot per each additional 500 square feet to be drained into
the interceptor.
   (D)   (1)   Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an
operative gasoline and oil interceptor which met all applicable laws and
standards at time of installation and which effectively collects gasoline and
oil so as to prevent entry of same into the sanitary sewer may, upon request to
and approval of the City Building Inspector, continue to use said existing
interceptor until such approval shall be revoked for cause, including but not
limited to inadequate maintenance, failure to maintain or clean, disrepair,
change of standards, discharge of gas and oil into the sanitary sewer,
inadequate capacity, or blockage within the sewer line or main.
      (2)   (a)   A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user
indicating maintenance and cleaning of the gas and oil interceptor. The record
shall indicate each date and time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and
time of cleaning or maintenance; name of person performing cleaning or
maintenance; name of person witnessing cleaning or maintenance; estimated
volume of gas and oil and other materials removed; method of disposal of the
gas and oil and other materials removed, and verification signed by the owner
and manager of the user.
         (b)   The maintenance records shall be filed with the City Inspection
Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often than quarterly;
maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and shall be
available for inspection by the City.
         (c)   The City Building Inspection or his authorized designee shall
have such right of entry and inspection as may be necessary for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine
compliance with this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § IVA)
LAUNDRIES
§ 51.065 INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor having a
removable wire basket or similar device that will prevent passage into the
sewage system of solids 2 inch or larger in size such as string, rags, coins,
buttons or other solids detrimental to the system, hereinafter called
PROHIBITED SOLIDS.
   (B)   Any user occupying and utilizing an existing structure having an
operative prohibited solids interceptor which met all applicable laws and
standards at time of installation and which effectively collects prohibited
solids so as to prevent entry of same into the sanitary sewer may, upon request
to and approval of the City Building Inspector, continue to use said existing
interceptor until such approval shall be revoked for cause, including but not
limited to inadequate maintenance, failure to maintain or clean, disrepair,
change of standards, discharge of prohibited solids into the sanitary sewer,
inadequate capacity, or blockage within the sewer line or main.
   (C)   A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating
maintenance and cleaning of the prohibited solids interceptor. The record shall
indicate each date and time of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of
cleaning or maintenance; name of person performing cleaning or maintenance;
name of person witnessing cleaning or maintenance; estimated volume of
prohibited solids and other materials removed; method of disposal of the
prohibited solids and other materials removed, and verification signed by the
owner and manager of the user. The maintenance records shall be filed with the
City Inspection Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often than
quarterly; maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and
shall be available for inspection by the City. The City Building Inspection or
his authorized designee shall have such right of entry and inspection as may be
necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § V)
BOTTLE ESTABLISHMENTS, SLAUGHTERHOUSES AND OTHER
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 51.080 BOTTLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Bottling plants shall discharge processed wastes into an interceptor that
will provide for the separation of broken glass or other solids before
discharging wastes into the sewer system.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIA)
§ 51.081 SLAUGHTERHOUSES.
   Slaughtering room and dressing room drains shall be equipped with
interceptors that meet or exceed the requirements set forth within the
provisions of this Ordinance relating to fats, oils, greases, and food wastes.
In addition, slaughtering room and dressing room drains shall be equipped with
interceptors or separators which shall prevent the discharge into the sewer
system of feathers, trimmings, entrails and other materials that cause
clogging.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIB)
§ 51.082 SAND INTERCEPTORS IN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.
   Any commercial establishment which discharges or may discharge heavy solids
into the sanitary sewer not otherwise regulated by a provision of this
Ordinance or other more restrictive local, State or federal law or rule shall
install sand or similar interceptor that will prevent the discharge of heavy
solids into the sewer system. Sand and similar interceptors for heavy solids
shall be designed and located so as to be prevent discharge of heavy solids
into the sanitary sewer and at a minimum shall meet the requirements of Section
III herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIC)
§ 51.083 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Interceptors and separators shall be designed so as to not to become air
bound where tight covers are utilized. Each interceptors and separator shall be
vented where subject to a loss of trap seal. Access shall be provided to each
interceptor and separator for service and maintenance. Interceptors and
separators shall be maintained by periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum,
oil or other floating substances and solids deposited in the interceptor or
separator.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VID)
§ 51.084 MAINTENANCE.
   A maintenance record shall be maintained by the user indicating maintenance
and cleaning of the interceptor. The record shall indicate each date and time
of inspection and/or cleaning; each day and time of cleaning or maintenance;
name of person performing cleaning or maintenance; name of person witnessing
cleaning or maintenance; estimated volume of materials removed; method of
disposal of the materials removed, and verification signed by the owner and
manager of the user. The maintenance records shall be filed with the City
Inspection Department on a regular and recurring basis not less often than
quarterly; maintenance records shall be maintained for a 3-year period and
shall be available for inspection by the City. The City Building Inspection or
his authorized designee shall have such right of entry and inspection as may be
necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing to determine compliance with this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIE)
ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
§ 51.095 SUSPENSION OF SERVICES.
   (A)   The City may suspend water and/or sewer service when such suspension
is necessary in the opinion of the City Manager, in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which may (i) present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; (ii) cause
stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the
sanitary sewer collection system; (iii) cause interference to the City’s sewer
treatment facility; (iv) cause the City to violate any condition of its NPDES
permit or (v) when necessary to prevent the repeated violation of this
Ordinance by a user, a repeated violation being defined as two violations of
any provision of this Ordinance as determined by the Building Inspector during
any 12-month period.
   (B)   If reasonably possible after consideration of the circumstances a user
shall be notified of the City’s intent to suspend water and sewer service prior
to such suspension. Any person notified of a suspension of water and sewer
service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a
failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediately termination of
water or sewer service to the user. The City shall reinstate the water or sewer
service only when such conditions causing the suspension have passed or have
been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the City Inspector within 15-days of
the date of the occurrence.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIIA)
§ 51.096 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Except where the provisions of this Ordinance relating to suspension of
services is applicable, the City shall serve upon any user alleged to be in
violation of this Ordinance a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. Within 5-days of the date of notice the user shall correct the
violation or if the violation cannot reasonably be corrected within said 5-day
period then within said 5-day period the user shall submit a plan for the
satisfactory correction of the violation to the City Inspection Department.
Multiple notices of the same violation shall be considered repeat violations
which may result in suspension of services.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIIB)
§ 51.097 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY.
   Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the City, any
user who is found to have violated any provision of this Ordinance or any
notice issued hereunder may be assessed an administrative penalty not to exceed
$50.00 per violation. Each day on which non-compliance shall occur or shall
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessment
shall be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and shall be
subject to collection in the same manner as all other charges for sewer
service. The administrative penalty described herein shall be imposed by the
City Manager upon the written recommendation of the Chief Building Inspector of
the City. Notice of the imposition of the administrative penalty shall be given
to the user immediately upon said administrative penalty being imposed.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIIC)
§ 51.098 RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   If the City is required to clean out or replace the public sewer line or
repair or replace any pump or other equipment of the public sewer as a result
of stoppage resulting from poorly maintained or operating grease interceptor or
grease trap or lack thereof or because of any violation of this Ordinance the
user shall be required to refund to City the labor, equipment, materials and
overhead costs incurred by the City. Said costs shall be added to the user’s
next scheduled sewer service charge and shall be subject to collection in the
same manner as all other charges for sewer service. Nothing in this Section
shall be construed to prohibit or restrict any other remedy the City has under
this Ordinance or State or federal law.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIID)
§ 51.099 FINES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00 for each offense. Each
day that a violation of a provision of this Ordinance occurs shall be
considered a separate offense. In addition to the imposition of a fine, any
violator of any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to issuance of an
injunction to restrain violations of the Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, § VIIE)
APPENDIX A: GREASE INTERCEPTOR/TRAP MAINTENANCE RECORD VERIFICATION FORM
User Name:
______________________________________________________________________
Address:
_________________________________________________________________________
DATE                                                           USER
     CLEANED/     WITNESSED BY GALLONS PUMPED/ GREASE DISPOSAL VERIFICATION
TIME INSPECTED BY              REMOVED         SITE/HAULER     SIGNATURE
DATE                                                           USER
     CLEANED/     WITNESSED BY GALLONS PUMPED/ GREASE DISPOSAL VERIFICATION
TIME INSPECTED BY              REMOVED         SITE/HAULER     SIGNATURE

                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
 
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, App. A)
APPENDIX B: WASTE HAULER MANIFEST FORM
   The purpose of this form is to track the grease that is removed from a
user’s establishment. It is a standard form that helps all FSF’s record the
volume of grease that is being pumped and removed from their facility. It also
helps to ensure that the grease is disposed to a proper location.
INSTRUCTIONS TO USER REPRESENTATIVE: An authorized representative for the User
shall fill out all information requested in the top box of the form. The
business address shall be the physical address and not a post office box. The
User representative shall sign and date the form when the waste is removed
certifying that the waste being removed contains no hazardous material.**
INSTRUCTIONS TO WASTE HAULER: The driver of the service vehicle is considered
an authorized representative for the waste hauler. The driver shall fill in
requested information regarding the waste hauler in the second box of the
manifest and shall complete the certification regarding the nature of the waste
removed. The address shall be the mailing address of the waste hauler. The
driver shall maintain possession of the manifest until the waste is discharged
at a qualified disposal site. The waste hauler shall then give the form to the
disposal site representative to complete.
INSTRUCTIONS TO DISPOSER: An authorized representative for the disposal
facility shall fill in requested information in the bottom box of the manifest.
The address shall be the mailing address of the disposal facility. The waste
disposal site shall be the physical location of the disposal facility. Some
examples of the waste disposal methods are landfill burial and wastewater
treatment plant. The waste disposal method shall not be detailed. The disposing
facility representative shall complete the certification and return the
original manifest to the User listed in the first box of the form.
**THE FOOD SERVICE FACILITY SHALL KEEP A COPY OF THIS MANIFEST AFTER THE WASTE
HAULER HAS ACCEPTED THE WASTE. THE USER SHALL ALSO PROVIDE A SELF-ADDRESSED,
STAMPED ENVELOPE WITH THE ORIGINAL FORM TO ENSURE ITS RETURN AFTER THE WASTE
HAS BEEN DELIVERED TO THE DISPOSAL SITE. IT IS THE USER’S RESPONSIBILITY TO
TRACK THE MANIFEST AND TO MAINTAIN A COPY OF EACH COMPLETED MANIFEST AT THE
USER’S ESTABLISHMENT.
CITY OF MT. VERNON, ILLINOIS
WASTE HAULER MANIFEST
EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER (618)___________
GENERATOR INFORMATION
Business Name:
__________________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________ City: __________________________ State:
________ Zip: ________
Phone: ________________________________________ Customer Billing:
_________________________________
Waste tank or Trap Capacity: _______________________ gallons   Pump Freq:
____________________________
Waste From: Grease Trap    Grip Trap    Other
________________________________________________
I CERTIFY THAT, TO THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE, THE WASTE MATERIAL REMOVED FROM THE
ABOVE PREMISES CONTAINS NO HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. I ALSO CERTIFY THAT A REPRESENTATIVE
OF THIS BUSINESS WITNESSED THE PUMPING OR INSPECTED THE TRAP AFTERWARDS.
                           ____________________________________
                           (Print Name)
_________________      ____________________   _______________________________________
(Date)               (Time In)               (Signature)
 
WASTE HAULER INFORMATION
Business Name:
___________________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________ City: __________________________ State: ________ Zip:
________
Phone: _____________________________________   Truck License Number:
_______________________________
Gallons Received: ___________________________   Vehicle Permit Number:
______________________________
I CERTIFY THAT THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ABOVE IS CORRECT AND THAT ONLY THE TYPE WASTE
SPECIFIED IS CONTAINED IN THE SERVICING VEHICLE.
____________________________________________   ______________________________________________
(Driver’s License No.)                     (Driver Name - Print)
_________________      ________________      __________________________________________
(Date)               (Time Out)            (Signature)
 
 
DISPOSAL INFORMATION
Business Name:
___________________________________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________ City: __________________________ State: ________ Zip:
________
Phone: ______________________________________   Gallons Received:
________________________________
I CERTIFY THAT I HAVE DISPOSED OF THE WASTE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ALL CITY, STATE AND FEDERAL
LAWS.
___________________________________________      _____________________________________________
(Date and Time Received)                  (Print Name)
                           _____________________________________________
                           (Signature)
 
(Prior Code, Art. 16A, App. B)
CHAPTER 52: PRETREATMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Administration
   
52.003   Abbreviations
   
52.004   Definitions
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
52.015   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.016   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.017   State pretreatment standards
   
52.018   Local limits
   
52.019   City’s right of revision
   
52.020   Dilution
   
52.021   Permitted user if deemed potential risks
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
52.035   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.036   Additional pretreatment measures
   
52.037   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
52.038   Hauled wastewater
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
   
52.050   Wastewater analysis
   
52.051   Wastewater discharge permit requirement
   
52.052   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
   
52.053   Wastewater discharge permit application contents
   
52.054   Application signatories and certification
   
52.055   Wastewater discharge permit decisions
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
   
52.070   Wastewater discharge permit duration
   
52.071   Wastewater discharge permit contents
   
52.072   Wastewater discharge permit appeals
   
52.073   Wastewater discharge permit denials
   
52.074   Wastewater discharge permit public notification
   
52.075   Wastewater discharge permit modification
   
52.076   Wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
52.077   Wastewater discharge permit revocation
   
52.078   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance
   
52.079   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
Reporting Requirements
   
52.090   Baseline monitoring reports
   
52.091   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
52.092   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
52.093   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.094   Reports of changed conditions
   
52.095   Reports of potential problems
   
52.096   Reports from unpermitted users
   
52.097   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
52.098   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
52.099   Analytical requirements
   
52.100   Sample collection
   
52.101   Timing
   
52.102   Record keeping
   
52.103   Certification statements
Compliance Monitoring
   
52.115   Right of entry: inspection and sampling
   
52.116   Search warrants
Confidential Information
   
52.130   Confidential information
Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
   
52.145   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
52.160   Notification of violation
   
52.161   Consent orders
   
52.162   Show cause hearing
   
52.163   Compliance orders
   
52.164   Cease and desist orders
   
52.165   Emergency suspension
   
52.166   Termination of discharge
   
52.167   Revocation or suspension of wastewater discharge permits
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
52.180   Injunctive relief
   
52.181   Civil penalties
   
52.182   Criminal prosecution
   
52.183   Remedies nonexclusive
Supplemental Enforcement Action
   
52.195   Performance bonds
   
52.196   Liability insurance
   
52.197   Water supply severance
   
52.198   Public nuisances
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
52.210   Upset
   
52.211   Bypass
Wastewater Treatment Rates
   
52.225   Rates
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
52.240   Pretreatment charges and fees
   
52.241   Severability
   
52.242   Effective date
   
52.243   Falsification
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works for the City of Mt. Vernon and enables Mt.
Vernon to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
      (3)   To protect both Publicly Owned Treatment Works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
and
      (6)   To enable Mt. Vernon to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works is subject.
   (B)   This ordinance shall apply to all users of the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein. This
Chapter 52 replaces City Ordinance 85-48 and all amendments thereto. All
existing permits and connections are hereby adopted by reference; the City will
act under §
52.075(A) Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification, to modify any wastewater
discharge permit that does not conform with this ordinance.
   (C)   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 1.1)
§ 52.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City Manager to
other authorized personnel.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 1.2)
§ 52.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD    Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMR    Baseline Monitoring Report
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
CIU    Categorical Industrial User
COD    Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd    gallons per day
IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
IU     Industrial User
mg/l   milligrams per liter
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M    Operation and Maintenance
POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC    Standard Industrial Classification
SIU    Significant Industrial User
SNC    Significant Non-compliance
TSS    Total Suspended Solids
TTO    Total Toxic Organics
U.S.C. United States Code
USEPA  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 1.3)
§ 52.004 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   A. Amenable to alkaline chlorination.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administrator of the U.S. EPA, Region 5,
until such time as the State of Illinois, desiring to administer the
Pretreatment Program, receives APPROVAL AUTHORITY from EPA in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.10, whereupon IEPA shall be the APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the User is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner of proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to Mt. Vernon.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at 20° Centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g., mg/l).
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §§
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c)) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I. Subchapter
N, Parts 405—471.
   CITY. The City of Mt. Vernon.
   CITY MANAGER. The chief administrator of the POTW.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City of Mt. Vernon.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. Any discharge of sewer, industrial wastes or other wastes
into Waters of the United States.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.
      (1)   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official
of said agency.
      (2)   The IEPA is the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen
(15) minutes.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c), or (d). This includes any hauled or
trucked waste disposed of at the POTW. The source(s) of indirect discharge
shall be the transporter and generator of the waste.
   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. A source of Indirect Discharge, including but not
limited to, a manufacturing, commercial or process facility, or other facility
engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or who
otherwise renders services to the public. (INDUSTRIAL USER includes, but is not
limited to, Significant Industrial User as hereinafter defined.)
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of Mt. Vernon’s NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
more stringent State or local regulations: § 405 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1345;
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.;
any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6941
et seq.; the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; the Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq. and
33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.
   LOCAL LIMITS. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City
upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific
prohibitions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.5 (a)(1) and (b).
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT). A
permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System for
discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant
to the Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c), that will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Section (1)(b) or (1)(c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site
construction program
            1.   any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated adequately by
the POTW and therefore exits the POTW into waters of the United States in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
Mt. Vernon’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
    PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
52.015 of this ordinance.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A “treatment works,” as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by Mt. Vernon. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature
and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which is designed to carry sanitary and industrial
wastewater, and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally
admitted.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SHALL. Is mandatory. MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU.
      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      (2)   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5)
percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by Mt. Vernon on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
       (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTWs operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, Mt. Vernon may at any time,
on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user (i.e. Non-Significant
Industrial User).
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG.
      (1)   Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
52.015 of this ordinance.
      (2)   A SLUG LOAD or SLUG is a discharge of a non-routine, episodic
nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary
batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass
Through, or in any other way may violate the POTW’s regulations, Local Limits,
or Permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. The four-digit code
indicating a company’s type of business according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by Mt. Vernon to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.
   T. Means total.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter,
expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is
in suspension in water, wastewater and other liquids and is removable by
laboratory filtration as prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS. The summation of all quantified values greater than
0.01 milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable
regulations.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
non-compliance with the Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. An UPSET does not include non-
compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operations.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. The document or documents issued to an
Industrial User by the POTW in accordance with the terms of this ordinance
allowing Indirect Discharge to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER HAULER. Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in
transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
   WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water
courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations or water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois or any portion
thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 1.4)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.015 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW (Publicly Owned Treatment Works) any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
      (1)   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or to
cause to be deposited or discharged, to any POTW Treatment Facility, any solid,
liquid or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved by the POTW.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater, without an NPDES
permit, to any natural outlet within the POTW or in any area under its
jurisdiction.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or more than ten
(10.0), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one half inch (1/2) or two and fifty four hundredths centimeters (2.54 cm)
in any dimension, including, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles
greater than one half inch (1/2) in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper,
wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and de
burring stones;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
to the POTW or will pass through the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140°F (60°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled wastewater;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent, thereby violating Mt. Vernon’s NPDES permit;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
      (12)   Storm water, foundation drain water, surface water, ground water,
artesian well water, roof runoff, surface drainage, subsurface drainage,
swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, noncontact
cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
City Manager;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City
Manager in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (16)   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/L;
      (18)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than
five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower
Explosive Limit of the meter. Materials for which discharge is prohibited under
this subsection include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorides, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated
biphenyls, carbides, hydrides, Stoddard reagents, and sulfides;
      (19)   Any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, cause a violation of the water quality standards or the receiving
waters of the POTW, exceed the limitation set forth in a National Categorical
Pretreatment standard (when effective) or in §
52.018 or create a public nuisance;
      (20)   In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; any
criteria guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed
pursuant to the RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq. (Pub. L. 92-500), the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq., or state regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle C, Part 391
applicable to the sludge management method being used;
      (21)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (22)   Any wastewater containing BOD, total solids, or suspended solids
of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expenses is required
to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant; provided however,
that a user may be permitted by specific written agreement with the POTW, which
agreement to discharge such BOD or TSS may provide for special charges,
payments or provisions for treating and testing equipment;
      (23)   Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would or contribute to
interference or pass through;
      (24)   Any discharge exceeding the standards established in 35 Illinois
Administration Code 307; or
      (25)   Any slug discharged to the POTW.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.1)
§ 52.016 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users must comply with the applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards
found in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the City
Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. 403.6(c).
   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the City Manager
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
C.F.R. 403.6(e).
   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.15.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.2)
§ 52.017 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   State pretreatment standards located at Title 35, Subtitle C, Chapter I, §
307, 35 Illinois Administration Code 307 are hereby adopted by reference, and
at least three copies of such regulations are on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.3)
§ 52.018 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant to
40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   (B)   (1)   The following Local Limits are established as Instantaneous
Limits. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
0.25 mg/l   arsenic
2.0 mg/l    barium
0.15 mg/l   cadmium
1.5 mg/l    chromium (total)
0.5 mg/l    chromium (hexavalent)
1.00 mg/l   chromium (trivalent)
500 mg/l    chloride
4.0 mg/l    copper
0.2 mg/l    cyanide
15.0 mg/l   fluoride
12.00 mg/l  iron (total)
3.0 mg/l    iron (dissolved)
0.1 mg/l    lead
1.0 mg/l    manganese
0.0005 mg/l mercury
2.0 mg/l    nickel
100.00 mg/l oil and grease (hexane soluble or equivalent)
0.6 mg/l    phenols
1.0 mg/l    selenium
0.2 mg/l    silver
8.0 mg/l    zinc
300 mg/l    bio chemical oxygen demand (BOD)
250 mg/l    total suspended solids (TSS)
 
      (2)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The City Manager may impose mass
limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations
above.
      (3)   Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured
under the provisions of this ordinance, shall not contain in excess of the
above concentrations based upon the techniques described in §
52.093(D)(5) of this ordinance. This Section imposes Local Limits as an
Instantaneous Maximum, a condition that occurs at any single moment in time.
This ordinance does not describe sample collection techniques that would be
employed to ensure a representative flow-weighted instantaneous maximum
condition involving multiple discharges.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.4)
§ 52.019 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   Mt. Vernon reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.5)
§ 52.020 DILUTION.
   (A)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (B)   The City Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.6)
§ 52.021 PERMITTED USER IF DEEMED POTENTIAL RISKS.
   Any user who does not meet the categorical or noncategorical standards found
in 40 C.F.R. §§ 405 or 406 or existing IEPA statute may still be permitted by
the City if it is deemed that there are potential risks to the City’s
collection system piping, lift stations, or wastewater treatment facility
requiring additional monitoring.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 2.7)
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 52.035 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
52.015 of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
State, or the City Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the City Manager for review, and shall be
approved by the City Manager before such facilities are constructed. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to Mt. Vernon under the provisions of this ordinance.
   (B)   All industrial users shall obtain all necessary construction operating
permits from the IEPA. Such pretreatment facilities shall be under the direct
supervision of at least one person certified by the IEPA as competent as a
wastewater treatment works operator at the classification level appropriate for
the pretreatment facilities. Any subsequent significant changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the City
Manager in accordance with §
52.094 Report of Changed Conditions and be accepted by the POTW prior to the
industrial user’s initiation of the changes.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 3.1)
§ 52.036 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the City Manager may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   (B)   The City Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the City Manager and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at their expense.
   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 3.2)
§ 52.037 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   At least once every two (2) years, the City Manager shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The City Manager may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the City Manager may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the City Manager of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
52.095 of this ordinance; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (B)   Each industrial user having the ability to cause pass through or
interference with the POTW Treatment Facility or to violate the regulatory
provisions of this ordinance shall provide protection from accidental discharge
to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
ordinance. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense.
   (C)   All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include
compatible or incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to cause pass
through or interference with the POTW must have detailed plans on file at the
POTW showing facilities and operating procedures to provide protection from
accidental discharge. All industrial users shall complete construction of said
facilities by 180 days from the effective date of this ordinance. No industrial
user who begins contributing to or could contribute such pollutants to the POTW
after the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to introduce such
pollutants into the POTW until accidental discharge facilities and procedures,
as appropriate, have been approved by the POTW and installed by the industrial
user. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 3.3)
§ 52.038 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic waste shall not be introduced into the POTW by any septic tank
waste hauler.
   (B)   Industrial waste shall not be introduced into the POTW by any
industrial waste hauler.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 3.4)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
§ 52.050 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the City Manager, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ninety (90) days of the
request. The City Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and
may periodically require users to update this information.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.1)
§ 52.051 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City
Manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to §
52.052 of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
   (B)   The City Manager may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
52.099 through
52.101 of this ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.2)
§ 52.052 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to
the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with §
52.053 of this ordinance, must be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.3)
§ 52.053 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The City Manager may require all users to submit as part
of an application the following information:
      (1)   All information required by §
52.090(B) of this ordinance;
      (2)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation including monthly and seasonal variations;
      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and
elevation, and all points of discharge showing all pipe sizes, manholes and
location of sanitary and storm sewer leaving the building or premises, together
with all connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers;
      (7)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (8)   SIC Code of the operation(s) carried out by the user.
      (9)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those set forth in §
52.016 of this ordinance as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136;
      (10)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system and
the name of the IEPA certified pretreatment operator;
      (11)   Significant Industrial User’s source of intake water together with
the types of usage and disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes in
each category; and
      (12)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the City
Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.4)
§ 52.054 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements -including those for significant industrial users,
non-significant categorical industrial users, and non-significant industrial
users-- must be signed by an Authorized Representative of the user and contain
the certification statement in §
52.103(A).
   (B)   If the designation of an Authorized Representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this Section must be submitted to the City Manager prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an Authorized Representative. The
Authorized Representative of a facility determined to be a non-significant
categorical industrial user by the City Manager, pursuant to §
52.004, must annually submit the signed certification statement in §
52.103(B).
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.5)
§ 52.055 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The City Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the City Manager will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The City Manager may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 4.6)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 52.070 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   (A)   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit.
   (B)   A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the City Manager. Each wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.1)
§ 52.071 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the City Manager to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this
ordinance and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees
established by the POTW.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   The issuance date, effective date, and expiration date such that
the expiration date shall not exceed five (5) years from the effective date.
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to Mt. Vernon in accordance with §
52.076 of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits on daily maximum and average pollutant
concentrations from the applicable pretreatment standards (including Federal,
State and Local limits whichever is more stringent);
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on Federal, State, and local law; and
      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law.
      (6)   Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the City
Manager to be necessary.
      (7)   Requirements to retain for a minimum of three years any records of
monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and for
affording the POTW access to said records;
      (8)   Requirements for advance notification to the POTW of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system pursuant to the terms of §
52.094 of this ordinance;
      (9)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as defined in this
ordinance;
      (10)   Requirements that permittee allow the POTW or its representatives
ready access upon presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts
of its premises in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or
in which records required by this ordinance are kept for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of said records and for the
performance of any of their duties.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, and flow measurement devices;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
      (8)   Requirements for reporting pretreatment sludge disposal practices;
      (9)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Manager to
ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.2)
§ 52.072 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
   The City Manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the City Manager
to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit application denial or terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within 10 days of the application denial or within
10 days of the notice of permit issuance.
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (D)   If the City Manager fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request
for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court of Jefferson County.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.3)
§ 52.073 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DENIALS.
   (A)   No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued by the POTW to any
person or industrial user whose discharge of material to sewers, whether shown
upon his application or determined after inspection and testing conducted by
the POTW, is not in conformity with POTW, is not in conformity with POTW
ordinances and regulations or whose application is incomplete or does not
comply with the requirements of §§
52.050 through
52.055.
   (B) The POTW shall state the reason or reasons for denial in writing, which
shall be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days
after denial.
   (C)   (1)   If the application is denied by the POTW, the applicant may
obtain review of the denial by the City Council, provided that the applicant
shall give written notice of this request within thirty (30) days after receipt
of such denial.
      (2)   The City Council shall review the permit application, the written
denial and such other evidence and matters as the applicant and POTW City
Manager shall present. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.3A)
§ 52.074 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
   The City Manager will publish in an official government publication and/or
newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice with
the jurisdiction served by the POTW, or on a Web page, a notice to issue a
pretreatment permit, at least 10 days prior to issuance. The notice will
indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an address where
written comments may be submitted.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.3B)
§ 52.075 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Significant Industrial User shall be informed of any proposed
changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change.
Where any changes are made in the Significant Industrial User’s permit, a
reasonable time shall be given to achieve compliance.
   (B)   The City Manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to Mt. Vernon’s POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.4)
§ 52.076 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific Significant
Industrial User for the process activity specified in the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a new owner or
new user in different premises or to a new or changed operation in the same or
different premises without the approval of the POTW. If the premises are sold
or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will maintain the
operation in the same premises, then the permit held by the seller shall be
reissued by the POTW to the new owner; provided that the new owner shall apply
for a new permit in accordance with this ordinance.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance notice
to the City Manager and the City Manager approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the City Manager must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
      (4)   The POTW shall have the same remedies for violation as it has for
violation of other discharge permits.
   (C)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.5)
§ 52.077 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the City Manager or the designated representative
of the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the City Manager of
changed conditions pursuant to §
52.094 of this ordinance;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self monitoring reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the City Manager timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit to that user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.6)
§ 52.078 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with §
52.053 of this ordinance, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.7)
§ 52.079 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality or user located within another municipality
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City Manager shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (A), above,
the City Manager shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality.
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW;
      (3)   Such other information as the City Manager may deem necessary.
   (C)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (A), above,
shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and Local
Limits, including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BI s) which are at
least as stringent as those set out in §
52.018 of this ordinance. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City’s
ordinance or Local Limits.
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis.
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities
including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the City Manager; and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and
the City Manager.
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the City
Manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW.
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
discharge;
      (7)   Provisions ensuring the City Manager access to the facilities of
users located within the contributing municipality’s jurisdictional boundaries
for inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the City
Manager; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 5.8)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.090 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   Industrial users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment standards
shall submit Baseline Reports to the POTW in a form prescribed and furnished by
the POTW.
   (A)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 C.F.R. 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the City Manager a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (B), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the City Manager a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (B), below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      (1)   Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      (2)   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include:
         (a)   schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes;
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at a facility which are or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge; all pipe sizes, manholes and
location of sanitary and storm sewers leaving the building or premises,
together with all connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers.
      (4)   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e). Significant Industrial User’s
source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal sources of
water and the estimated volumes in each category.
      (5)   Measurement of Pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process, and any new categorical regulated process for existing
sources.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the City
Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
52.099 of this ordinance.
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
52.100 of this ordinance.
         (d)   Sample based on the flow of the sampled stream, as follows:
(composite samples are required where feasible)
            1.   Where the flow of the stream being sampled is less than or
equal to 950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd), the industrial user
shall take a minimum of three samples within a two week period.
            2.   Where the flow of the stream being sampled is greater than
950,000 liters/day (approximately 250,000 gpd) the industrial user shall take a
minimum of six samples within a two week period.
         (e)   Take the samples immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order to evaluate compliance with the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the industrial user shall measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e). Where an alternate concentration has
been calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e), this adjusted limit
along with supporting data shall be submitted to the POTW.
         (f)   Submit, only with POTW authorization, a Baseline Report which
utilizes only historical data, so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
         (g)   Provide, for each report the time, date, and place, of sampling
and methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (7)   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
52.091 of this ordinance.
      (8)   Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.054 of this ordinance.
       (9)   Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the POTW.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.1)
§ 52.091 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
52.090(B)(7) of this ordinance:
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the City Manager no later
than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.2)
§ 52.092 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the City Manager a report containing the information described in §
52.090(B) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits; established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s
long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.054 of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.3)
§ 52.093 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the City Manager but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§
52.054 of this ordinance.
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (C)   If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the City Manager, using
the procedures prescribed in §
52.100 of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
   (D)   Monitoring shall be as follows:
      (1)   Significant Industrial Users shall provide and operate at the
Significant Industrial User’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal
drainage systems. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the
user’s premises but the POTW may, when such a location would be impractical and
cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area land located so that it will not be obstructed
by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user.
      (2)   Where required by the POTW, additional control manholes or sampling
chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an
industrial user’s facility suitable for the determination of compliance with
Pretreatment Standards.
      (3)   Whenever required by a wastewater discharge permit, any Significant
Industrial User shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber for each
separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the POTW, installed and maintained at all times at
the user’s expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling chamber to
permit the POTW to take accurate composite samples for analysis. The chamber
shall be safely, easily and independently accessible to authorized
representatives of the POTW at any time.
         (a)   Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer Bowlus flume unless
a weir or similar device is approved by the POTW with a recording and
totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or at the
discretion of the POTW the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be
used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated to the POTW that the
metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where
a measurable adjustment agreed to by the POTW is made in the metered water
supply to determine the liquid waste quantity.
         (b)   When required, samples shall be taken every hour or half hour,
as determined by the POTW and properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and shall be composited in proportion to the flow for a
representative 24 hour sample. Such sampling shall be done as prescribed by the
user’s wastewater discharge permit.
         (c)   The sampling chamber, metering device, and documentation of the
frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses of samples shall be
subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection and verification by the POTW.
      (4)   Whenever required by a wastewater discharge permit, the permittee
shall pay the costs of sampling of its discharge and the costs of analyses of
its samples, whether or not the sampling and analyses are done by the permittee
or by the POTW.
      (5)   All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in
this ordinance shall be determined and performed in accordance with the
procedures established by the Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (hereafter “Administrator”) pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g), and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments
thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
Administrator. Where 40 C.R.F. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the Administrator
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other
parties, approved by the Administrator.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.4)
§ 52.094 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user must notify the City Manager of any planned significant changes to
the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
   (A)   The City Manager may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.053 of this ordinance.
   (B)   The City Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
52.055 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under §
52.075 of this ordinance in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
   (D)   No permittee shall materially and substantially change the type,
quality or volume of its wastewater beyond that allowed by its permit without
prior approval of the POTW.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.5)
§ 52.095 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the
incident. This notification shall include the name of caller, the location and
time of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
   (B)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the City Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this ordinance. Failure to
report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other
remedies available to the POTW, result in the revocation of the discharger’s
wastewater discharge permit.
   (C)   A notice in English or the language of common use shall be permanently
posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (A), above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.6)
§ 52.096 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the City Manager as the City Manager may require.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.7)
§ 52.097 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the City Manager within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the City Manager within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if
the City Manager monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if
the City Manager samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.8)
§ 52.098 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Region 5 Land, Chemicals and Redevelopment Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user
discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than
one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under §
52.094 of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self monitoring requirements of §§
52.090, 52.092, and 52.093 of this ordinance.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (A), above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA, being 42
U.S.C. § 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
City Manager, the EPA Region 5 Land, Chemicals and Redevelopment Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.9)
§ 52.099 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.10)
§ 52.100 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Except as indicated in Section (B), below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques. In the event 24-hour flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
City Manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum
of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (C)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of the
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.11)
§ 52.101 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.12)
§ 52.102 RECORD KEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance and
any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records
shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name
of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who
performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or Mt. Vernon, or where the user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.13)
§ 52.103 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Certification of Permit Applications, User Reports, and Initial
Monitoring Waiver. The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with
§
52.054; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by §
52.093(A) - (D) and users submitting an initial request to forego sampling of a
pollutant based on §
52.093(B). The following certification statement must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in §
52.004.
“I certify under penalty of Law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and/or
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (B)   Annual Certification for Non-Significant Industrial Users. A facility
determined to be a Non-Significant Industrial User by the City Manager pursuant
to §
52.004 and §
52.054(C) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in
accordance with the signatory requirements in §
52.004. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
City Manager.
“Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 C.F.R. Part
403, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief during the periods
from (mm/dd/yyyy) to (mm/dd/yyyy): (a) The facility described as [facility
name] met the definition of non-significant categorical industrial user as
described in § 52.004; (b) The facility complied with all applicable
Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c)
The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical
wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.”
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 6.14)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 52.115 RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The City Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the City Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   The City reserves the right to randomly sample any and all industries
within its jurisdiction at any time without prior notice.
   (C)   All permittee facilities will be randomly monitored at minimum once
annually during the calendar year.
   (D)   Non-permitted facilities may be randomly monitored at any time at the
discretion of the City Manager.
      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the City Manager will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The City Manager shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
      (3)   (a)   The City Manager may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense.
         (b)   All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated as per manufacturer’s recommendation to ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   (a)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the user at the written or verbal request of the City Manager and shall not
be replaced.
         (b)   The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City Manager access to the
user’s premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 7.1)
§ 52.116 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the City Manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of Mt. Vernon designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the City Manager may seek issuance of
a search warrant from the Circuit Court of Jefferson County.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 7.2)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 52.130 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the City Manager’s inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City Manager, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at
the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40
C.F.R. 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.
   (B)   The POTW shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of
confidential information; however, neither the POTW nor its employees shall be
held legally responsible for release of information if they have acted in good
faith.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 8)
PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 52.145 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The City Manager shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users
which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term
significant noncompliance shall mean:
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceeds the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including the instantaneous limit, or are
outside the pH range.
   (B)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including the
instantaneous limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS,
Oils and Grease (N-hexane extractable material), and 1.2 for all other
pollutant parameters except pH);
   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the City Manager believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City Manager’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s) which the City Manager determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 9)
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 52.160 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
City Manager may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation. Within ten
(10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a
plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the City Manager.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City Manager to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a Notice of Violation.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.1)
§ 52.161 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The City Manager may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to
be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect
as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
52.163 and
52.164 of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.2)
§ 52.162 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   The City Manager may issue a Show Cause Order to a user which
has violated or continues to violate any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement. The Show Cause Order shall require the
user to appear at a Hearing before the City Council to show cause why the POTW
should not disconnect service, revoke or suspend the user’s wastewater
discharge permit or seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from
discharging to the POTW.
      (2)   The City Manager may also, upon discovering an ongoing or potential
discharge to the POTW which presents or may present a danger to the health or
welfare of persons, to the environment or causes interference with the
operation of the POTW, issue a Show Cause Order to the user to appear at a
Hearing before the City Council to show cause why the POTW should not
disconnect service, revoke or suspend the user’s wastewater discharge permit or
seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging to the POTW.
   (B)   The Show Cause Order shall specify the time and place for the Show
Cause Hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action,
and the purpose of the Hearing (i.e. to allow the user to show cause why such
action should not be taken). The Show Cause Order shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least five (5)
days prior to the scheduled date of the Show Cause Hearing. The Show Cause
Order may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A Show Cause
Hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
   (C)   Procedures to be followed by the City Council in said show cause
hearing shall be in accordance with §
52.167(B) of this ordinance. After said hearing, the POTW may disconnect
service, revoke or suspend the wastewater discharge permit or seek injunctive
relief to prohibit the industrial user from making the discharge to the POTW.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.3)
§ 52.163 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   (A)   (1)   When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City Manager may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time.
      (2)   If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
   (B)   (1)   Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer.
      (2)   A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.4)
§ 52.164 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   (A)   When the City Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the City Manager may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.5)
§ 52.165 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Conditions for Immediate Disconnection of Service. Any industrial user
is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any
discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the City
Manager to present or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or causes interference
with the operation of the POTW; or
      (2)   Whenever the industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit is
revoked.
   (B)   Procedures for Immediate Disconnection.
      (1)   Notwithstanding §§
52.160 through
52.167 of this ordinance, the City Manager shall have the authority, after
informal notice to the industrial user, to immediately and effectively halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to the
City Manager to present or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or causes interference
with the operation of the POTW. When the City Manager determines that such an
emergency situation exists, he shall issue a verbal order (followed immediately
by a written order) to the industrial user stating the problem and requiring
immediate cessation of the discharge. The City Manager’s action may include
disconnection of wastewater collection service. The City Manager shall obtain
the concurrence of the POTW attorney before initiating action. Methods of
informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
personal conversation between the industrial user and POTW employees, telephone
calls, letters, hand delivered messages or notices posted at the industrial
user’s premises or point of discharge.
   (C)   Procedures for Elimination of Discharge and Reinstatement.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate blockage
or severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The City
Manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in §
52.166 of this ordinance are initiated against the user.
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, or causes interference with the operation of the
POTW shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence,
to the City Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing
under §§
52.162 or
52.166 of this ordinance.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.6)
§ 52.166 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions in §
52.077 of this ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
52.015 through
52.021 of this ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
52.162 of this ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken.
      (2)   Exercise of this option by the City Manager shall not be a bar to,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.7)
§ 52.167 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Conditions for Revocation or Suspension. Any Significant Industrial
User who violates this ordinance, an Order issued pursuant to §§
52.160 through
52.167 of this ordinance, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Adm.
Code Title 35), or the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (Pub.
L. 92-500)), or regulations promulgated under either act, or does any of the
following, is subject to having its wastewater discharge permit revoked or
suspended.
      (1)   Fails to fully and accurately report to the City Manager or other
designee of City the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
wastewater discharge as determined by the industrial user’s or POTW’s analysis;
      (2)   Fails to fully and accurately report significant changes in process
activity which could affect its wastewater discharge or wastewater constituents
and characteristics, including without limitation failure to provide prior
notification to the City Manager of changed conditions under §
52.094 of this ordinance;
      (3)   Refuses reasonable access to the industrial user’s premises by POTW
representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
      (4)   Tampers with, disrupts, or destroys POTW equipment;
      (5)   Fails to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant;
      (6)   Fails to report an Upset of the industrial user’s treatment
facilities; or
      (7)   Violates any condition of the wastewater discharge permit.
      (8)   Tampers with any portion of the city sanitary sewer.
      (9)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in a wastewater discharge permit application.
      (10)   Failure to pay sewer charges or other charges assessed pursuant to
this ordinance.
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
      (12)   Failure to provide notice of transfer of business ownership of a
permitted facility.
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
   (B)   Procedures for Revocation or Suspension.
      (1)   The POTW may order any industrial user who causes or allows any
action which is subject to revocation or suspension under Section (A) above to
show cause before the City Council why its wastewater discharge permit should
not be revoked or suspended.
      (2)   (a)   A notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed action, and
directing the industrial user to show cause before the City Council why its
wastewater discharge permit should not be revoked or suspended.
         (b)   The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five (5) days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.
      (3)   The City Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or its attorney to:
         (a)   Issue in the name of the City Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
         (b)   Take the evidence;
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City
Council for action thereon.
      (4)   At any hearing held pursuant to this ordinance, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically or by tape recording. The
transcript of said hearing will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual copying charges
therefore.
      (5)   After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing either:
         (a)   That the wastewater discharge permit be revoked or suspended and
the service be disconnected, or
         (b) That following a specified time the wastewater discharge permit
shall be revoked or suspended and sewer service discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been
installed and operated properly to comply with the wastewater discharge permit,
or
         (c)   Direct the user to cease the unauthorized discharge effective
after a specified period of time, or
         (d)   That such other action as deemed necessary by the City Council
to abate the discharge be done by the industrial user. Further orders and
directives as are necessary may be issued.
      (6)   Following an order of revocation or suspension of its wastewater
discharge permit, the industrial user shall cease discharging to the POTW in
accordance with the terms of said Order. Failure to do so shall be prima facie
evidence of continuing harm to POTW and provide grounds for the granting of
injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 10.8)
JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 52.180 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   The POTW may institute a civil action for an injunction to restrain
violations of this ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   When the POTW finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
requirement, or discovers an ongoing or potential discharge of pollutants to
the POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent and substantial danger
to the health and welfare of persons, to the environment, or the POTW, the POTW
may petition the Circuit Court of Jefferson County for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual Wastewater Discharge Permit, order,
or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user.
      (2)   The POTW may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
      (3)   Prior to the filing of such petition, the user shall be given
informal notice of the POTW intention to file such action.
      (4)   Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be limited to,
any of the following: personal conversation between discharger and the POTW
employees, telephone calls, letters, hand delivered messages or notices posted
at the discharger’s premises or point of discharge. Personal contact between
the POTW personnel and the user shall be attempted but shall not be condition
precedent to POTW petitioning for an obtaining a temporary restraining order.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 11.1)
§ 52.181 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of
this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to Mt. Vernon
for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of
a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue
for each day during the period of the violation.
   (B)   The City Manager may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by Mt.
Vernon.
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 11.2)
§ 52.182 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   (A)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation,
per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
   (B)   (1)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least
$1,000.00 or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
      (2)   This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for
personal injury or property damage available under State law.
   (C)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months,
or both.
   (D)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not
more than six months, or both.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 11.3)
§ 52.183 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this ordinance shall not be exclusive. The City
Manager may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with Mt. Vernon’s Enforcement Response Plan. However, the City
Manager may seek whatever remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in
equity against any person or industrial user violating the provisions of this
ordinance. Further, the City Manager is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the POTW set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, if the POTW is fined by the State of Illinois or USEPA for
violation of the POTW NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as
the result of discharge of pollutants, then the fine, including all the POTW
legal, sampling analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be
charged to the responsible industrial user. Such charge shall be in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the POTW may have under this
ordinance, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
   (B)   (1)   If the discharge from any industrial user causes a deposit,
obstruction or damage to any of the POTW wastewater facilities, the POTW shall
cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to
be promptly repaired.
      (2)   The cost for such work, including material, labor and supervision,
shall be borne by the person or industrial user causing such deposit,
obstruction, or damage.
   (C)   In addition to any penalty levied under §§
52.180 through
52.183, the POTW may, where the circumstances of the particular case so
dictate, seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, or to provide such other affirmative relief as may be
appropriate.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 11.4)
SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
§ 52.195 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files
a satisfactory bond, payable to Mt. Vernon, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the City Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 12.1)
§ 52.196 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The City Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore
or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 12.2)
§ 52.197 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be
severed. Service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 12.3)
§ 52.198 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the City Manager. Any person creating a public nuisance
shall reimburse the City of Mt. Vernon for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying such nuisance, and shall be subject to the general
provisions of §
90.11 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, including
the provision for a lien upon real estate as described therein.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 12.4)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 52.210 UPSET.
   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph (B) below, are met.
   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the City
Manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset and if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days:
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 13.1)
§ 52.211 BYPASS.
   (A)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the City Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible. A user shall submit oral notice to the City Manager of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The City Manager may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty-four (24) hours.
   (C)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the City Manager may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of
this section. (2) The City Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the City Manager determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this section.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 13.2)
WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
§ 52.225 RATES.
   See §
50.092 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 14)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 52.240 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   Mt. Vernon may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting
up and operating Mt. Vernon’s Pretreatment Program which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and
   (E)   Other fees as Mt. Vernon may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 15.1)
§ 52.241 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this ordinance is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 15.2)
§ 52.242 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 16)
§ 52.243 FALSIFICATION.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance or wastewater discharge
permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this ordinance, shall be subject to
the penalties and costs provided in §§
52.180 through
52.183.
(Prior Code, Art. 16B, § 17)
CHAPTER 53: STORM DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Section
   
53.01   Purpose
   
53.02   Conflicting ordinances
   
53.03   Compliance with other ordinances
   
53.04   Definitions
   
53.05   Storm water control policy
   
53.06   Permits for construction in the floodway
   
53.07   Information requirements
   
53.08   Determination of runoff quantities
   
53.09   Amount of runoff to be accommodated by various parts of drainage
facility
   
53.10   Level of protection for urban areas
   
53.11   Storm sewer design standards
   
53.12   Workmanship and materials
   
53.13   Open channel design standards
   
53.14   Construction and materials
   
53.15   Storm water detention
   
53.16   Certifications required
   
53.17   Changes in plan
   
53.18   Determination of impact drainage areas
   
53.19   Other requirements
   
53.20   Regional drainage plans
   
53.21   Disclaimer of liability
   
53.22   Corrective action
   
53.23   Exempt projects
   Appendix A:   Tables and Figures
§ 53.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this ordinance is to reduce the hazard to public health
and safety caused by excessive storm water runoff, to enhance economic
objectives, and to protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of
land and water resources within the regulatory area. This ordinance regulates:
      (1)   Storm water drainage improvements related to development of lands
located within the corporate limits of the City and all areas within one and
one half (1/2) miles of the corporate limits as existing now or in the future.
      (2)   Drainage control systems installed during new construction and
grading of lots and other parcels of land.
      (3)   Erosion and sediment control systems installed during new
construction of grading of lots and other parcels of land.
      (4)   The design, construction and maintenance of storm water drainage
facilities and systems.
      (5)   Existing storm water drainage systems where the inclusion of
improvements is feasible.
   (B)   (1)   It is recognized that drainage systems serving the City of Mt.
Vernon and adjacent areas may not have sufficient capacity to receive and
convey storm water runoff resulting when land changes from open or agricultural
use to a more urbanized use. It is further recognized that deposit of sediment
from developments during and after construction can reduce capacities of storm
sewers and drainage systems and result in damages to receiving lakes and
streams.
      (2)   Therefore, it shall be the policy of the City Council that the
storage and controlled release of storm water runoff shall be required of all
new development, any redevelopment and other new construction in the regulated
areas as stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance. The release rate of storm
water from developed lands shall not exceed the release rate from the land area
in its undeveloped state.
   (C)   Because topography and the availability and adequacy of outlets for
storm runoff vary with almost every site, the requirements for storm drainage
tend to be an individual matter for any project. It is recommended that each
proposed project be discussed with the City Engineer’s office at the earliest
practical time in the planning stage.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-1)
§ 53.02 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed as additional requirements
to minimum standards required by other ordinances of the City. In the case of
conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-2)
§ 53.03 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   In addition to the requirements of this ordinance, compliance with the
requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon and
other applicable ordinances with respect to submission and approval of
preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans, building and zoning
permits, construction inspections, appeals, and similar matters, and compliance
with applicable State of Illinois statutes and regulations shall be required.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-3)
§ 53.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
   CAPACITY OF A STORM DRAINAGE FACILITY. The maximum flow that can be conveyed
or stored by a storm drainage facility without causing damage to public or
private property.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse which periodically or
continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between
two bodies of water. It has a defined bed and banks which serve to confine the
water.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificial volume of storage within a flood plain
used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill
or structures are placed within the flood plain.
   CONTIGUOUS. Adjoining or in actual contact with.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of Mt. Vernon, Jefferson County, Illinois, and any
subordinate employee or agent to whom they shall specifically delegate a
responsibility authorized by this Ordinance.
   CRITICAL DURATION STORM. The storm duration which requires the greatest
detention storage. In the Rational Method, the critical duration storm is equal
to the time of concentration being analyzed. For computer modeling, the
critical duration storm is equal to or greater than the time of concentration
of the watershed being modeled.
   CULVERT. A closed conduit used for the passage of surface drainage water
under a roadway, railroad, canal, or other impediment.
   DETENTION BASIN. A facility constructed or modified to restrict the flow of
storm water to a prescribed maximum rate, and to detain concurrently the excess
waters that accumulate behind the outlet.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The area from which water is carried off by a drainage
system; a watershed or catchment area.
   DROP MANHOLE. A manhole having a vertical drop greater than two feet between
the inlet pipe and the outlet pipe. A vertical drop pipe shall be located
immediately outside the manhole.
   DRY BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN. A basin designed to be completely dewatered
after having provided its planned detention of runoff during a storm event.
   DURATION. The time period of a rainfall event.
   ENGINEER. A subordinate or agent of the Council to whom the Council has
delegated responsibility. The City Engineer serves as a subordinate or agent to
the Council having chief engineering responsibilities.
   EROSION. Wearing away of the land by running water, waves, temperature
changes, ice, or wind.
   FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation at all locations delineating the maximum
level of high waters for a flood of given return period and rainfall duration.
   FLOOD or FLOOD WATERS. The water of any watercourse which is above the banks
of the watercourse. It also means the water of any lake which is above and
outside the banks thereof.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Those flood plains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding caused by the regulatory flood, and are shown on the
Flood Hazard or Floodway Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration or maps provided to the City by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
   FLOOD PLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by flood water from the regulatory floodway and floodway
fringe.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain lying outside the floodway
which is inundated by the regulatory flood.
   FOOTING DRAIN. A drain pipe installed around the exterior of a basement wall
foundation to relieve water pressure caused by high groundwater elevation.
   GRADE. The inclination or slope of a channel, canal, conduit, etc., or
natural ground surface usually expressed in terms of the percentage the
vertical rise (or fall) bears to the corresponding horizontal distance.
   HEC-1. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Flood Hydrograph Package.
   IMPACT AREAS. Areas defined and mapped by the Council which are unlikely to
be easily drained because of one or more factors including but not limited to
any of the following: soil type, topography, land where there is not adequate
outlet, a floodway or flood plain, land within 100 feet of each bank of any
regulated drain or within 100 feet from the centerline of any regulated tile
ditch.
   IMPERVIOUS. A term applied to material through which water cannot pass, or
through which water passes with difficulty.
   INLET. An opening into a storm sewer for the entrance of surface storm water
runoff, more completely described as a storm sewer inlet.
   JUNCTION CHAMBER. A converging section of conduit, usually large enough for
a person to enter, used to facilitate the flow from one or more conduits into a
main conduit.
   LATERAL STORM SEWER. A sewer that has inlets connected to it but has no
other storm sewer connected.
   MANHOLE. Storm sewer structure through which a person may enter to gain
access to an underground storm sewer or enclosed structure.
   MAJOR DRAINAGE AREA. Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of more
than ten square miles Rural classification or one square mile Urban
classification. Designs shall be in accordance with the Illinois Department of
Transportation Division of Water Resources Standards.
   MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Drainage system carrying runoff from an area of less
than ten square miles Rural classification or one square mile Urban
classification.
   OFF SITE. Everything not on site.
   ON SITE. Located within the controlled or Urbanized area where runoff
originates.
   OUTFALL. The point or location where storm runoff discharges from a sewer or
drain. Also applies to the outfall sewer or channel which carries the storm
runoff to the point of outfall.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel
or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm or flood.
   RADIUS OF CURVATURE. Length of radius of a circle used to define a curve.
   RAINFALL INTENSITY. The cumulative depth of rainfall occurring over a given
duration, normally expressed in inches per hour.
   REACH. Any length of river, channel or storm sewer.
   REGULATED AREA. All of the land under the jurisdiction of the City of Mt.
Vernon. This includes all areas within the corporate limits of the City and all
areas within one and one half miles of the corporate limits as existing now or
in the future.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. That flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or
exceed on the average of once in a one hundred (100) year period, as calculated
by a method and procedure which is acceptable to the Council. If a permit from
the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources for
construction in the floodway is required (see § 53.06), then the regulatory
flood peak discharge should be calculated by a method acceptable to the Council
and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources.
This regulatory flood is equivalent to a flood having a probability of
occurrence of one percent (1%) in any given year.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge efficiently the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   RELEASE RATE. The amount of storm water released from a storm water control
facility per unit of time.
   RETURN PERIOD. The average interval of time within which a given rainfall
event will be equaled or exceeded once. A flood having a return period of 100
years has a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any one
year.
   RUNOFF COEFFICIENT. A decimal fraction relating the amount of rain which
appeared as runoff and reaches the storm sewer system to the total amount of
rain falling. A coefficient of 0.5 implies that 50 percent of the rain falling
on a given surface appears as storm water runoff.
   SEDIMENT. Material of soil or rock origin, transported, carried or deposited
by water.
   SIPHON. A closed conduit or portion of which lies above the hydraulic grade
line, resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and requiring a vacuum
within the conduit to start flow. A SIPHON utilizes atmospheric pressure to
effect or increase the flow of water through a conduit. An INVERTED SIPHON is
used to carry storm water flow under an obstruction such as a sanitary sewer.
   STILLING BASIN. A basin used to slow water down or dissipate its energy.
   STORAGE DURATION. The length of time that water may be stored in any storm
water control facility, computed from the time water first begins to be stored.
   STORM SEWER. A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All means, natural or man made, used for
conducting storm water to, through or from a drainage area to any of the
following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches,
streams, culverts, street and pumping stations.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The water derived from rains falling within a tributary
basin, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   TR-20. Natural Resources Conservation Services Technical Release 20 Project
Formulation Hydrology.
   TR-55. Natural Resources Conservation Services Technical Release 55 Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
   TRIBUTARY. Contributing storm water from upstream land areas.
   URBANIZATION. The development, change or improvement of any parcel of land
consisting of one or more lots for residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational or public utility purposes.
   WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch natural or man made
drainageway in or into which storm water runoff or floodwaters flow wither
regularly or intermittently.
   WATERSHED. See DRAINAGE AREA.
   WET BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN (RETENTION BASIN). A basin designed to retain a
permanent pool of water after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-4)
§ 53.05 STORM WATER CONTROL POLICY.
   (A)   It is recognized that the smaller streams and drainage channels
serving the City of Mt. Vernon may not have sufficient capacity to receive and
convey storm water runoff resulting from continued urbanization. Accordingly,
the storage and controlled release rate of excess storm water runoff shall be
required for any development, redevelopment and new construction located within
the regulated area not exempt under this ordinance. No improvement location
permit shall be issued for the construction or extension of any proposed or
existing building in the regulated area until the required drainage plans have
been approved in writing by the Council, except for the following exemptions:
      (1)   Construction or extension of a single family dwelling house or an
extension of a single family dwelling house or an accessory use building
thereto;
      (2)   Construction or extension of a duplex dwelling house or an
accessory use building thereto;
      (3)   Construction or extension in that area of the City designated
Primary Business District (B-1 Zoning Classification); or
      (4)   Construction, extension or replacement of a building or buildings
on a site of 20,000 square feet or less.
      (5)   Extension or replacement of any existing building that does not
increase the existing rate of runoff.
   (B)   The exceptions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above, however, shall not be
applicable to a project if located in a previously designated Impact Area as
established per §
53.18 of this ordinance.
   (C)   The release rate of storm water from development, redevelopment, and
new construction, as stipulated above, may not exceed the peak rate of runoff
from the land area in its undeveloped state. The developer must submit to the
Council, detailed computations of runoff before and after development,
redevelopment or new construction. These computations must show that the peak
runoff rate after development, redevelopment, or new construction, for the 10
year and 100 year return period of critical duration must not exceed the
undeveloped peak runoff rate for either return periods. The computation method
used in determining storm water runoff for land areas up to and including 5
acres may be the “Rational Method.” Other proven hydrograph techniques and/or
computer drainage modeling methods may be used for determining storm water
runoff for both areas smaller and larger than 100 acres.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-5)
§ 53.06 PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION IN THE FLOODWAY.
   (A)   (1)   The State of Illinois requires U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources, and
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency approval of any construction in a
floodway, and of any works for flood control.
      (2)   This includes bridges, dams, levees, dikes, floodwalls, wharves,
piers, dolphins, booms, weirs, bulkheads, jetties, groins, excavations, fills
or deposits of any kind, utility lines, or other building, structure or
obstruction. Also, any ditch work (new construction, deepening or modification)
within one half mile of a public freshwater lake of 10 acres or more in area.
   (B)   The approval of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Illinois Department
of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources, and Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, in writing, must be obtained before beginning construction.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-6)
§ 53.07 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following information and data provided by an Illinois licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor engaged in storm drainage design shall
be submitted to the Council at the time of application for 1) each proposed
major subdivision or planned development lying within the Regulated Area prior
to Final Plat approval by the Planning Commission, or 2) a building permit for
any development, redevelopment, or new construction on real estate which lies
within the Regulated Area which has not previously received drainage approval
or is not exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance.
   (A)   Topographic and Soils Maps. A topographic map of the land to be
developed and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or
drainage of the development. The contour intervals shall be one foot when
slopes are less than four percent and shall be two feet when the slope exceeds
four percent and shall be five feet when the slope exceeds 10 percent. On this
map, the following shall be shown:
      (1)   The locations of streams and other flood water runoff channels, the
extent of the flood plains at the established 100 year flood elevation where
available (regulatory floodway), and the limits of the floodway, all properly
identified.
      (2)   The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins,
their flood plains, lines of inflow and outflow if any.
      (3)   The location of regulated drains, farm drains, inlets and outfall,
if any of record.
      (4)   Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and outfall, if any of record.
      (5)   Septic tank systems and outlets, if any of record.
      (6)   Seeps, springs, flowing and other wells, that are visible or of
record.
      (7)   Provide soils map of proposed development indicating soil name and
their hydrologic classification when Soils Conservation Service (SCS)
hydrologic methods are used.
   (B)   Preliminary Drainage Plan. A comprehensive plan, in preliminary form
(or in combined preliminary and final form), designed to handle safely the
storm water runoff and to detain the increased storm water runoff must be
submitted to the Council. The plan shall provide or be accompanied by maps or
other descriptive materials indicating the feasibility of the drainage plan and
showing the following:
      (1)   The extent and area of each watershed affecting the design of
detention facilities as shown on United States Geological Survey Quadrangle
Maps or other more detailed maps as required by the Council.
      (2)   The preliminary layout and design of proposed storm sewers, the
outfall and outlet locations and approximate elevations, the receiving stream
or channel and its 100 year return period water elevation.
      (3)   The location and design of the proposed street system, especially
including depressed pavements used to convey or temporarily store overflow from
the heavier rainstorms, and the outlets for such overflow.
      (4)   The locations, cross sections and profiles of existing streams and
flood plains to be maintained, and new channels to be constructed.
      (5)   The materials, elevations, waterway openings, and the basis for
design of proposed culverts and bridges.
      (6)   Existing detention ponds and basins to be maintained, enlarged, or
otherwise altered and new ponds or basins to be built and the basis of their
design.
      (7)   The estimated depth and amount of storage required in the new ponds
or basins.
      (8)   The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces
existing and expected to be constructed when the development is completed.
      (9)   Any interim plan which is to be incorporated into the development
pending completion of the development and the final drainage plan.
   (C)   Valley Cross Section. One or more typical cross sections must be
provided showing all existing and proposed channels or other open drainage
facilities carried to a point above the 100 year high water elevation; showing
the elevation of the existing land and the proposed changes thereto, together
with the high water elevations expected from the 100 year storm under the
controlled conditions called for by this ordinance; and showing the
relationship of structures, streets and other facilities.
   (D)   Site Plan. A plan drawn to scale showing dimensions of the site with
existing and proposed facilities must be provided. All plan views shall
include, but may not be limited to, the following information when applicable:
      (1)   A North arrow;
      (2)   The scale used;
      (3)   Site location map;
      (4)   Property boundaries with bearing and distance;
      (5)   Property owner/developer;
      (6)   Building setback lines;
      (7)   Location of all existing and proposed facilities/utilities;
      (8)   Topography in the area affected by construction.
   (E)   Final Drainage Plans.
      (1)   Upon approval of the preliminary drainage plans by the Council,
final drainage plans shall be submitted to the Council. The final plans shall
provide or be accompanied by calculations, maps and/or other descriptive
material showing the following:
         (a)   The extent and area of each watershed tributary to the drainage
channels in the development.
         (b)   The street storm sewers and other storm drains to be built, the
basis of their design, outfall and outlet locations and elevations, the
receiving stream or channel and its high water elevation, and the functioning
of the drains during high water conditions.
         (c)   The parts of the proposed street system where pavements are
planned to be depressed sufficiently to convey or temporarily store overflow
from storm sewers and over the curb runoff resulting from the heavier
rainstorms and the outlets for such overflow.
         (d)   Existing streams and flood plains to be maintained, and new
channels to be constructed, their locations, cross sections and profiles.
         (e)   Proposed culverts and bridges to be built, their materials,
elevations, waterway openings and basis of their design.
         (f)   Existing detention basins and ponds to be maintained, enlarged,
or otherwise altered and new basins or ponds to be built and the basis of their
design.
         (g)   The estimated location and percentage of impervious surfaces
existing and expected to be constructed when the development is completed.
         (h)   The slope, type and size of all sewers and other waterways.
         (i)   For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage
volumes with corresponding water surface elevations and a plot or tabulation of
the basin outflow rates for those water surface elevations.
      (2)   A written report must be included with each preliminary and final
drainage plan. The report will contain a summary description of:
         (a)   The significant drainage problems associated with the project;
         (b)   The analysis procedure used to evaluate these problems and to
propose solutions;
         (c)   Any assumptions or special conditions associated with the use of
these procedures;
         (d)   The proposed design of the drainage control system; and
         (e)   The results of the analysis of the proposed drainage control
system showing that it does solve the project’s drainage problems.
      (3)   The following additional documents should be submitted with all
applications submitted for approval:
         (a)   A hydraulic report detailing existing and proposed drainage
patterns on the subject site. The report should include a description of the
present land use as well as proposed land use. Any off site drainage entering
the site should also be addressed. This report should be comprehensive and
detail all the design steps which the design engineer took during the design.
         (b)   All hydrologic and hydraulic computations should be included in
the submittal. These calculations should include, but not be limited to: runoff
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; runoff calculation; stage discharge
relationships; times of concentration; and storage volume.
         (c)   Copies of all computer runs. These computer runs should include
both the input and the outputs. A floppy diskette with input files will
expedite the review process.
         (d)   A set of plan drawings stamped by a Registered Professional
Engineer showing all proposed detention areas, storm sewers, inlets, outfall
structures, open ditches, culverts and bridges.
         (e)   A set of exhibits should be included showing the drainage
subareas and a schematic detailing of how any computer model inputs were set
up.
         (f)   A conclusion report summarizing the hydraulic design and
detailing how this design satisfies the Mt. Vernon Storm Water and Sediment
Control Ordinance.
   (F)   Submittal and Consideration of Plans. The Council and/or its Engineer
shall attempt to approve or disapprove any preliminary plans, final plans and/
or construction plans within forty five (45) days of receipt of a complete
submittal unless applicant requests to a time extension. All approvals and
disapprovals shall be in writing.
   (G)   Engineering Review Fees.
      (1)   As a condition of and prior to approval of final drainage plans by
the Council, the applicant shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon the actual costs
incurred by the City in respect to the review of all preliminary plans, final
plans and/or construction plans by a licensed professional engineer in excess
of the first four (4) hours of such review and consultation.
      (2)   The City shall furnish to the applicant in writing prior to the
approval of the applicant’s final drainage plan a written statement specifying
the total cost of professional engineering fees incurred by the City in
connection with the review of applicant’s plans, including the total hours
expended by such professional engineer, and the amount required to be paid by
applicant prior to approval of final drainage plans by the Council. As a
condition of and prior to approval of final drainage plans, applicant shall pay
to the City of Mt. Vernon Clerk the sum set forth in said statement
representing the cost of professional engineering services in excess of the
following number of hours thereof incurred by the City in connection with the
review of applicant’s preliminary and final drainage plans and accompanying
information and data: Four (4) hours for individual site plans, subdivisions,
and/or other projects that involve storm water drainage plans and/or
calculation.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-7)
§ 53.08 DETERMINATION OF RUNOFF QUANTITIES.
   Runoff quantities shall be computed for the area of the parcel under
development plus the area of the watershed flowing into the parcel under
development. The quantity of runoff which is generated as the result of a given
rainfall intensity may be calculated as follows:
   (A)   Areas up to and Including 100 Acres.
      (1)   For areas up to and including one hundred (100) acres and for sites
with no depressional storage, the Rational Method may be used. In the Rational
Method, the peak rate of runoff, Q, in cubic feet per second is computed as:
Q = CIA, where
C = runoff coefficient, representing the characteristics of the drainage area
and defined as the ratio of runoff to rainfall.
I = average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to
the time of concentration (tc) for a selected rainfall frequency.
A = tributary drainage area in acres.
      (2)   Guidance to the selection of the runoff coefficient “C” is provided
by Table 1 and Table 1A which show values for different types of surface and
local soil characteristics. The composite “C” value used for a given drainage
area with various surface types shall be the weighted average value for the
total area calculated from a breakdown of individual area having different
surface types.
      (3)   Table 2 provides runoff coefficients and inlet times for different
land use classifications. In the instance of undeveloped land situated in an
upstream area, a coefficient or coefficients shall be used for this area in its
present or existing state of development.
      (4)   Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the rainfall frequency
curves shown in Figure 1 or from data shown in Table 5A. The time of
concentration (tc) to be used shall be the sum of the inlet time and flow time
in the drainage facility from the most remote part of the drainage area to the
point under consideration. The flow time in the storm sewers may be estimated
by the distance in feet divided by velocity of flow in feet per second. The
velocity shall be determined by the Manning formula.
      (5)   Inlet time is the combined time required for the runoff to reach
the inlet of the storm sewer. It includes overland flow time and flow time
through established surface drainage channels such as swales, ditches and sheet
flow across such areas as lawns, fields, and other graded surfaces. It may be
computed by using Figure 2.
   (B)   Areas in Excess of 100 acres. The runoff rate for area in excess of
100 acres shall be determined by methods described in §
53.15(G).
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-8)
§ 53.09 AMOUNT OF RUNOFF TO BE ACCOMMODATED BY VARIOUS PARTS OF DRAINAGE
FACILITY.
   Various parts of a drainage facility must accommodate runoff water as
follows:
   (A)   Minor Drainage System.
      (1)   The minor drainage system such as inlets, catch basins, street
gutters, swales, sewers and small channels which collect storm water (runoff)
must accommodate peak runoff from a 10 year return frequency storm. Duration,
for sizing these conveyances, using the rational method shall be equal to the
time of concentration. The Rational Method is acceptable for storm sewer
design, as long as the TR-55 time of concentration methodology is used.
Determination of hydraulic capacity for storm sewers sized by Rational Method
analysis should be done using Manning’s Equation.
      (2)   When using the HEC-1, TR-20 or comparable computer program, the
design should use the Huff First Quartile (50%) rainfall distribution with no
greater than a one hour storm duration; however, these minimum requirements
must be satisfied:
         (a)   The allowable spread of water on Collector Streets is limited to
maintaining two clear 10 foot moving lanes of traffic. One lane is to be
maintained on Local Roads, while Places can have a water spread equal to one
half of their width.
         (b)   Open channels carrying peak flows greater than 30 cubic feet per
second shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff for a 50 year return
period storm within the drainage easement.
         (c)   Culverts shall be capable of accommodating peak runoff from a 50
year return frequency storm when crossing under roads which are part of the
functional classification and are classified as primary or secondary arterial
streets.
   (B)   Major Drainage Systems. Major drainage systems are defined in §
53.04, and shall be designed in accordance with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources, and
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Standards as described in §
53.06.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-9)
§ 53.10 LEVEL OF PROTECTION FOR URBAN AREAS.
   First floor elevations of all buildings shall be such that all floors
including basements shall have two feet of free board above the 100 year flood
elevation or at the flood protection grade.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-10)
§ 53.11 STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All storm sewers, whether private of public, and whether constructed on
private or public property shall conform to the design standards and other
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning Equation.
      (1)   The hydraulic capacity of storm sewers shall be determined using
Manning’s Equation:
V = (1.486/n )(R 2/3)(s 1/2), where
V = mean velocity of flow in feet per second
R = the hydraulic radius in feet, A/P, cross sectional area / wetted perimeter
s = the slope of the energy grade line in feet per foot
n = roughness coefficient
      (2)   The hydraulic radius, R, is defined as the cross sectional area of
flow divided by the wetted flow surface or wetted perimeter. Typical “n” values
and maximum permissible velocities for storm sewer materials are listed in
Table 3. Roughness coefficients (n) values for other sewer materials can be
found in standard hydraulics texts and references.
   (B)   Minimum size. The minimum size of all storm sewers shall be 12 inches.
Rate of release for detention storage shall be controlled by an orifice plate
or other devices, subject to approval of the Council, where the 12 inch pipe
will not limit rate of release as required.
   (C)   Grade. Sewer grade shall be such that, in general, a minimum of two
feet of cover is maintained over the top of the pipe. Pipe cover less than the
minimum may be used only upon approval of the Council. Uniform slopes shall be
maintained between inlets, manholes and inlets to manholes. A minimum drop of
0.1 foot through manholes and inlets should be provided. Final grade shall be
set with full consideration of the capacity required, sedimentation problems
and other design parameters. Minimum and maximum allowable slopes shall be
those capable of producing velocities of two and one half and 15 feet per
second, respectively, when the sewer is flowing full.
   (D)   Alignment. Storm sewers shall be straight between manholes insofar as
possible. Where long radius curves are necessary to conform to street layout,
the minimum radius of curvature shall be no less than 100 feet for sewers 42
inches and larger in diameter. Deflection of pipe sections shall not exceed the
maximum deflection recommended by the pipe manufacturer. The deflection shall
be uniform and finished installation shall follow a smooth curve.
   (E)   Manholes.
      (1)   Manholes shall be installed to provide access to continuous
underground storm sewers for the purpose of inspection and maintenance.
Manholes may be used as inlet or drainage structures and shall be provided at
the following locations:
         (a)   Where one or more storm sewers converge.
         (b)   At the point of beginning or at the end of a curve, and at the
point of reverse curvature (PC, PT, PRC).
         (c)   Where the pipe size changes.
         (d)   Where an abrupt change in alignment occurs.
         (e)   Where a change in grade occurs.
         (f)   At suitable intervals in straight sections of sewer.
      (2)   The maximum distance between storm sewer manholes, unless otherwise
approved by the Council, shall be as follows:
 
Size of Pipe (inches) Maximum Distance (feet)
12 through 42         400
48 and larger         600
 
   (F)   Inlets.
      (1)   (a)   Inlets or drainage structures shall be utilized to collect
surface water through grated openings and convey it to storm sewers, channels
or culverts. Inlet design and spacing shall be in accordance with Section 8-300
of the Illinois Department of Transportation Drainage Manual or other approved
design procedure.
         (b)   The inlet grate opening provided must be adequate to pass the
design 10 year flow with 50% of the sag inlet areas clogged. An overflow
channel from sag inlets to the overflow channel or basin shall be provided at
sag inlets, so that the maximum depth of water that might be ponded in the
street sag shall not exceed 7 inches. Inlets may be used as manholes at
locations where the pipe sizes do not exceed eighteen (18) inches in diameter.
      (2)   Inlet design and spacing may be done using the Rational Method. Use
of the HEC 12 computer program is also an acceptable method. Gutter spread on
continuous grades may be determined using the modified Manning’s equation, or
by using the attached Figure 3, Flow in Triangular Gutter Sections.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-11)
§ 53.12 WORKMANSHIP AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Workmanship. The specifications for the construction of storm sewers
shall not be less stringent than those set forth in the latest edition of the
Illinois Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction”.
   (B)   Materials. Storm sewer manholes, inlets, pipe and fittings used in
storm sewer construction shall conform to the materials shown in the latest
edition of the Illinois Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction”.
   (C)   Special Hydraulic Structures.
      (1)   Special hydraulic structures required to control the flow of water
in storm runoff drainage systems include junction chambers, drop manholes,
inverted siphons, stilling basins, or other special structures.
      (2)   The use of these structures shall be limited to those locations
justified by prudent planning and by careful and thorough hydraulic engineering
analysis.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-12)
§ 53.13 OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All open channels, whether private or public, and whether constructed on
private or public land, shall conform to the design standards and other design
requirements contained herein.
   (A)   Manning Equation. The waterway for channels shall be determined using
Manning’s Equation.
Q = AV = A (1.486/n) (R 2/3) (s 1/2), where:
A = waterway area of channel in square feet
Q = discharge in cubic feet per second, cfs
V, R, s and n are explained in § 53.11(A)
   (B)   Channel Cross Section and Grade.
      (1)   The required channel cross section and grade are determined by the
design capacity, the material in which the channel is to be constructed, and
the requirements for maintenance. A minimum depth may be required to provide
adequate outlets for subsurface drains, tributary ditches, or streams. The
channel grade shall be such that the velocity in the channel is high enough to
prevent siltation, but low enough to prevent erosion.
      (2)   Velocities less than 1.5 feet per second should be avoided because
siltation will take place and ultimately reduce the channel cross section. The
maximum permissible velocities in vegetal lined channel are shown in Table 4.
Developments through which the channel is to be constructed must be considered
in the design of the channel section.
   (C)   Side Slopes. Earthen channel side slopes shall be no steeper than 2 to
1. Flatter slopes may be required to prevent erosion and for ease of
maintenance. Where channels will be lined, side slopes shall be no steeper than
1-1/2 to 1 with adequate provisions made for weep holes. Side slopes steeper
than 1-1/2 to 1 may be used for lined channels providing that the side lining
and structural retaining wall are designed and constructed with provisions for
live and dead load surcharge.
   (D)   Channel stability.
      (1)   Characteristics of a stable channel are:
         (a)   It neither aggrades nor degrades beyond tolerable limits.
         (b)   The channel banks do not erode to the extent that the channel
cross section is changed appreciably.
         (c)   Excessive sediment bars do not develop.
         (d)   Excessive erosion does not occur around culverts, bridges or
elsewhere.
         (e)   Gullies do not form or enlarge due to the entry of uncontrolled
surface flow to the channel.
      (2)   Channel stability shall be determined for an aged condition and the
velocity shall be based on the design flow or the bank full flow, whichever is
greater, using “n” values for various channel linings as shown in Table 3. In
no case is it necessary to check channel stability for discharges greater than
that from a 100 year return period storm.
      (3)   Channel stability must be checked for conditions immediately after
construction. For this stability analysis, the velocity shall be calculated for
the expected flow from a ten year return period storm on the watershed, or the
bank full flow, whichever is smaller. The “n” value for newly constructed
channels in fine grained soils and sands may be determined in accordance with
the National Engineering Handbook 5, Supplement B, Soil Conservation Service,
and shall not exceed 0.025. The allowable velocity in the newly constructed
channel may be increased by a maximum of 20 percent to reflect the effects of
vegetation to be established under the following conditions:
         (a)   The soil and site in which the channel is to be constructed are
suitable for rapid establishment and support of erosion controlling vegetation.
         (b)   Species of erosion controlling vegetation adapted to the area,
and proven methods of establishment are shown.
         (c)   The channel design includes detailed plans for establishment of
vegetation on the channel side slopes.
   (E)   Drainage of Waterways. Vegetated waterways that are subject to low
flows of long duration or where wet conditions prevail shall be drained with a
tile system or by other means such as paved gutters. Tile lines may outlet
through a drop structure at the end of the waterway or through a standard tile
outlet.
   (F)   Establishment of New Drain. When the Council determines it is
necessary to establish a new drain, each developer must provide the necessary
information and meet the requirements of this ordinance.
   (G)   Appurtenant Structures.
      (1)   The design of channels will provide all structures required for the
proper functioning of the channel and the laterals thereto and travelways for
operation and maintenance. Recessed inlets and structures needed for entry of
surface and subsurface flow into channels without significant erosion or
degradation shall be included in the design of channel improvements.
      (2)   The design is also to provide the necessary flood gates, water
level control devices, and any other appurtenance affecting the functioning of
the channels and the attainment of the purpose for which they are built.
      (3)   The effect of channel improvements on existing culverts, bridges,
buried cables, pipelines and inlet structures for surface and subsurface
drainage on the channel being improved and laterals thereto shall be evaluated
to determine the need for modification or replacement.
      (4)   Culverts and bridges which are modified or added as part of channel
improvement projects shall meet reasonable standards for the type of structure,
and shall have a minimum capacity equal to the design discharge or governmental
agency design requirements, whichever is greater.
   (H)   Disposition of Spoil. Spoil material resulting from clearing, grubbing
and channel excavation shall be disposed in such a manner which will:
      (1)   Minimize overbank wash.
      (2)   Provide, for the free flow of water between the channel and flood
plain unless the valley routing and water surface profile are based on
continuous dikes being installed.
      (3)   Not hinder the development of travelways for maintenance.
      (4)   Leave the right-of-way in the best condition feasible, consistent
with the project purposes, for productive use by the owner.
      (5)   Improve the aesthetic appearance of the site to the extent
feasible.
      (6)   Be approved by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or US Army Corps of Engineers
(whichever is applicable) if deposited in the floodway.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-13)
§ 53.14 CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Construction. Specifications shall be in keeping with the proceeding
standards and shall describe the requirements for proper installation of the
project to achieve its intended purpose.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Materials acceptable for use as channel lining are:
         (a)   Grass.
         (b)   Revetment riprap.
         (c)   Concrete.
         (d)   Hand laid riprap.
         (e)   Precast cement concrete riprap.
         (f)   Grouted riprap.
         (g)   Gabions.
      (2)   Other lining materials may be used with prior approval of the
Council. Materials shall comply with the latest edition of the Illinois
Department of Transportation’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction”.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-14)
§ 53.15 STORM WATER DETENTION.
   The following shall govern the design of any improvement with respect to the
detention of storm water runoff.
   (A)   Acceptable Detention Methods. The increased storm water runoff (peak
rate) resulting from a proposed development should be detained on site by the
provisions of appropriate wet or dry bottom reservoirs, by storage on flat
roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns or other acceptable techniques. Measures
which retard the rate of overland flow and the velocity in runoff channels
shall also be used to control the runoff rate partially. Detention basins shall
be sized to store excess flows from storms with a ten (10) year and one hundred
(100) year return period. Control devices shall limit the discharge to a rate
no greater than that prescribed by this ordinance (see Sections (F) and (G)).
   (B)   Time of Concentration. All storm water management projects within the
City of Mt. Vernon must be done using the time of concentration methodology
outlined in the SCS TR-55 manual. The TR-55 method examines the factors which
affect time of concentration including surface roughness, channel shape and
flow patterns along with watershed slope. Through the examination of sheet,
shallow, concentrated and open channel flows, a more refined time of
concentration may be determined. The methodology represents the best attempt of
a Federal Agency to standardize times of concentration procedures.
   (C)   Design Storm. Design of storm water detention facilities shall be
based on a return period of once in 10 years and once in 100 years. The storage
volume and outflow rate shall be sufficient to handle storm water runoff from a
critical duration storm, as defined in Sections (F) and (G). Rainfall depth
duration frequency relationships and intensity duration frequency relationships
shall be those given in Tables 5 and 5A.
   (D)   Allowable Release Rate.
      (1)   Design of storm water detention facilities shall be based on the
allowable release rate of storm water originating from a proposed development
and shall not exceed the amount specified in §
53.05 Storm Water Control Policy, and as described in Sections (F) and (G).
      (2)   In the event the natural downstream channel or storm sewer system
is inadequate to accommodate the release rate provided in Table 5A, then the
allowable release rate shall be reduced to that rate permitted by the capacity
of the receiving downstream channel or storm sewer system and additional
detention as determined by the Council shall be required to store that portion
of the runoff exceeding the capacity of the receiving sewers or waterways.
      (3)   The area will be considered an impact drainage area subject to the
provisions of §
53.18 of this Ordinance.
      (3)   If more than one detention basin is involved in the development of
the area upstream of the limiting restriction, the allowable release rate from
any one detention basin shall be in direct proportion to the ratio of its
drainage area to the drainage area of the entire watershed upstream of the
restriction.
   (E)   Drainage System Overflow Design. Drainage systems shall have adequate
capacity to convey the storm water runoff from all upstream tributary areas
through the development under consideration for a storm of 100 year design
return period calculated on the basis of upstream land in its undeveloped
state. An allowance, equivalent to the reduction in flow rate provided, shall
be made for upstream detention when such upstream detention and release rate
have previously been approved by the Council and evidence of its construction
can be shown.
   (F)   Determination of Storage Volume Rational Method.
      (1)   The Rational Method may be used to determine the 10 year return
period undeveloped release rate for sites of less than five (5) acres of
commonly owned contiguous property where no depressional storage exists.
      (2)   Step Procedure.
         (a)   Determine total drainage area in acres “A”.
         (b)   Determine composite runoff coefficient “Cu” based on existing
land use (undeveloped).
         (c)   Determine time of concentration “Tc” in minutes based on
existing conditions.
         (d)   Determine rainfall intensity “Iu” in inches per hour, based on
time of concentration and using Figure 1 or from data given in Table 5A for the
ten (10) year return period.
         (e)   Compute runoff based on existing land use (undeveloped), and ten
(10) year return period:
Qu = CuIuA
         (f)   Determine composite runoff coefficient “Cd” based on developed
conditions and a one hundred (100) year return period.
         (g)   Determine the one hundred (100) year return period rainfall
intensity “Id” for various storm durations “td” up through the time of
concentration for the developed area using Table 5A.
         (h)   Determine developed inflow rates “Qd” for various storm
durations “td” measured in hours.
Qd = CdIdA
         (i)   Compute a storage rate “Std” for various storm durations “td” up
through the time of concentration of the developed area.
Std = Qd Qu
         (j)   Compute required storage volume “SR” in acre feet for each storm
duration “td”. This assumes a triangular hydrograph of duration (2td) hours
with the peak flow of Std and td hours.
SR = Std (td/12)
         (k)   Select the largest storage volume computed in step 10 for
detention basin design.
   (G)   Determination of Storage Volume Hydrograph Methods.
      (1)   Methods other than the rational method for determining runoff and
routing of storm water may be used to determine the storage volume required to
control storm water runoff. The SCS TR-20 computer model with the SCS TR-55
time of concentration and curve number calculation methodologies, and Huff
Third Quartile (50%) rainfall distribution (Table 6) must be used to determine
the 10 year return period pre development release rate for sites of five (5)
acres or more and for sites with existing depressional storage. The SCS TR-20,
and SCS TR-55 models are approved by the Council for appropriate use in
analysis of the runoff and routing of storm water. The use of these models or
other approved procedures can be defined in an eight step procedure to
determine the required storage volume of the detention basin.
      (2)   Step Procedure.
         (a)   Calibrate the hydrologic/hydraulic model that is to be used for
prediction of runoff and routing of storm water.
         (b)   Determine the critical storm duration. The critical duration
storm for computer modeling shall be equal to or greater than the time of
concentration for the watershed being modeled.
         (c)   Determine the ten (10) year, undeveloped peak flow. Denote this
flow by Qu10.
         (d)   Determine the one hundred (100) year runoff hydrograph (Hd100)
for developed conditions.
         (e)   Determine the hydrograph that must be stored (Hs100) by
subtracting a flow up to Qu10 from the hydrograph (Hd100) found in step (d).
         (f)   Determine the volume of water (Vs) to be stored by calculating
the area under the hydrograph Hs100.
         (g)   The detention basin must be designed to store the largest volume
(Vs) found for any storm duration analyzed in step (f).
         (h)   Approved routing techniques may be used to determine the final
detention storage required.
   (H)   General Detention Basin Design Requirements.
      (1)   Basins shall be constructed to detain temporarily the storm water
runoff which exceeds the maximum peak flow rate authorized by this Ordinance.
The volume of such storage provided in these basins, together with such storage
as may be authorized in other on site facilities shall be sufficient to control
excess runoff from the one hundred (100) year storm.
      (2)   The following design principles shall be observed:
         (a)   The maximum volume of water stored and subsequently released at
the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in excess of 48
hours unless additional storms occur within the period.
         (b)   The maximum planned depth of storm water stored (without a
permanent pool) shall not exceed four feet.
         (c)   All storm water detention facilities shall be separated by not
less than 25 feet from any building or structure to be occupied.
         (d)   All excavated excess spoil may be spread so as to provide for
aesthetic and recreational features such as sliding hills, sports fields, etc.
Detention pond side slopes no steeper than 6 horizontal to 1 vertical for
safety, erosion control, stability and ease of maintenance shall be permitted.
         (e)   Safety screens having a maximum opening of 4 inches shall be
provided for any pipe or opening to prevent children or large animals from
crawling into the structures.
         (f)   Danger signs shall be mounted at appropriate locations to warn
of deep water, possible flooding conditions during storm periods and other
dangers that exist. Fencing shall be provided if deemed necessary by the
Council.
         (g)   Outlet control structures shall be designed to operate as simply
as possible and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for
proper operation. They shall limit discharges into existing or planned
downstream channels or conduits so as not to exceed the predetermined maximum
authorized peak flow rate.
         (h)   Emergency overflow facilities such as a weir or spillway shall
be provided for the release of exceptional storm runoffs or in emergency
conditions should the normal discharge devices become totally or partially
inoperative. The overflow facility shall be of such design that its operation
is automatic and does not require manual attention.
         (i)   Grass or other suitable vegetative cover shall be provided
throughout the entire basin area. Grass should be cut regularly at
approximately monthly intervals during the growing season or as required.
         (j)   Debris and trash removal and other necessary maintenance shall
be performed on a regular basis to assure continued operation in conformance to
design.
         (k)   Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all
design features.
         (l)   No residential lot or any parts thereof shall be used for the
storage of water, either temporary or permanent, without approval of the
Council.
   (I)   Dry Bottom Basin Design Requirements. Detention basins which will not
contain a permanent pool of water shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Provisions shall be incorporated to facilitate complete interior
drainage of dry bottom basins, to include the provisions of natural grades to
outlet structures, longitudinal and transverse grades to perimeter drainage
facilities, paved gutters, or the installation of subsurface drains.
      (2)   The detention basin shall, whenever possible, be designed to serve
a secondary or multipurpose function. Recreational facilities, aesthetic
qualities (open spaces) or other types of use shall be considered in planning
the detention facility.
   (J)   Wet Bottom Basin Design Requirements. Where a part of a detention
basin will contain a permanent pool of water, all the items required for
detention storage shall apply except that the system of drains without a
positive gravity outlet required to maintain a dry bottom basin will not be
required. A controlled positive outlet will be required to maintain the design
water level in the wet bottom basin and provide required detention storage
above the design water level. However, the following additional conditions
shall apply:
      (1)   (a)   Basins designed with permanent pools or containing permanent
ponds shall have a water area of at least one half acre.
         (b)   If fish are to be maintained in the pond, a minimum depth of
approximately 10 feet shall be maintained over at least 25 percent of the pond
area. The remaining pond area shall have no extensive shallow areas, except as
required by subsection (3) below.
      (2)   In excavated lakes the underwater side slopes in the lake shall be
stable. In the case of valley storage, natural slopes may be considered to be
stable.
      (3)   A safety ledge four to six feet in width is required and must be
installed in all ponds approximately 30 to 36 inches below the permanent water
level. In addition, a similar maintenance ledge 12 to 18 inches above the
permanent water line shall be provided.
      (4)   A safety ramp exit from the pond is required in all cases and shall
have a minimum width of 20 feet and exit slope of 6 horizontal to 1 vertical.
The ramp shall be of a material that will prevent its deterioration due to
vehicle use and/or wave action.
      (5)   Periodic maintenance is required in ponds to control weed growth
and larval growth. The pond shall also be designed to provide for the easy
removal of sediment which will accumulate during periods of pond operation. A
means of maintaining the designed water level of the pond during prolonged
periods of dry weather is also required.
      (6)   For emergency use, basin cleaning, or shoreline maintenance,
facilities shall be provided or plan prepared for auxiliary equipment to permit
emptying and drainage.
      (7)   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be provided,
if required. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness of these
aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering plans. Agreements
for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be
prepared to the satisfaction of the Council.
      (8)   The perimeter of wet bottom detention basins, defined by the high
water contour which represents the high water elevation, shall be a minimum
horizontal distance of 10 feet from high voltage electric lines.
   (K)   Roof Top Storage. Detention storage requirements may be met in total
or in part by detention on flat roofs. Details of such designs are to be
included in the building permit application and shall include the depth and
volume of storage, details of outlet devices and downdrains, and elevations of
emergency overflow provisions.
   (L)   Parking Lot Storage. Paved parking lots may be designed to provide
detention storage of storm waters on all or a portion of their surfaces. Depths
of storage must be limited to a maximum depth of six (6) inches so as to
prevent damage to parked vehicles and so that access to parked vehicles is not
impaired. Locate the deepest ponding zones at remote and least used portions of
the parking lot.
   (M)   Facility Financial Responsibilities. The construction cost of storm
water detention systems and facilities as required by this ordinance shall be
part of the cost of land development.
   (N)   Facility Maintenance Responsibility.
      (1)   Maintenance of detention/retention facilities during construction
and thereafter shall be the responsibility of the land developer/owner.
Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one
lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds,
unless responsibility is formally accepted by a public body. This determination
shall be made before the final drainage plans are approved.
      (2)   Storm water detention and retention basins may be donated to the
City of Mt. Vernon or other unit of government approved by the City, for
ownership and permanent maintenance providing:
         (a)   The City or other governmental unit is willing to accept
responsibility and the City Council accepts operation and maintenance in
writing by appropriate resolution.
         (b)   The facility has been designed and constructed according to all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
         (c)   All improvements have been constructed, approved and accepted by
the City for the land area served by the basin.
         (d)   Retention ponds containing a permanent pool of water have all
slopes between the permanent pool and high water line sodded and the remaining
land area hydroseeded using a method approved by the Council; are equipped with
electrically driven aeration devices, if required to maintain proper aerobic
conditions and sustain aquatic life; provide suitable access acceptable to the
responsible government agency; and have the high water line not closer than 25
feet to any property line.
         (e)   Dry detention ponds shall have all slopes, bottom of the basin
and areas above the high water line hydroseeded; and shall have the high water
line not closer than 25 feet to any development boundary.
   (O)   Inspections. All public and privately owned detention storage
facilities shall be subject to inspection by representatives of the City.
   (P)   Corrective Measures. If deficiencies are found upon inspection, the
owner of the detention/retention facility shall be required to take the
necessary measures to correct such deficiencies. If the owner fails to do so,
the City may undertake the work and the owner shall be personally liable for
all costs incurred by the City and the real estate shall be subject to a lien
for said costs, which lien may be foreclosed by the City with all the costs and
expenses therefore, including reasonable attorney’s fees being assessed against
the owner and the real estate.
   (Q)   Joint Development of Control Systems. Storm water control systems may
be planned and constructed jointly by two or more developers as long as
compliance with this Ordinance is maintained. Developers are encouraged to plan
and construct these systems on a joint or regional basis.
   (R)   Installation of Control Systems. Runoff and erosion control systems
shall be installed as soon as possible during the course of site development.
Detention/retention basins shall be designed with an additional 6 (six) percent
of available capacity to allow for sediment accumulation resulting from
development and to permit the pond to function for reasonable periods between
cleanings. Basins should be designed to collect sediment and debris in specific
locations so that removal cost are kept to a minimum. The Council will require
temporary and permanent erosion control plans to be submitted as a part of the
construction plans.
   (S)   Detention Facilities in Flood Plains. If detention storage is provided
within a flood plain, only the net increase in storage volume above that which
naturally existed on the flood plain shall be credited to the development. No
credit will be granted for volumes below the elevation of the regulatory flood
at the location unless compensatory storage is also provided.
   (T)   Off Site Drainage Provision. When the allowable runoff is released in
an area that is susceptible to flooding, the developer may be required to
construct appropriate storm drains through such area to avert increased flood
hazard caused by the concentration of allowable runoff at one point instead of
the natural overland distribution. The requirement of off site drains shall be
at the discretion of the Council.
   (U)   Erosion Control. Erosion control plans shall be submitted as part of
the construction plans and specifications and shall include the following:
      (1)   A complete copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Control Plan
filed with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   Temporary erosion control measures necessary during the initial
construction and establishment phases up to final site grading and seeding.
      (3)   A permanent erosion control plan of all the graded and non-hard
surface areas within the proposed development, as planned for completion, up to
and including seeding of the final lot on which business or residential
dwellings are to be placed.
      (4)   Details concerning removal of temporary erosion control devices
after the initial establishment of adequate vegetative cover.
      (5)   Maintenance procedures, as part of the continuing plan, to keep all
of the land under adequate cover and erosion at an acceptable minimum.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-15)
§ 53.16 CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   After completion of the project and before final approval and
acceptance can be made, an “As Built” set of plans prepared and certified by a
professional engineer shall be submitted to the Council for review. These plans
shall include all pertinent data relevant to the completed storm drainage
system and shall include:
      (1)   Pipe size and pipe material.
      (2)   Invert elevations.
      (3)   Top rim elevations.
      (4)   Lengths of all pipe structures.
      (5)   Data and calculations showing detention basin storage volume.
      (6)   Certified statement on plans stating the completed storm drainage
system substantially complies with construction plans as approved by the
Council.
   (B)   All such submitted plans shall be reviewed for compliance by the
Engineer or other City designee. Upon approval of the submitted plans, such
approval shall be evidenced in writing to the person submitting the plans.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-16)
§ 53.17 CHANGES IN PLAN.
   Any revision to, and/or significant change or deviation from the detailed
plans and specifications after formal approval by the Council shall be filed in
duplicate with and approved by the Council prior to implementation of the
revision or change. Copies of the revisions or changes, if approved, shall be
attached to the original plans and specifications.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-17)
§ 53.18 DETERMINATION OF IMPACT DRAINAGE AREAS.
   (A)   The Council is authorized, but is not required to classify certain
geographical areas as Impact Drainage Areas and to enact and promulgate
regulations which are generally applied. In determining Impact Drainage Areas,
the Council shall consider such factors as topography, soil type, capacity of
existing regulated drains and distance from adequate drainage facility. The
following areas shall be designated as Impact Drainage Areas, unless good
reason for not including them is presented to the Board:
      (1)   A floodway or flood plain as designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (2)   Land within 100 feet of each bank of any stream or main drainage
channel.
      (3)   Land within 100 feet of the centerline of any stream or main
drainage channel now in conduit.
      (4)   Land subject to flooding and/or areas that have previously
exhibited drainage deficiencies.
   (B)   Land where there is not an adequate outlet, taking into consideration
the capacity and depth of the outlet, may be designated as an Impact Drainage
Area by resolution of the Council. Special requirements for development within
any Impact Drainage Area shall be included in the resolution.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-18)
§ 53.19 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sump Pumps. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge groundwaters
or other storm waters shall be connected to the storm sewer where possible or
discharged into a designated storm drainage channel. Sump pumps installed to
receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage shall be
connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function
only, either the discharge of storm waters or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   (B)   Down Spouts. All down spouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the
ground or be connected to the storm sewer. No down spouts or roof drains shall
be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Footing Drains. Footing drains shall be connected to storm sewers
where possible or designated storm drainage channels. No footing drains or
drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Basement Floor Drains. Basement floor drains shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-19)
§ 53.20 REGIONAL DRAINAGE PLANS.
   The Council may establish a regional drainage plan or Interim Regional
Drainage Plan which controls drainage requirements within a specified drainage
area.
   (A)   Regional Drainage Plan or Interim Drainage Plan shall specify:
      (1)   A description of the region;
      (2)   The basis for the region having a Regional Drainage Plan;
      (3)   Potential areas of ground water discharge and recharge;
      (4)   What modifications or waivers of this Ordinance apply in the
region; and
      (5)   What additional drainage or drainage plan requirements, beyond
those in this Ordinance, apply in the region.
   (B)   A Regional Drainage Plan or Interim Drainage Plan may provide:
      (1)   For regional detention and/or storage of storm water;
      (2)   For design or performance standards to ensure water quality;
      (3)   For design requirements to ensure compatibility with the plan for
regional detention and storage; and
      (4)   For a charge, in land or dollars, based upon the size and nature of
the development, for the use of regional storm water detention and/or storage
facilities for new development.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-20)
§ 53.21 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of protection required by this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or storm
water runoff depths may be increased by man made or natural causes. This
Ordinance does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from storm water
damage.
   (B)   This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Mt. Vernon or any officer or employee thereof for any damage which may result
from reliance on this Ordinance or on any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-21)
§ 53.22 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Mt. Vernon from taking
such lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All
costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-22)
§ 53.23 EXEMPT PROJECTS.
   Any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision (major or minor) or
construction project thereon, which has had its drainage plan approved by the
Council prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from all
of the requirements of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 20, § 20-23)
APPENDIX A: TABLES AND FIGURES
   (A)   Table 1 - Urban Runoff Coefficients Urban Runoff Coefficients.
Type of Surface Runoff Coefficient “C”
Type of Surface            Runoff Coefficient “C”
Asphalt                    0.82
Concrete                   0.85
Roof                       0.85
Lawn (sandy)
   Flat (0—2% Slope)  0.07
   Rolling (2—7% Slope0.12
   Steep (greater than 70.17
Lawns (Clay)
   Flat (0—2% Slope)  0.16
   Rolling (2—7% Slope0.21
   Steep (greater than 70.3
 
      1.   The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5 to
10 year frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms
shall be modified as follows:
Return Period (yrs)       Multiply “C” by   (B)   Table 1A - Rural Runoff
                          Coefficients.
Rural Runoff Coefficients
Type of Surface           Runoff Coefficient “C”
Woodland (Sandy)           
   Flat (0—5% Slope) 0.1
   Rolling (5—10% Slo0.25
   Steep (greater than 0.3
10%)
Woodland (Clay)
   Flat (0—5% Slope) 0.3
   Rolling (2—10% Slo0.35
   Steep (greater than 0.5
10%)
Pasture (Sandy)
   Flat                0.1
   Rolling             0.16
   Steep               0.22
Pasture (Clay)
   Flat                0.3
   Rolling             0.36
   Steep               0.42
Cultivated (Sandy)
   Flat                0.3
   Rolling             0.4
   Steep               0.52
Cultivated (Clay)
   Flat                0.5
   Rolling             0.6
   Steep               0.72
 
1.   The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5 to 10
year frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms shall
be modified as follows:
Return Period  Multiply “C” by   (C)   Table 2 Runoff Coefficients “C” by Land Use and Typical Inlet
(yrs)          Times
Runoff Coefficients “C” By Land Use and Typical Inlet Times
Land Use       Runoff CoefficientsInlet Times (minutes)
               Flat RollingSteep
Commercial     0.750.830.915
(CBD)
Commercial     0.540.60.66
(Neighborhood)
Industrial     0.630.70.77
Garden         0.540.60.6637750
Apartments
Churches       0.540.60.66
Schools        0.310.350.39
Semi Detached  0.450.50.5
Residential
Detached       0.40.450.537908
Residential
Quarter Acre   0.360.40.44
Lots
Half Acre Lots 0.310.350.39
Parkland       0.180.20.22To be Computed
 
      (1)   Flat terrain 0 2% slopes.
      (2)   Rolling terrain 2 7% slopes.
      (3)   Steep terrain greater than 7% slopes.
      (4)   Interpolation, extrapolation and adjustment for local conditions
shall be based on engineering experience and judgment. Final calculations shall
be based on the actual conditions that will exist after development.
      (5)   The coefficients of this tabulation are applicable to storms of 5
to 10 year frequencies. Coefficients for less frequent higher intensity storms
shall be modified as follows:
Return Period (yrs)                                                    Multiply “C” by   (D)   Table 3 Typical Values of Manning’s n.
Typical Values of Manning’s n
Material                                                               Desirable Manning’s nMaximum Velocities
Closed Conduits
   Concrete                                                         0.01315 f.p.s.
   Vitrified Clay                                                   0.01315 f.p.s.
   Brick                                                            0.01515 f.p.s.
   Cast Iron                                                        0.01315 f.p.s.
   PVC or PE Pipe                                                   0.01115 f.p.s.
   Circular Corrugated Metal Pipe, Annular Corrugations, 2-2/3 x 1/
2 in.
      Unpaved                                                    0.0247 f.p.s.
      25% Paved                                                  0.0217 f.p.s.
      50% Paved                                                  0.0187 f.p.s.
      100% Paved                                                 0.0137 f.p.s.
   Concrete Culverts                                                0.013
Open Channels
   Concrete, Trowel Finish                                          0.013
   Concrete, Broom or Float Finish                                  0.015
   Gunite                                                           0.018
   Riprap Placed                                                    0.03
   Riprap Dumped                                                    0.035
   Gabion                                                           0.028
   New Earth (Uniform, Sodded, Clay)                                0.025
   Existing Earth
      (Fairly Uniform, With Some Weeds)                          0.03
      Dense Growth of Weeds                                      0.04
      Dense Weeds and Brush                                      0.04
   Swale With Grass                                                 0.035
 
   (E)   Table 4 Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal Lined Channels.
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal Lined Channels
                                  Permissible Velocity
Cover Slope     Erosion Resistant Easily
Soils Range     Soils             Eroded
      (percent) (f.p.s.)          (f.p.s.)
Maximum Permissible Velocities in Vegetal Lined Channels
                                               Permissible Velocity
Cover              Slope     Erosion Resistant Easily
Soils              Range     Soils             Eroded
                   (percent) (f.p.s.)          (f.p.s.)
Bermuda grass      37625     8                 6
                   over 10   6                 4
Bahia
Buffalo grass
Kentucky Bluegrass 37625     7                 5
Smooth Bromegrass  37750     6                 4
Blue Grama         over 10   5                 3
Grass Mixture      37625     5                 4
Reed Canary grass  37750     4                 3
Sericea Lespedeza
Weeping Lovegrass  37625     3.4               2.5
Yellow Bluestem
Redtop
Alfalfa
Red Fescue
Common Lespedeza             5                 6
Sudangrass         37625     3.5               2.5
 
      (1)   From Soil Conservation Service, SCS TP 61, Handbook of Channel
Design for Soil & Water Conservation.
      (2)   Use velocities exceeding 5 feet per second only where good covers
and proper maintenance can be obtained.
      (3)   Do not use on slopes steeper than 10 percent except for vegetated
side slopes in combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant
vegetative center section.
      (4)   Do not use on slopes steeper than 5 percent except for vegetated
side slopes in combination with a stone, concrete, or highly resistant
vegetative center section. 5
      (5)   Annuals B use on mild slopes or as temporary protection until
permanent covers are established.
      (6)   Use on slopes steeper than 5 percent is not recommend.
   (F)   Table 5 Rainfall Depths for Various Return Periods and Storm
Durations.
Rainfall Depths For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Duration Depth Return (inches) Period (years)
Rainfall Depths For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Duration Depth Return (inches) Period (years)
5 min.   0.38 0.48 0.55 0.69 0.81  0.93
10 min.  0.7  0.88 1.02 1.27 1.48  1.7
15 min.  0.85 1.08 1.25 1.56 1.81  2.09
30 min.  1.17 1.47 1.73 2.14 2.48  2.86
60 min.  1.49 1.88 2.2  2.72 3.15  3.63
2 hrs.   1.85 2.36 2.72 3.41 3.96  4.56
3 hrs.   2.02 2.56 2.96 3.71 4.29  4.95
6 hrs.   2.37 3    3.47 4.34 5.03  5.8
12 hrs.  2.75 3.48 4.02 5.04 5.84  6.72
18 hrs.  2.91 3.68 4.25 5.33 6.17  7.11
24 hrs.  3.16 4    4.62 5.79 6.71  7.73
48 hrs.  3.6  4.52 5.28 6.48 7.58  8.62
72 hrs.  3.92 4.92 5.75 7.05 8.23  9.4
5 days   4.48 .57  6.5  7.91 9.16  10.57
10 days  5.74 7.09 8.07 9.54 10.68 11.79
 
   (G)   Table 5A Rainfall Intensities for Various Return Periods and Storm
Durations.
Rainfall Intensities For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Duration Intensities (inches/hour) Return Period (years)
Rainfall Intensities For Various Return Periods and Storm Durations
Duration Intensities (inches/hour) Return Period (years)
5 min.  4.56 5.76 6.6  8.28 9.72 11.16
10 min. 4.2  5.28 6.12 7.62 8.88 10.2
15 min. 3.4  4.32 5    6.24 7.24 8.36
30 min. 2.34 2.94 3.46 4.28 4.96 5.72
60 min. 1.49 1.88 2.2  2.72 3.15 3.63
2 hrs.  0.92 1.18 1.36 1.7  1.98 2.28
3 hrs.  0.67 0.85 0.99 1.24 1.43 1.65
6 hrs.  0.4  0.5  0.58 0.72 0.84 0.97
12 hrs. 0.23 0.29 0.34 0.42 0.49 0.56
18 hrs. 0.16 0.2  0.24 0.3  0.34 0.4
48 hrs. 0.08 0.09 0.11 0.14 0.16 0.18
72 hrs. 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.1  0.11 0.13
5 days  0.04 0.05 0.05 0.07 0.08 0.09
10 days 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.05
 
   (H)   Table 6 Huff 50% Rainfall Distribution, Median Time Distributions of
Heavy Storm Rainfall at a Point.
ADD IMAGES
 
 
 
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
      
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
73.   PARKING
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Police administration
   
70.03   Office of Traffic Engineer established
   
70.04   Authority of Police and Fire Departments officials
   
70.05   One-way street signs
   
70.06   Excavations (street)
   
70.07   Use of public grounds
   
70.08   Solicitation within public highways
   
70.09   Tow trucks
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   ALLEY. A public travelway of normally less than 24 feet in width used
primarily for delivery service.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal
departments of public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the Chief of Police of this City.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is 20 inches in diameter, and
including any devices generally recognized as a BICYCLE though equipped with
two front or two rear wheels.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when
within any 600 feet along such roadway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
roadway.
   CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT. All streets and portions of streets
within the Central Business District as defined elsewhere in this Article.
   CROSSWALK. That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   MOTOR VEHICLES. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but not operated upon
rails.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground,
but excluding a tractor.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, marking, and devices
not inconsistent with this Article, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, marking or
guiding traffic.
   PARK. When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, or
corporation.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal police department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implies
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street
cars, operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more in the main is improved with dwellings or dwellings and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the road way.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area of space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times, which set
apart as a safety zone.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STOP, STOPPING, or STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained right-of-way, when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances
to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highway is required by
law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are
erected as provided in this act.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together while using any street for purpose of
travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   TRAFFIC DIVISION. The Traffic Division of the police department of this
City.
   VEHICLES. Every device in, upon, or by which any person, or property is or
may be transported, or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.1)
§ 70.02 POLICE ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a
Traffic Division to be under the control of an officer of police, appointed by
and directly responsible to the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the
Traffic Division and other members of the Police Department to enforce the
street traffic regulations of this City, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents, and to cooperate with the officers of the
City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means
to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed
upon said division by this Article and the traffic articles of this City.
   (B)   The Police Department shall keep a record of all violations of the
traffic articles of this City or of the State Vehicle Laws of which any person
has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such
alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the total of each. Said record shall accumulate during at least
a 5-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete
for at least the most recent 5-year period. All such records and reports shall
be public records.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, assisted by other
police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest
and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of
law causing or contributing to such accidents. Whenever the accidents at any
particular location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall conduct studies
of such accidents and determine remedial measures. The Traffic Division shall
maintain a suitable system of filing accident reports. Accident reports or
cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location.
      (2)   The Traffic Division shall receive and properly file all accident
reports made to it under State Law or under any Article of this City, but all
such accident reports made by drivers shall be for the confidential use of the
Police Department and the City Traffic Engineer, and no such report shall be
admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding other than upon request of any
person making such report or upon request of the court having jurisdiction to
prove a compliance with the laws requiring the making of any such report.
   (D)   (1)   The Police Department or the Traffic Division thereof shall
maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests,
convictions, and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Said division shall
study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations
of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious
accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take
whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the
licenses of such persons suspended or revoked. Such records shall accumulate
during at least a 5-year period and from that time on such records shall be
maintained complete for at least the most recent 5-year period.
      (2)   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which
shall be filed with the City Manager. Such report shall contain information on
traffic matters in this City as follows:
         (a)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed,
the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.
         (b)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police.
         (c)   The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic
safety activities.
      (3)   The Traffic Division shall designate a type of pennant or other
identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed, to
identify the vehicles in funeral processions.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.2)
§ 70.03 OFFICE OF TRAFFIC ENGINEER ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   The Office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The
officer in charge of the Traffic Division of the Police Department shall serve
as City Traffic Engineer, in addition to his other functions, and shall
exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this
Article.
      (2)   It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control
devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents, and to devise
remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions
and to cooperate with other City Officials in the development of ways and means
to improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by articles of this City.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of the City Manager, is
hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions
of the traffic articles of this City and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90
days.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.3)
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or such
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all street traffic
laws of this City and all of the State Vehicle Laws applicable to street
traffic in this City. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic
laws, provided that in the event of a fire, or other emergency, or to expedite
traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may
direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws.
   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic threat, or in the immediate
vicinity. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. Every
person propelling any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of
this Article applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions.
of this Article which by their very nature can have no application.
   (C)   No person upon roller skates or riding in, or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing
a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a
play street as authorized by Ordinance of this City. The provisions of this
Article shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States Government, this State, County, or City, and it
shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this
Article, except as otherwise permitted in this Article or by State Statute.
   (D)   The provisions of this Article regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in
this Article, except as follows:
   (E)   A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand notwithstanding the provision of this Article.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
   (F)   These exemptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of
an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of said
vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably
necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from the front
as a warning to others. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect
the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard
of the safety of others.
   (G)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible, under
normal atmospheric conditions, from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-
way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as
possible to the right hand edge of the curb of the roadway, clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer. This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
   (H)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $25.00 or more,
shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, either verbally or
written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department, if such
accident occurs within this City.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.4)
§ 70.05 ONE-WAY STREET SIGNS.
   Whenever any ordinance of this City designates any one-way street or alley,
the City Manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no
such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
Vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.8)
§ 70.06 EXCAVATIONS (STREET).
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made an
opening, ditch or excavation in or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, or
other public places of the City for the laying of any pipes already laid, or
for any other purpose whatsoever, except upon condition that a permit therefor
shall have first been obtained from the City Clerk for such purpose.
   (B)   (1)   Any company, corporation of person desiring to lay, lower,
change, or remove any gas, water or other pipe or pipes or to make connection
therewith or to make any change, alteration or improvement in the right-of-way
on any street, shall first apply to the City Clerk for a permit to enter upon
such street, avenue, alley or other public place of the City. Such application
shall accurately describe the premises sought to be broken, dug or excavated
and the applicant shall agree to guard properly the place which may be dug,
broken or excavated so as to protect the City from loss and all persons from
accident or injury and to complete the work to be done with reasonable dispatch
and in accordance with specifications and standards furnished by the City Clerk
at the time the permit is issued, or in the case of a public utility, two
copies of such current specifications and standards may be filed by the City
Clerk at the local office of the utility. The application shall be signed by
the person, persons, firm or corporation by their or its duly authorized agent;
and in addition to the other requirements therein described shall recite that
the person, persons, firm or corporation to whom the same is issued, will
indemnify the City against any loss or damage in any way resulting to the City
by the granting of the permit to such applicant.
      (2)   The permit shall be issued by the Clerk, in triplicate, and one
copy shall remain on file in the Clerk’s office and two copies shall be
delivered to the person, persons, firm or corporation, making application or to
their or its duly authorized agent, and one of the said two copies shall at all
times, when any work is in progress concerning which the permit was issued, be
at the location of said work in the custody of the person or persons to whom a
permit is issued shall be and remain responsible for the proper reconstruction
of the right-of-way or any street, avenue, alley, or other public place
described in the said permit issued to them in accordance with the
specifications and standards hereinabove described for a period of one year
from the date that the said permit is issued.
   (C)   It shall further be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be
made an opening, ditch or excavation in or upon any curbing adjacent to any
street, avenue or other public place in said City for any purpose whatsoever
without first having obtained a permit from the City Clerk for such purpose.
   (D)   Any person who shall desire to make any opening in or to remove any
portion of a curb adjacent to any public street, avenue, or other public place
shall first apply to the City Clerk for a permit. Such application shall
accurately describe the premises sought to be broken, dug, excavated or
removed. No such permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall agree to
either replace said curb in as good condition as before or if said applicant
desires, to replace said curb with a driveway or other means of ingress and
egress to said premises from the street, avenue or other public way, then said
applicant shall agree to construct said driveway of a hard surfaced material
such as asphalt or concrete according to specifications approved by the City
Engineer.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall collect a fee in the amount of $25.00 for each
permit issued hereunder. Said fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the
permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.21)
§ 70.07 USE OF PUBLIC GROUNDS.
   That no person shall place or park or cause to be placed or parked, any
automobile, truck, or other vehicle or any article of merchandise whatsoever,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or storing the same, upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds within the limits of the City
of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.22)
§ 70.08 SOLICITATION WITHIN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   Solicitation on highways within the City of Mt. Vernon from an occupant of
any vehicle is hereby expressly permitted, subject to the following
restrictions:
   (A)   Solicitation on highways shall be allowed only at intersections where
all traffic is required to come to a full stop.
   (B)   The soliciting agency must be registered with the Attorney General as
a charitable organization as provided by “An act to regulate solicitation and
collection of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof,
and making an appropriation therefor; approved July 26, 1963 as amended.”
(225 ILCS 460/)
   (C)   The soliciting agency must be engaged in a statewide fund raising
activity.
   (D)   The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injury to any person or
property during solicitation which is caused or related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agent.
   (E)   Each person engaged in an act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age
or older and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
   (F)   Each soliciting agent and soliciting agency shall comply fully with
the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-1006 as the same may be amended from time to
time.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.23)
§ 70.09 TOW TRUCKS.
   (A)   TOW TRUCK is hereby defined to mean every truck designed or altered or
equipped for and used to push, tow, or draw disabled vehicles by means of a
crane, hoist, tow bar, tow line, or auxiliary axle and to render assistance to
disabled vehicles.
   (B)   Every tow truck, except those owned by governmental agencies, shall
have displayed on each side thereof a sign with letters not less than 2 inches
in height contrasting in color to that of the background stating the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner and operator thereof.
   (C)   Every tow truck shall be equipped with: (1) one or more brooms and
shovels; (2) one or more trash cans at least 18 inches in height; and (3) one
fire extinguisher of a dry chemical or carbon dioxide type with an aggregate
rating of at least 4-B, C units, and bearing the approval of a laboratory
qualified by the Division of Fire Prevention for this purpose.
   (D)   Every owner or operator and driver of a tow truck shall remove or
cause to be removed all glass and debris deposited upon any street or highway
by the disabled vehicle being serviced and shall in addition spread dirt or
sand upon that portion of any street or highway where oil or grease has been
deposited by the disabled vehicle being serviced.
   (E)   Every tow truck operator shall in addition provide an indemnity bond
or insurance policy which shall indemnify or insure the tow, truck operator for
his liability for loss or damage to any disabled or damaged vehicle towed or
stored by the tow truck operator in an amount not less than $5,000.00 for any
one accident or claim. Any such bond or policy shall be issued only by a
bonding or insuring firm properly qualified to do business at such in the State
of Illinois and a certificate of such bond or policy shall be carried in the
cab of each tow truck.
   (F)   Any operator or owner of a tow truck which fails to comply with the
provisions of this Section shall be subject to the penalties of §
10.99 of the Revised Code. Moreover, no officer, employee, or agent of the City
during the course of his employment shall utilize the services of any tow truck
which fails to comply with the provisions of this Section, unless the
requirements of public health and safety under a particular circumstance
reasonably dictate otherwise.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.24)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
71.01   Traffic control devices
§ 71.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall place and maintain traffic-control signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic regulation of this
City to make effective the provisions of said regulations, and may place and
maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to
regulate traffic under the traffic regulations of this City or under State Law,
or to guide or warn traffic. All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices
shall conform with the manual and specifications approved by the State Highway
Department or resolution adopted by the City Council of this City.
   (B)   All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the
City. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the
provisions of State Law or this Article, shall be official traffic-control
devices. The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the
traffic articles of this City, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in this Article.
   (C)   No provision of this Article for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective, even
though no signs are erected in place.
   (D)   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words, “Go” “Caution”, or “Stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively, one at a time, or with arrows, the colors only shall be used and
said terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
      (1)   Green alone or “Go”.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited, may
proceed straight through to turn right or left, unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the
time such signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
      (2)   Yellow alone or “Caution”, when shown following the green or “go”
signal.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
respective “green” or “go” movement is being terminated and is thereby warned
that the “red” or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter; and
such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the “red” or
“stop” signal is exhibited.
         (b)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the “green” or “go” is shown alone (unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian
“walk” signal).
      (3)   Red alone or “Stop”.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone.
         (b)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or “go” is shown alone (unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian
“walk” signal).
   (E)   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words,
“walk” or “wait” are in place, such signals shall indicate the following:
      (1)   Walk - Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of the vehicles.
      (2)   Wait - No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his
crossing on the walk signal, shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while
the wait signal is showing.
   (F)   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
      (1)   Flashing Red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      (2)   Flashing Yellow (caution sign). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (G)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon, or in view of, any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of the
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person
shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This
shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways or signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for official signs. Every prohibited sign, signal, or
marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having
jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove same or cause it to
be removed without notice.
   (H)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to, or in fact,
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control
device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (I)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized:
      (1)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he may deem necessary.
      (2)   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
      (3)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he
may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic articles of this City.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.5)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Miscellaneous driving rules
   
72.02   Right-of-way
   
72.03   Trains
   
72.04   Equipment
   
72.05   Driving regulations
§ 72.01 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business, shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, closer
than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire
apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. No vehicle shall be driven
over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street,
private driveway, or streetcar track, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire,
without the consent of the department official in command.
   (B)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as are required in this Article. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers. Each driver in a funeral or other
procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as
practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and
safe. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the traffic division.
   (C)   No funeral procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50
or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the
military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street, except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back same nor leave the curb with a
forward movement unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and
without interfering with other traffic.
   (E)   A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the
permanent and regular attached seat or carry any other person, nor shall any
other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat
to the rear or side of the operator. Any person riding upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach
the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or garage
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across
a sidewalk line projected across such alley, sound the horn of said vehicle,
and shall exercise unusual care in driving upon said sidewalk or cross such
line.
   (G)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of
a roadway marked as a safety zone.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.10)
§ 72.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, motor vehicles traveling upon public
highways shall give the right-of-way to vehicles approaching along intersecting
highways from the right and shall have the right- of-way over those approaching
from the left.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of- way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal, when is as required by this Article, may make such left turn
and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left
turn.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be
made safely and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with
traffic.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a “U”
turn at any place where such turns are prohibited.
   (E)   Upon the sounding of gongs or warning devices used upon fire apparatus
or fire patrol vehicles, drivers shall drive their vehicles as near to the
right curb as is reasonably possible and shall remain standing until such fire
apparatus has passed. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within the block
where fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
   (F)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
      (4)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
      (5)   Whenever there is single track paved road on one side of the public
highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider
shoulder, shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
   (G)   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite direction shall pass each
other to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction; each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
   (H)   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations,
exceptions, and special rules hereinafter stated.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   (a)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right
of another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn. The driver of
a vehicle may overtake, and, allowing sufficient clearance, pass another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction, either upon the left or upon the
right on a street or roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
four or more lines of moving traffic, when such movement can be made in safety.
         (b)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of
the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right. The driver of a vehicle may
overtake and pass another vehicle on the right on a one-way street or upon any
roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the
street or roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or
more lanes of moving traffic.
      (4)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the
roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
      (5)   No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at
any other time, be driven to the left side of the street or roadway under the
following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway.
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or
tunnel, or when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
      (6)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway.
      (7)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
      (8)   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to
the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having
given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn
and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction, shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left
turn.
      (9)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within
a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained such movement can be made with safety.
      (10)   When Signals Are Required.
         (a)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a
street or alley unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable
safety and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn
if any pedestrians shall be affected by such movement or after giving an
appropriate signal in the manner provided by this Article, in the event that
any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
         (b)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given
during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
         (c)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give such signal.
      (11)   Signal by Hand or Arm or Signal Device.
         (a)   The signals herein required shall be given either by means of
the hand or arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand or arm signal would not be visible, both to
the front and rear of such vehicle, then said signals must be given by such
lamp or device. All signals herein required to be given by the hand and arm
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
            1.   Left Turn - hand and arm extended horizontally.
            2.   Right Turn- hand and arm extend upward.
            3.   Stop or decrease speed - hand and aim extended downward.
         (b)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto or from any limited
access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.
      (12)   Driver’s License. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the
streets or roadways of the City unless such person has a valid driver’s license
or permit as an operator or chauffeur issued by the State of Illinois, except
those persons exempted from driver’s license and permit requirements as
provided by the laws of the State of Illinois.
      (13)   Stop Signs.
         (a)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-
control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view
of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, before entering the
intersection.
         (b)   After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway or which is
approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time often the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval
occurs.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.11)
§ 72.03 TRAINS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a railroad corporation to permit any train,
railroad car, or engine to obstruct public travel at any grade crossing where a
railroad intersects with a public street or alley for a period in excess of ten
minutes, except where such train, railroad car or engine cannot be moved by
reason of circumstances over which the railroad corporation has no control.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any railroad employee to willfully or intentionally
permit any train, railroad car or engine to obstruct public travel at any grade
crossing where a railroad intersects with a public street or alley for a period
in excess of ten minutes, except where such train, railroad car or engine
cannot be moved by reason of circumstances over which the railroad employee has
no control.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.12)
§ 72.04 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle which makes unusually
loud or unnecessary noise; no motor vehicle shall be operated upon any street
unless the same is provided with a muffler in efficient and actual working
condition.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle upon any street or
alley unless said vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in
efficient working condition.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle, the lights of which
do not conform to the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of
Illinois.
   (D)   Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient
signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of approaching vehicle, but such
horn or signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose other than as a
warning of impending danger. No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle
shall be equipped with a siren, gong signaling device or musical horn.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or is
in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts
of the roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any vehicle
which is so constructed or loaded that the driver’s view of the roadway to the
rear is obstructed, shall be equipped with a mirror so attached as to give him
a view of the roadway behind him.
   (F)   The driver of a bus (hackney) or taxicab shall not park upon any
street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, (hackney
stand), or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not
prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance
with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
   (G)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, (or other than a hackney in a hackney stand), or other than a taxicab
in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated
and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any
bus, (hackney) or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.18)
§ 72.05 DRIVING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
   (B)   No person shall transport, carry, or possess or have any alcoholic
liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle, except in the original package
and with the seal unbroken.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the municipality in
negligent or careless manner or so as to unnecessarily endanger life and
property.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any
glass bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any substance likely to
injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon such street or alley. Any person who
drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any
destructive, harmful, or injurious material, shall immediately remove same or
cause it to be removed.
      (2)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or
alley shall remove any glass or injurious or harmful substances dropped on the
street or alley from such vehicle.
   (F)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on a street or alley unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its cargo from
dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom.
   (G)   No person shall operate upon any street or alley any vehicle with any
cargo unless said cargo and any covering thereon is securely fastened to
prevent said covering or cargo from coming loose, detached or becoming in any
manner a hazard to any street, alley, or the users thereof.
   (H)   No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of said vehicle is
running and no person operating or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it
to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
and removing the key.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or encumber
any street, alley, or sidewalk by standing, sitting, or remaining upon the same
or to cause persons to assemble thereon or by placing merchandise or any
article or thing thereon so as to prevent the free and convenient passage of
persons or vehicles upon and over the entire area of such street, alley, or
sidewalk, nor shall any person obstruct or endanger the free passage of persons
or vehicles along any street, alley, or sidewalk by playing any game therein or
thereon.
   (J)   (1)   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parking or
stopping in violation of any of the laws imposed by ordinance of this City and
if any officer of the City shall observe such violation, such police officer
shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that
such vehicle has been parked or operated in violation of a provision of any
such ordinances which said notice shall contain the license number of such
vehicle, the date and time thereof, other information relative to the violation
alleged and any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation, and further
instructing such owner or operator to report to the City of Mt. Vernon in
regard to such violation.
      (2)   Such owner or operator may, within forty-eight hours of the time
when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the City of Mt. Vernon as
a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00). The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment
within said forty-eight hours shall render such owner or operator subject to
the penalties provided for the violation of any of the City ordinances.
   (K)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to remove
without notice to the owner a vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of
safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or
otherwise maintained by the City under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated;
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic.
      (2)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
      (3)   When any vehicle is left unattended on a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
      (4)   When any vehicle is illegally parked in any place where such parked
vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire
hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle.
      (5)   When any vehicle reasonably appears to be lost or stolen.
      (6)   (a)   When any vehicle cannot be removed by its operator or when
any vehicle is required to be placed into the custody of law enforcement
because of the arrest of the operator or other occupant of the vehicle or
because of the violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code or violation of any other
provision of local, state or federal law.
         (b)   The owner of any motor vehicle removed by authorization of the
Mt. Vernon Police Department shall be responsible for all towing (including
storage) charges and the administrative fee imposed by subsection (N) herein,
except for that removal pursuant to subsection (K)(2) and (K)(5) shall not be
subject to the administrative fee unless the owner or operator shall have been
issued a violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code or of any other provision of
local, state, or federal law.
   (L)   (1)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as
authorized in Section (K) and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from
the registration record in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in
writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and
of the place to which such vehicle has been removed.
      (2)   The officer shall also keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
removed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license
plate year and number, and registration sticker year and number displayed on
the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of removal, reason
for removal, and name of officer authorizing the removal.
      (3)   In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy
of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. Whenever an
officer removes a vehicle from a street under Section (K) and does not know and
is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is
unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore provided and in the
event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three (3)
days, then and in that event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be
sent written reports of such removal by mail to the State Department whose duty
it is to register vehicles and shall file a copy of such notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice
shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place
from which removed and reason for such removal, name of the garage or place
where the vehicle is stored.
      (4)   Such vehicle shall then be processed and disposed of in accordance
with Subsection (M) of the Revised Code.
   (M)   (1)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway
or street in this municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties as set
forth within the Revised Code. The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof
on private or public property other than a highway in view of the general
public anywhere in this City, is unlawful except on property of the owner or
bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle comes into the temporary possession or
custody of a person in this State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person
shall immediately notify the Police Department when the vehicle is within the
corporate limits of the City.
      (3)   A vehicle shall be presumed to be an “abandoned vehicle” for the
purposes of this Section when:
         (a)   The vehicle or any part thereof is parked or left unattended on
private property without authorization of the owner of the property or on
public property other than a highway in view of the general public for a period
of seven days or more; or
         (b)   The vehicle or any part thereof is parked or left unattended on
a highway or street within the City 10 hours or more.
            1.   An abandoned vehicle may be authorized to be removed or towed
by the members of the police department, provided however, that prior to the
removal of an abandoned vehicle, written notice personally served or written
notice by certified mail return receipt requested shall be given to the
registered owner. Said notice shall identify the vehicle, identify the location
of the vehicle, state the factual basis for towing and presumption of
abandonment, and advise that, unless the vehicle is removed by the owner within
72 hours, it will be removed by the police department as an abandoned vehicle.
Said notice shall also state that the owner may appear before the Building
Official for the City of Mt. Vernon within the 72 hours and show cause why the
vehicle should not be removed as an abandoned vehicle. In addition, a notice
shall be placed upon the vehicle identifying the vehicle as an abandoned
vehicle and stating that the vehicle will be removed by the Police Department
after a lapse of 72 hours from the date appearing on the notice unless the
vehicle is removed by the owner or unless the owner contacts the Building
Official for the City of Mt. Vernon and shows cause why it should not be
removed.
            2.   When removal of a vehicle from either public or private
property is authorized by order of the Police Department pursuant to subsection
(M), the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs
( including storage) and the administrative fee imposed by (N) herein.
         (c)   1.   When a vehicle is authorized to be removed, the Police
Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle removed, listing the
color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name, manufacturer’s series
name, body style, vehicle identification number, license plate year and number,
and registration sticker year and number displayed on the vehicle. The records
shall also include the date and hour of removal, location removed from,
location removed to, reason for removal, and the name of the officer
authorizing the removal.
            2.   When the Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the State
Motor Vehicle Registration records to be searched by a directed communication
to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership
information.
            3.   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State
Police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the
State Police. The information determined from these record searches will be
used by the Police Department in sending a notice by certified mail to the
owner or legally entitled person, advising that the vehicle has been removed by
the Police Department, advising where the vehicle has been removed to, advising
as to the legal or factual basis for the determination that the vehicle was
abandoned, requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public sale
information.
            4.   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files
of the State or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the Police Department shall notify the State Police for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle’s owner or other person legally entitled to possession
of the vehicle.
            5.   The information obtained by the State Police will be
immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the
vehicle for notification of the owner.
            6.   At any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department
proof of ownership or proof of the right of possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this Section until
all towing and storing charges have been paid; provided, however, that the
owner or such person may appear before the Building Official for the City of
Mt. Vernon and show cause why he should not be required to pay the towing and
storage charges.
            7.   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor
vehicle seven years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30)
days after notice has been given as provided herein, the Police Department
having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to
the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the Police
Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police
Department or towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be
sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the
vehicle.
            8.   In those instances where the certified notification given
after removal of the vehicle has been returned by the postal authorities to the
Police Department due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the
address obtained from the registration records of the State, the sending of the
certified notice pertaining to the sale of the vehicle will not be required.
            9.   When the identity of the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle
of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for
in this Ordinance, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by the Ordinance without notice to the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
            10.   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this Ordinance, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of 10 days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of
the registered owner by mail, by public service or in person for a
determination of disposition; and an examination of the State Police stolen
motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information.   At the expiration of
the 10-day period without the benefit of disposition information being received
from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the disposition
of the vehicle as junk, except that if in the opinion of the Police Officer
processing the vehicle it has a value of $200 or more and can be restored to
safe operating condition, the Police Chief or his designee may authorize its
purchase as salvage, provided the requirements of State law are met.
            11.   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be
sold to a person desiring to restore it.
            12.   When a motor vehicle in the custody of the Police Department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided by this
Ordinance, a report of the transaction will be retained by the Police
Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
            13.   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the
City is authorized to be removed by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set
forth in this Ordinance, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after
the deduction of towing, storage, and processing charges shall be deposited in
the municipal treasury.
            14.   Any Police Officer, towing service owner, operator, or
employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action
brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal
representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a
motor vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this Ordinance.
   (N)   Except as otherwise provided within the (K) when any vehicle is
removed or towed pursuant to the authorization of the Mt. Vernon Police
Department, an administrative fee of $100.00 shall be imposed and collected
prior to release of the motor vehicle to its owner or other authorized person;
collection of said administrative fee shall be effected pursuant to the towing
policy and procedures of the Mt. Vernon Police Department.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.19)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING
Section
   
73.01   Parking
   
73.02   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited
   
73.03   Stopping for loading or unloading only
   
73.04   Parking lots
   
73.05   Parking exception for a physically disabled person
§ 73.01 PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street or roadway other
than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen
inches (18”) of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided
in this Article.
   (B)   The City Traffic Engineer shall determine upon what streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle
parking shall not be indicated upon any Federal Aid or State Highway, or
immediately adjacent thereto within the City, unless the State Highway
Department has determined by resolution, or by traffic capacity study, the
results of which are on file with the City, that the roadway is of sufficient
width or conditions are such as to permit angle parking without interfering
with the free movement of traffic.
   (C)   Upon these streets which have been signed or marked by the City
Traffic Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such
signs or markings. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any
street within a business or residence district, no lights need to be displayed
upon such parked vehicle. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be
depressed or dimmed.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.15)
§ 73.02 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (5)   On a crosswalk.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection.
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon approach to any flashing beacon stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a
point on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
City Traffic Engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings.
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing.
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or
within 75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted).
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      (15)   At any place where parking may have been prohibited by ordinance
duly enacted prior to the effective date of this ordinance or hereinafter
enacted, the City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to erect signs
indicating no parking on any street where parking may have been prohibited by
such an ordinance or where the effective regulations of traffic, health, safety
and welfare of public may require.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley,
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10
feet of the width of the roadway or free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (D)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   (E)   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or roadway for the
principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale or storing same.
      (2)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   (F)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation, except when loading or discharging upon that side of a street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place, except as prescribed in subsection (A) of this section.
   (G)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet,
or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the
street does not exceed 30 feet, When official signs prohibiting parking are
erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
   (H)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs placed, not exceeding 100 feet in length, in which the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition
or would cause unusual delay to traffic. When official signs are erected at
hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
   (I)   (1)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to reserve spaces for
physically disabled parking on public streets and public property and to post
official signs indicating such reserved physically disabled parking; and
private property owners are hereby authorized to reserve spaces for physically
disabled parking on private lots and private property and to post official
signs indicating such reserved physically disabled parking; all as provided
herein and in §
150.13 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
      (2)   When official signs reserving physically disabled parking spaces
are erected as authorized herein, no person shall cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to
stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any such designated space unless the
vehicle shall:
         (a)   Bear registration plates or a special decal or device issued to
a physically disabled person pursuant to § 3-616 (625 ILCS 5/3-616) or § 11-
1301.2 (625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2) or to a disabled veteran pursuant to § 3-609 (625
ILCS 5/3-609) of the “Illinois Vehicle Code”; and
         (b)   Be operated by the physically disabled or disabled person to
whom the special registration plates, special decal device, or visor card were
issued or by a person acting under the express direction of a physically
disabled or disabled person while the physically disabled or disabled person is
present.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any
unauthorized vehicle to stop, stand, or park in a space specifically reserved
for physically disabled parking by the posting of an official sign; such
violation shall constitute the offense of “unauthorized parking in a physically
disabled zone” and shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. Said offense maybe
charged by means of a citation or “hang-on” ticket.
   (J)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to erect signs designating and
reserving parking areas within the City of Mt. Vernon for use by the Police
Department during the course of official police business. Said signs shall
indicate no parking or shall indicate reserved for police. When official signs
are erected as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a
vehicle in any such designated place or in violation of such sign.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.16)
§ 73.03 STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY.
   (A)   (1)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section are applicable.
      (2)   The City Manager shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb
loading zone upon special request of any person, unless such person makes
application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends
of the zone.
      (3)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
period of time in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during
hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective,
except for a period not to exceed five minutes.
   (B)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30)
minutes.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.17)
§ 73.04 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   The provisions of this Section shall regulate and control the motor
vehicle parking lots heretofore or hereafter acquired by the City of Mt.
Vernon. Each of such municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or
established shall be under the supervision of the City Manager; provided that
violations of the ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police and enforced by the Police Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot
in violation of any ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, or so to park contrary
to rules established by the City Council and City Manager for the use of such
parking lot, or in any manner or place other than those designated and marked
Parking Lanes or the directions of any parking lot custodian who may be
hereafter employed at any such parking lot. No commercial or freight carrying
vehicle or truck nor any trailer shall be parked in any City parking lot.
   (C)   The municipal parking lot located at Tenth Street and Harrison Street
is hereby designated as Lot A; the parking lot located within the 100 block of
Main Street is hereby designated as Lot B; the parking lot located at Tenth
Street and Jordan is hereby designated as Lot C; the parking lot located within
the 300 block of South Eleventh Street is hereby designated as Lot D; the
parking lot located within the 300 block of S. Ninth Street is hereby
designated as Lot E; the parking lot located within the 800 block of Main is
hereby designated as Lot F; and the parking lot located at Johnson Alley and
Broadway (800 block of Broadway) is hereby designated as Lot G.
   (D)   (1)   The City Manager shall cause parking meters to be installed,
maintained, and operated in a parking lot and at such locations as he shall
from time to time determine to be proper for the effective regulation and
safety of traffic and parking, and shall further cause parking lanes to be
designated in each such parking lot. It shall be unlawful and constitute a
violation of this Article to park any vehicle across any said parking lane or
marking or to park any vehicle in any such position so that same shall not be
entirely within the areas designated by such line or marking.
      (2)   In any municipal parking lot where meters are installed, it shall
be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle
registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked without first
inserting a coin into the meter controlling the parking space used or to park
for a period longer than covered by such coin; same shall constitute a meter
violation and shall constitute the offense of overtime or illegal parking and
shall be punishable as follows: a penalty of $4.00 if paid within 72 hours of
the violation; a penalty of $8.00 if paid after expiration of 72 hours of the
violation; in addition, failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours of the
violation shall render the owner or operator of the vehicle subject to the
penalties stated within §
10.99 of the Revised Code.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to park in any municipal parking lot where a
fee is provided by Ordinance without paying such fee.
   (E)   The time limit for parking in municipal parking lot controlled by
meters and the charge for parking in such spaces shall be the following times
and charges:
      (1)   The time limit for parking in municipal parking Lot A, Lot B, and
Lot D shall be controlled by meters and the charge for parking in such spaces
shall be the following times and charges:
         (a)   Two-hour parking for two ten-cent coins of money of the United
States or its equivalent.
         (b)   Five-hour parking for a twenty-five cent coin of money of the
United States or its equivalent.
         (c)   Ten-hour parking for two twenty-five cent coins of money of the
United States or its equivalent.
      (2)   Except for leased spaces, the time limit for parking in municipal
parking lots F and G shall be controlled by meters, and the charge for parking
in such spaces shall be the following times and charges.
         (a)   One-hour parking for a five-cent coin of money of the United
States or its equivalent.
         (b)   Two-hour parking for a ten-cent coin of money of the United
States or its equivalent.
         (c)   Five-hour parking for a twenty-five cent coin of money of the
United States or its equivalent.
         (d)   Ten-hour parking for two twenty-five cent coins of money of the
United States or its equivalent.
      (3)   The time limit and charge for each particular metered parking space
within said zones shall be specified in the legend on the parking meter
installed at such parking space and each parking meter shall be equipped with a
clearly visible signal device which indicates whether or not parking time is
expired or unexpired; and if unexpired, the amount of unexpired time remaining.
When parking in any parking space regulated by a meter, the vehicle shall be
parked so that the front part of such vehicle is nearest to such parking meter.
      (4)   The time limit for parking in said zones at such parking places and
the charge made for the use of each parking space as hereinabove provided shall
be in effect from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on each day of every week, except
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Parking on Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays and from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. of each weekday shall be without time
limitation and without charge.
   (F)   Parking in municipal parking Lot C and Lot E shall be without charge
and without time limitation; provided no continuous period of parking upon said
lots shall exceed 24 hours.
   (G)   (1)   Fourteen spaces within Parking Lot B shall be reserved for use
by motor vehicles of employees of the City of Mt. Vernon bearing an official
parking sticker; however, all of the provisions herein relating to parking and
parking lots shall apply to said parking spaces. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park his motor vehicle within a reserved parking space unless said
vehicle displays the valid and proper parking sticker; same shall constitute
the offense of parking in a prohibited zone.
      (2)   Thirty spaces in Lot F and G shall be leased to individuals for the
exclusive use of said individuals; said spaces shall be leased in the manner
determined by the City Manager and shall be leased for $25.00 per quarter
provided however that enforcement of lessee’s rights shall be effected by
lessee by lawful means, and enforcement shall not be effected by the City.
      (3)   Thirty-six spaces within Lots F and G shall be leased to businesses
and commercial establishments for the exclusive use of said establishments and
for use by persons having the lessee’s permission and authorization; said
spaces shall be leased in the manner determined by the City Manager and shall
be leased for $25.00 per month provided however that enforcement of lessee’s
rights shall be effected by lessee by lawful means, and enforcement shall not
be effected by the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.20A)
§ 73.05 PARKING EXCEPTION FOR A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON.
   A motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special decal or device
issued to a physically disabled person pursuant to § 3-616 (625 ILCS 5/3-616)
or § 11-1301.2 (625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2) or to a disabled Veteran pursuant to § 3-
609 (625 ILCS 5/3-609) of “The Illinois Vehicle Code” or bearing a registration
plate or special decal or device of another jurisdiction issued under a
comparable Statute is exempt from any provisions under the Revised Code of
Ordinances imposing time limitations on parking except limitation of one-half
hour or less on any street or highway zone or any parking lot or parking place
which is owned, leased, or owned and leased by a municipality or a municipal
parking utility. However, said vehicle is otherwise subject to the laws which
prohibit parking in no-stopping and no-standing zones in front or near fire
hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops, and
loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle
constitutes a traffic hazard, and is prohibited from parking where an official
sign controlling an area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during
certain hours; any vehicle parked in such prohibited area shall immediately be
moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location
designated by the officer. The parking exemption and privileges granted
hereunder are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration
plates, special decal or device were issued and to the persons acting under the
express direction of the physically disabled or disabled person while the
handicapped or disabled person is present.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.20B)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrians
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIANS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore
declared in this Article, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this Article.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (B)   When Passing Not Permitted at Crosswalk.
      (1)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. Pedestrians shall move, whenever
practicable, upon the right half crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross a
roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by
the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.
      (2)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within
a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. Any pedestrian
crossing a roadway at a point where the pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-
control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place
except in a crosswalk. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for
any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. No person shall
stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any
vehicle.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, every
driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.13)
CHAPTER 75: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
75.01   Regulations for bicycles
   
75.02   Regulations for skateboards, roller skates and play vehicles
§ 75.01 REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic regulations of this City applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this Article and except as to
those provisions of laws and articles which by their nature can have no
application.
   (A)   A person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
   (C)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (D)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time that the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (E)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (F)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of the roadway set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
   (G)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
   (H)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
   (I)   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway.
   (J)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle
bars.
   (K)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycles, or against a building, or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
   (L)   (1)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
      (2)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk,
street or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, if
it constitutes a hazard to traffic or pedestrians, and when such signs are in
place, no person shall disobey the same.
   (M)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
   (N)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
   (O)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person
use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (P)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
   (Q)   (1)   No person shall operate, park, store, or own any bicycle within
the City of Mt. Vernon without first registering the bicycle with the Police
Department of the City and having the registration number stamped or placed
thereon.
      (2)   Upon written application by an owner (or, if the owner is under 18
years of age, then by his parent or other adult guardian), and upon payment of
a One Dollar fee, the Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon shall stamp
or place a registration number on the frame of each bicycle, and shall keep a
record of each application, the name and address of the owner of the bicycle
and the registration number.
      (3)   When any bicycle is transferred from one owner to another, the new
owner shall make a written application to the Police Department for transfer of
registration, but no fee shall be imposed for the change of registration.
      (4)   (a)   Any person who fails to register his bicycle and obtain a
registration number thereon or who fails to change a registration upon transfer
of a bicycle, thereby implicitly consents to confiscation and retention of the
bicycle by the Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon until the Department
determines the lawful owner of the bicycle and the bicycle is properly
registered.
         (b)   Any confiscated bicycle may be delivered by the Police
Department to the owner as shown by the registration records. The burden of
proof as to ownership shall be upon the individual asserting ownership of the
bicycle.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, or alter
any registration number without first reporting same to the Police Department.
      (6)   Any police officer or other agent of the City shall not be held to
answer or be liable for damages in any action arising from enforcement of this
ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.14)
§ 75.02 REGULATIONS FOR SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND PLAY VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended.
      BUSINESS DISTRICT OR PROPERTY. Any area having a business zoning
classification or any property used for a commercial, business or industrial
activity or purpose.
      PLAY VEHICLE. Any coaster, scooter, roller skates, tricycle, toy wagon,
sled, toboggan, unicycle or any other non-motorized device with wheels or
rollers upon which a person may ride; however, this definition shall not apply
to wheel chairs and strollers or other devices designed and used for the
purpose of transporting children, infants, physically challenged, or
incapacitated persons or to bicycles, or to trailers, wagons, carts or other
devices intended and used for transporting merchandise or materials, so long as
they are used for the purpose for which they are intended.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR PROPERTY. Any area having a residential zoning
classification or any property used for single family or multiple family
dwellings or other residential use.
   (B)   No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play
vehicle upon any business property or property situated within a business
district except for such business property as may be operated as a skating rink
or otherwise designated and specifically posted with signs permitting such
activity.
   (C)   No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play
vehicle upon any public sidewalk, except sidewalks (including the crosswalk
area upon a roadway) situated within a residential zoning district or upon
residential property.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or
play vehicle upon any public street (excluding a crosswalk within a residential
area); except however, a person 13 years of age or older may operate a
skateboard or roller skates upon a public street within a residential zoning
district or upon residential property if there is no sidewalk adjacent to such
street, provided however, street riding shall be done as far to the right of
the road as possible and in the same direction as traffic.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall operate a skateboard
or roller skates upon any street or other public property during the hours of
dusk to dawn, nor at any time upon any street posted with a sign prohibiting
the operation of skateboards, roller skates, or play vehicles.
   (E)   No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates or play
vehicle upon any public parking lot, nor upon any other public property unless
signs are posted specifically permitting such activity.
   (F)   No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, or play
vehicle upon private property except with the permission of the owner, lessee
or person in control or possession of the property.
   (G)   No person operating a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle shall
attach himself or herself to any vehicle at any time or place.
   (H)   No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle in
such a manner so as to damage or injure any publicly or privately owned
property, including but not limited to, any table, bench, structure, tennis
court, parking stop, retaining wall or other improvement which may suffer
damage by such use.
   (I)   Any person operating a skateboard, roller skates or other play vehicle
must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian or lawfully operated motor
vehicle, unless otherwise specifically provided by law.
   (J)   The City Manager is authorized to erect signs upon any sidewalk,
street or other public property prohibiting the operation of skateboards,
roller skates or play vehicles. No person shall operate or ride a skateboard,
roller skates or play vehicle in violation of any sign.
   (K)   No parent, guardian, legal custodian or other person having care or
control of a minor shall authorize or knowingly permit the minor to violate
this Ordinance; violation of this Ordinance by a minor after verbal or written
notice or warning to the parent, guardian, legal custodian, or other person in
control of the minor shall constitute prima facie evidence that the parent,
guardian, legal custodian or other person in control of the minor has
authorized or knowingly permitted the minor to violate this ordinance.
   (L)   Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined
not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each occasion during which a violation
occurs; multiple offenses may occur on the same day if a violation occurs or
continues after an offense has been cited. Complaint for the offense of
unlawful operation of a skateboard, roller skates or play vehicle may be made
by a traffic citation complaint or by other written complaint.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.14A)
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed laws
   
II.   One-way streets
   
III.   Through streets
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LAWS.
   (A)   The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable upon all streets within the City, except as this Article, as
authorized by State law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of
engineering and traffic investigation, that certain speed regulations shall be
applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall
be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess
of any speed so declared in this Article when signs are in place giving notice
thereof.
   (B)   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, that the speed permitted as safe and reasonable upon the streets
or roadways within the City is as established by this Section.
      (1)   Speeds on Certain Specified Streets:
         (a)   Broadway, between 19th Street and 27th Street, 30 miles per
hour.
         (b)   Broadway, between 27th Street and 34th Street, 35 miles per
hour.
         (c)   Broadway, between 8th Street and 12th Street, 35 miles per hour.
         (d)   Salem Road, between 11th Street and the North Corporate Limits,
35 miles per hour.
         (e)   Main Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street, 20 miles per
hour.
         (f)   Ninth Street, between Harrison Street and Casey Avenue, 20 miles
per hour.
         (g)   Tenth Street, between Harrison Street and Jordan Street, 20
miles per hour.
         (h)   Tenth Street, between Jordan Street and Vaught Street, 25 miles
per hour.
         (i)   All United States and State Highways, except as hereinabove
established, 25 miles per hour.
         (j)   Where a highway or street is adjacent to a public school or a
private school and when the school is in session, the speed limit shall be 20
miles per hour, or the speed limit shall be as otherwise determined and as
posted by sign by the City Manager; where a highway or street is adjacent to a
church and when the church is in session, the speed limit shall be as
determined and as posted by sign by the City Manager; at all other times, the
speed limit for a highway or street adjacent to a school or a church shall be
as posted by sign or as established by other provisions of City ordinance or
other controlling law.
         (k)   Veteran’s Memorial Drive, between 10th Street and 17th Street,
30 miles per hour.
         (l)   Veteran’s Memorial Drive, between 17th Street and 26th Street,
40 miles per hour; and between 26th Street and 42nd Street, 35 miles per hour.
         (m)   42nd Street, between Veteran’s Memorial Drive and Broadway, 35
miles per hour.
         (n)   Lake Terrace Drive, 40 miles per hour.
         (o)   South 45th Street/Wells Bypass South of 625 South 45th Street,
40 miles per hour.
      (2)   Streets on Which The Speed Shall Not Exceed 30 Miles Per Hour.
         (a)   South 10th Street, between Vaught Avenue and the South Corporate
limits.
         (b)   Shawnee Street, between Perkins Avenue and the South Corporate
Limits.
         (c)   Wilshire Drive.
         (d)   12th Street, between Jones and Fishers Lane.
         (e)   42nd Street, between Fox Creek and Richview Road.
      (3)   Streets on Which The Speed Shall Not Exceed 20 Miles Per Hour.
         (a)   East – West:
            1.   North Street, between 9th Street and 12th Street.
            2.   Harrison Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
            3.   Jordan Street, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
            4.   Casey Avenue, between 8th Street and 12th Street.
         (b)   North - South:
            1.   8th Street, between Main Street and Casey Avenue.
            2.   Johnson Avenue, between North Street and Jordan Street.
            3.   11th Street, between North Street and Casey Avenue.
            4.   13th Street, between 12th Street and Broadway.
            5.   14th Street, between Main Street and Broadway.
      (4)   Streets on Which the Speed Shall Not Exceed 30 Miles Per Hour: All
streets not otherwise designated in this section are limited to 30 miles per
hour.
      (5)   Streets on Which the Speed Limit Shall Not Exceed 25 Miles Per
Hour: All streets adjacent to or abutting hospitals, infirmaries, sanitariums,
asylums, or other clinical or convalescent institutions.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.6)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   In order to patrol the flow of traffic in the eye of public safety,
the following streets are hereby determined and declared to be one-way streets,
and it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the following
designated streets, except as directed:
      (1)   Westbound only: Main Street between 4th and 14th Streets.
      (2)   Eastbound only: Broadway Street between 14th and 4th Streets.
      (3)   Northbound only: Eighth Street between Main and Jordan Streets.
      (4)   Southbound only: Johnson Avenue between Broadway and Main Street.
      (5)   Southbound only: 14th Street between Main and Broadway.
      (6)   Northbound only: 4th Street between Main and Broadway.
      (7)   Northbound only: Public alley from Casey Avenue to Jordan Avenue
between 7th and 8th Streets.
      (8)   North and East bound only: Public alley running from Casey Avenue
in the middle of the 1800 block, north to Casey Junior High School, east to
South 18th Street in the middle of the 200 block.
      (9)   Alley between 10th and 11th Streets, running north and south
between Main and Broadway, will be one-way from Main Street South to Broadway.
      (10)   Westbound only: Main Street from intersection of Old and New
Fairfield Road to 14th Street.
      (11)   Eastbound only: Broadway from 14th Street to intersection of Old
and New Fairfield Road.
      (12)   Eastbound only: Lamar Street from 10th Street (Dr. Martin Luther
King Memorial Drive) to 6th Street.
      (13)   Southbound only: 6th Street from Lamar to Conger Avenue.
      (14)   Westbound only: Conger Avenue from 6th Street to 9th Street.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:
      (1)   Right Turn - Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn
shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
      (2)   Left Turn - Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion
of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and after
entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
      (3)   (a)   Approach for Left Turn from Two-Way Street - Approach for a
left turn from a two-way street onto a one-way street shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and by
passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection, and
as close to the left hand lane as practicable.
         (b)   A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered
upon leaving the intersection.
      (4)   Left Turn From and Into One-Way Street - Where both streets or
roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the left hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (C)   (1)   The City Manager is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so
indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or Article.
      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
   (D)   The City Manager or Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine
those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left, or
U-turns and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted on the
signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
   (E)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such signs.
   (F)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not
upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.7)
SCHEDULE III. THROUGH STREETS.
   Those streets and parts of streets described hereafter are hereby declared
to be through streets for the purpose of this section:
   (A)   The following are hereby designated as North and South Through
Streets:
      (1)   4th Street - Castleton Avenue to Main Street.
      (2)   6th Street - Broadway to Main Street.
      (3)   8th Street - (Tolle Road) Harrison to Oakland Avenue.
      (4)   9th Street - Casey Avenue to Taylor Avenue.
      (5)   10th Street and Salem Road - South City Limits to North City
Limits.
      (6)   12th Street - South City Limits to North City Limits.
      (7)   14th Street - Broadway to Main.
      (8)   19th Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
      (9)   22nd Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
      (10)   24th Street - Perkins Avenue to Broadway.
      (11)   26th Street - South City Limits to Perkins Avenue.
      (12)   27th Street - Logan Street to Broadway.
   (B)   The following are hereby Designated as East and West Through Streets:
      (1)   Perkins Avenue and Shawnee Street - East City Limits to 26th
Street.
      (2)   Castleton Avenue- East City Limits to 4th Street.
      (3)   Casey Avenue - East City Limits to 12th Street
      (4)   Broadway - East City Limits to West City Limits.
      (5)   Main Street - East City Limits to 14th Street.
      (6)   Harrison Street - East City Limits to 9th Street.
      (7)   Oakland Avenue and Richview Road - 8th Street (Tolle Road) to West
City Limits.
      (8)   Logan Street - 12th Street to 24th Street.
   (C)   Whenever any ordinance of this City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to place and maintain a stop
sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting
that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of this
City.
   (D)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and
designate intersections and streets where particular hazard exists upon other
than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop or decrease
speed at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, or on any such
streets and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is
required and a slow or caution sign when a decrease in speed is required.
   (E)   Every sign erected pursuant to this Article shall bear the word “Stop”
in letters not less than 6 inches in height and such signs shall at nighttime
be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination or by a fixed
floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting
elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as
practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
   (F)   When a stop sign is erected as herein provided at or near the entrance
to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such
sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except
when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control sign.
   (G)   Whenever a sign or signs are erected upon any street or roadway
displaying the word “Slow” or “Caution”, the operator of any vehicle shall
decrease the motion of such vehicle to a speed of at least 10 miles less than
otherwise established as the maximum speed in the area in which the said
vehicle is being operated and in no event shall the speed of any vehicle
operated in a zone designated as “Slow” or “Caution” exceed 20 miles per hour.
   (H)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to
any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching said roadway.
   (I)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
   (J)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The foregoing shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train.
      (2)   A railroad train approaching within approximately 1500 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distances and such railroad
train by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate
hazard.
      (3)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.9)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Street parking
SCHEDULE I. STREET PARKING.
   (A)   In order to regulate and to promote the safety of traffic upon the
streets of Mt. Vernon, there are hereby established and fixed certain zones to
be known as non-metered parking zones in and upon the following streets:
      (1)   The north and south side of Broadway from Eighth Street to Ninth
Street; and the north side of Broadway from Seventh Street to Eighth Street.
      (2)   The south side of Broadway from Ninth Street to Twelfth Street.
      (3)   The south side of Broadway from Thirteenth Street to Fourteenth
Street.
      (4)   The north and south side of Main Street from Eighth Street to Ninth
Street.
      (5)   The north side of Main Street from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
      (6)   The south side of Main Street from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
      (7)   The north and south side of Main Street from Tenth Street to
Twelfth Street.
      (8)   The north side of Jordan Street from Eighth Street to Johnson
Street.
      (9)   The north and south side of Jordan Street from Johnson Street to
Twelfth Street.
      (10)   The north and south side of Harrison Street from Ninth Street to
Tenth Street.
      (11)   The east and west side of Ninth Street from Harris on to Main
Street.
      (12)   The east and west side of Ninth Street from Broadway to Casey
Street.
      (13)   The west side of Tenth Street from North Street to Harrison
Street.
      (14)   The east and west side of Tenth Street from Harris to Street to
Main Street.
      (15)   The west side of Tenth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
      (16)   The east side of Tenth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
      (17)   The east and west side of Tenth Street from Broadway to Casey
Street.
      (18)   The east and west side of Eleventh Street from Harrison Street to
Jordan Street.
      (19)   The south side of Harrison from 811 Harrison to 825 Harrison,
inclusive.
      (20)   The west side of Seventh Street from Main to Broadway.
      (21)   The east side of Ninth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
      (22)   The west side of Ninth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
   (B)   (1)   The City Manager shall cause parking signs to be installed and
maintained in said zones at such locations as he shall from time to time
designate and determine to be proper for the effective regulation and safety of
traffic within the provisions of this Article and its amendments and in
accordance with directions of the City Council when the Council elects to
exercise jurisdiction by specific Council action.
      (2)   Parking signs installed in the parking zones as provided for herein
shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the parking spaces, which
parking spaces shall be designated by lines or markings painted or placed upon
the curb or street adjacent to each parking space, and each vehicle parked
shall be parked within the lines or markings painted or placed upon the curb or
street.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this Article to
park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park any vehicle in any
position so that same shall not be entirely within the area designated by said
line or marking.
      (4)   When a parking space in any parking zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be
parked so that such vehicle is heading in the same direction as the traffic
lane nearest such curb or sidewalk; when a parking space in any parking zone is
diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space
shall be parked with the front part of such vehicle nearest to the curb or
sidewalk.
   (C)   Except as to spaces reserved for physically disabled parking as
provided within §
73.02(I) of this Article and except as to prohibited parking zones (including
spaces reserved for official vehicles) as provided within Subsection (E)
herein, parking at the parking spaces at the location specified in Subsection
(A) shall be and is hereby limited to a period of two hours. Parking shall be
without charge. The time limit for parking in said zones at said parking spaces
shall be in effect from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on each day of every week,
except Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. Parking in said zones at said
parking spaces shall be without limitations on Saturday, Sunday, legal
holidays, and on weekdays from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
   (D)   The City Manager shall cause signs prohibiting parking to be installed
at such spaces in front of each movie picture theater located within the said
non-metered parking zone as he shall determine from time to time to be proper
for the effective regulation and safety of traffic, which signs shall prohibit
parking in front of said movie picture theaters during the time said theaters
are open to the public. The provisions of this Article establishing and
regulating loading zones shall control the use of said parking spaces.
   (E)   (1)   Prohibited parking zones are hereby established in and upon the
following streets:
         (a)   The North side of Broadway from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
         (b)   The South side of Main Street from the West side of Jefferson
County Courthouse steps to 10th Street.
         (c)   The approximate length of two parking spaces on the East side of
Tenth Street nearest Broadway between Broadway and Main Street.
         (d)   The South side of Mannen Street from 27th Street to Logan
Street.
         (e)   The West side of 19th Street from Logan Street to Perkins
Avenue.
         (f)   The East side and the West side of 22nd Street from Broadway to
Perkins Avenue.
         (g)   The East side and the West side of 24th Street from Broadway to
Perkins Avenue.
         (h)   The East side of 26th Street from Perkins Avenue to Forest
Avenue.
         (i)   The East side and the West side of 26th Street from Forest
Avenue to Veterans Memorial Drive.
         (j)   The South side of Casey Avenue from 19th Street to 27th Street.
      (2)   Parking within the said above prohibited zones shall constitute the
offense of parking in a prohibited zone and shall be punishable by a penalty of
$10.00 if paid within 72 hours of the violation; in addition, failure to pay
the penalty within 72 hours of the violation shall render the owner or operator
of the vehicle subject to the penalty stated within §
10.99 of the Revised Code. Said offense of parking in a prohibited zone may be
charged by means of citation of “hang-on” ticket.
      (3)   There is also hereby established non-metered reserved parking
spaces from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Friday (excluding Court Holidays)
for use by official vehicles of the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Department and
Judges and Court Personnel of the Second Judicial Circuit upon the following
streets:
         (a)   Three reserved spaces nearest to Broadway on the west side of
Ninth Street between Main Street and Broadway.
         (b)   Three reserved spaces nearest to Ninth Street on the south side
of Main Street from Ninth Street to Tenth Street.
         (c)   Two reserved spaces nearest Main Street on the east side of
Tenth Street from Main Street to Broadway.
         (d)   One reserved space on the west side of 10th Street from Main
Street to Broadway.
      (4)   Parking by authorized vehicles at said non-metered reserved spaces
shall be without charge and without time limitation. Parking by non-authorized
vehicles at said non-metered reserved parking spaces shall constitute the
offense of parking in a prohibited zone and shall be punishable as provided
herein.
   (F)   Parking shall be and is hereby prohibited along the curb in front of
any drive-in United States mailbox for a longer period of time than that
required to deposit mail. The violation of the provisions of this section shall
subject the owner or operator of such improperly parked vehicle to the penalty
set forth herein for parking in a prohibited zone.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of
this Article for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle
registered in the name of or permitted by such person to be parked beyond the
period of legal parking time established for any parking space within the
parking zone as herein described and established; same shall constitute the
offense of prohibited parking.
         (b)   Parking beyond the period of legal parking time established for
any parking space shall constitute a separate offense for each individual
violation of the period of legal parking time (e.g. every two hours within a
two-hour zone, every 30 minutes within a 30-minute zone).
      (2)   The offense of prohibited parking in a two-hour zone, a 30-minute
zone, or other time- limited zone shall be punishable by a penalty of $10.00 if
paid within 72 hours of the violation; in addition, failure to pay the penalty
within 72 hours of the violation shall render the owner or operator of the
vehicle subject to the penalties stated within §
10.99 of the Revised Code.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this Article
for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, willfully break, destroy,
or impair the usefulness of any parking sign installed under the provisions of
this Article.
   (I)   (1)   That within the parking zones established by this Article, there
are located commercial enterprises dealing primarily in services and of a
public service nature; when said commercial enterprises do not have access to
their places of business by alleyways or private ways, the City Manager may
designate a parking space or spaces as a loading zone, if he determines same to
be necessary for the efficient regulation and safety of traffic, subject to the
direction and control of the City Council when the Council elects to exercise
jurisdiction by specific Council action.
      (2)   That the City Manager shall cause to be painted or placed upon the
curb or street lines indicating the area and extent of the loading zones
designated and established in accordance with this Section and the loading and
unloading of persons, equipment, goods, or merchandise, when a loading zone is
provided, outside the indicated area of the designated and established loading
zone shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this Article.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article to use any
designated and established loading zone for the parking of any vehicle or
vehicles or to allow any vehicle to remain in any designated and established
loading zone for a longer period of time than that reasonably required for the
actual loading and unloading of persons, equipment, goods, and merchandise and
shall subject the owner or operator of any such improperly parked vehicles or
vehicles improperly allowed to remain in said parking zone to the penalties
prescribed herein for prohibited parking in a prohibited zone.
   (J)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the City of Mt.
Vernon, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the City Manager, to
report the violations of any provisions of this Section in regard to parking.
   (K)   The parking regulations provided within this section may be enforced
by placement of a chalk mark upon the tire or other mark upon the vehicle to
identify the vehicle and to determine whether said vehicle has parked in
violation of the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to remove, hide,
destroy, alter, wipe, tamper with, or conceal any chalk mark or other mark
placed upon any person’s tire or vehicle by a police officer or other parking
enforcement agent of the City or to otherwise interfere, obstruct, or prevent
any police officer or other parking enforcement officer of the City from
enforcing the provisions of this Section. This interference with parking
enforcement shall be punishable by a penalty of $50.00 for the first offense,
$100.00 for the second offense, and $200.00 for each subsequent offense.
   (L)   (1)   (a)   Parking of a motor vehicle on either side of North Street
from 10th Street to 12th Street and on either side of each Peek Street, North
Last Street, South Last Street, East Last Street, and Rufus Street is hereby
declared to be a traffic hazard, an obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic and to the movement of emergency vehicles, and injurious to the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
         (b)   The parking of a motor vehicle on either side of North Street
from 10th Street to 12th Street and on either side of each Peek Street, North
Last Street, South Last Street, East Last Street, and Rufus Street is hereby
prohibited.
      (2)   Pursuant to §
72.05 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, violation of the prohibition against
parking on North Street from 10th Street to 12th Street and on either side of
each Peek Street, North Last Street, South Last Street, East Last Street, and
Rufus Street shall be subject to issuance of a citation and imposition of a
fine for prohibited parking and shall subject the motor vehicle parked on said
Streets to towing of the motor vehicle without notice (except for the placement
of signs as provided herein), all as provided within said §
72.05 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (3)   The City Manager, pursuant to §
73.02(A)(15) of the Revised Code of Ordinances, is hereby authorized and
directed to erect signs adjacent to North Street from 10th Street to 12th
Street and on Peek Street, North Last Street, South Last Street, East Last
Street, and Rufus Street prohibiting parking (e.g. No Parking, Parking
Prohibited, or similar notification) and signs indicating that vehicles in
violation will be towed (e.g. Violators Will Be Towed or similar notification),
which signs shall be placed at locations as determined by the City Manager.
      (4)   The City Manager and the Mt. Vernon Police Department are hereby
authorized and directed to enforce this Ordinance and the applicable provisions
of the Revised Code of Ordinances as provided herein and as provided within the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 18, § 18.20) (Ord. 2023-26, passed 6-19-2023)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
      
92.   TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS
      
93.   RECREATION
      
94.   CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES
Section
   
90.01   General nuisance
   
90.02   Trash, debris
   
90.03   Combustibles
   
90.04   Dead animals
   
90.05   Animals, dogs, cats
   
90.06   Spitting
   
90.07   Sale of spoiled food
   
90.08   Open burning
   
90.09   Loud noises
   
90.10   Refrigerators
   
90.11   Complaints, fines, liens
   
90.12   Inoperable or junked vehicles
   
90.13   Smoke, dust or fumes emission
   
90.14   Weeds
   
90.15   Animals running at large
   
90.16   Prohibited storage, including shipping containers
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 GENERAL NUISANCE.
   (A)   No person shall keep, maintain or allow upon any premises within the
City any carrion, pigsty, decaying animal or vegetable matter, stagnant water
or any other thing that may be injurious to the health of or offensive to the
public, or by which any noxious or offensive smell may be created.
   (B)   The keeping, maintaining or allowing of any such matter or condition
within the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which shall be abated as
hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.1)
§ 90.02 TRASH, DEBRIS.
   No person shall dump, throw, place, deposit, maintain, store or keep on any
street, alley, premises, public property, private property or land within the
City any junk, trash, waste, garbage or other debris and the dumping, throwing,
placing, depositing, maintaining, storage or keeping of any such matter as
aforesaid shall be declared to be a nuisance, which shall be abated as
hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.2)
§ 90.03 COMBUSTIBLES.
   (A)   No person shall keep or allow any dead grass, dry weeds or any
combustible material upon any right-of-way or any premises owned, occupied or
controlled by him within the City, and no person shall keep or allow any rank
or growing weeds of a height of one foot on any premises within the City owned
or occupied by such person.
   (B)   The keeping or allowing of any of the material herein described is
hereby declared to be a nuisance which shall be abated as hereinafter set
forth.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.3)
§ 90.04 DEAD ANIMALS.
   No person being owner or having custody, care, control or possession of any
animal which shall die within the City limits shall allow the carcass thereof
to remain in the City limits for more than 12 hours and every such person shall
cause such carcass to be removed within 12 hours of the death of such animal.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.4)
§ 90.05 ANIMALS, DOGS, CATS.
   (A)   No person shall have or keep any cattle, hogs, sheep or goats or other
animals within the City in such manner as to create any offensive smell or
noise or to create any condition dangerous to the health of the public.
   (B)   Keeping or permitting six or more dogs and/or cats over the age of
four months upon or within any lot, structure, dwelling, or premises, except
upon a lot, structure, or premises licensed and lawfully operating under the
Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605) and lawfully zoned under Chapter 161
of the Revised Code of Ordinances, shall constitute and is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.5)
§ 90.06 SPITTING.
   No person shall expectorate or spit on any sidewalk or public place within
the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.6)
§ 90.07 SALE OF SPOILED FOOD.
   No person shall within the City sell or offer for sale any tainted or
spoiled matter, vegetable or other food products to be used for human
consumption.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.7)
§ 90.08 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or
other open burning fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained
within the limits of the City, except recreational fires, permitted landscape
fires, and permitted leaf burning fires as hereinafter defined and except small
open flames for heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares
and the like.
   (B)   Recreational fires shall consist of the burning of fuels for a
legitimate campfire, recreational, and cooking purposes, or in a domestic
fireplace or device in areas where such burning is consistent with other laws.
   (C)   Recreational fires, permitted landscape fires, and permitted leaf
burning fires shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)    A recreational fire may only burn sticks, limbs, logs not
exceeding four inches in diameter, charcoal, cooking fuel or camping fuel only.
      (2)   No recreational fire shall be burned or be permitted to smolder
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
      (3)   No recreational fire, permitted landscape fire, or permitted leaf
burning fire shall be burned during periods of high wind or extreme drought.
      (4)   Recreational fires shall be in a fire pit, fire ring, outdoor
fireplace, chiminea, or other such device designed for such burning, or shall
be in an area surrounded by non-combustible material. If the recreational fire
is not within a device designed for such burning, permission shall be obtained
from the Mt. Vernon Fire Department before igniting the recreational fire; in
addition, no recreational fire shall exceed an area dimension of 6 feet by 6
feet (i.e. no width or length measurement of the fire area shall exceed 6
feet).
      (5)   No garbage, trash, debris, waste, refuse, lumber, building
materials, or tires shall be burned in a recreational fire, a permitted
landscape fire, or leaf burning fire; no landscape waste (including leaves)
except sticks, limbs, and logs described within subparagraph (A) above shall be
burned in a recreational fire.
      (6)   No person shall willfully leave any recreational fire, permitted
landscape fire, or leaf burning fire including any smoldering fire, unattended;
a fire shall be considered unattended if a person of not at least 18 years of
age is not physically present out-of-doors and in visible contact with the fire
at all times.
      (7)   No recreational fire, permitted landscape fire, or leaf burning
fire shall be burned upon any public street, public sidewalk, any drainage
ditch within the public right-of-way, or any manhole cover or burned upon the
property of another without written permission.
      (8)   Recreational fires, permitted recreational fires, and leaf burning
fires shall be extinguished immediately upon direction of police or fire
personnel.
      (9)   A leaf burning fire (which may burn leaves and also sticks and logs
not exceeding four inches in diameter) may be burned as hereinafter stated, but
on no other dates, except as may be permitted within subparagraph (D) below. A
leaf burning fire is permitted between the hours of sunrise and sunset each day
as determined by the Astronomical Applications Department of the U.S. Navy
Observatory during the following periods: Monday through Sunday during each the
second full week of April, the second full week of May, the second full week of
October, and the second full week of November each year. Leaf burning may be
prohibited during a permitted leaf burning period by order of the Chief of the
Mt. Vernon Fire Department upon a determination by him that leaf burning
constitutes a fire hazard due to high winds, dry conditions or other factors.
No leaf burning fire shall be burned or shall be permitted to smolder between
the hours of sunset and sunrise.
   (D)   No person within the City of Mt. Vernon shall burn any landscape waste
(including leaves) on any date or at any time except (i) as hereinafter
provided, (ii) except sticks, limbs, and logs within recreational fires or leaf
burning fires as permitted as within subparagraph (C) above, and (iii) except
leaves within leaf burning fires as permitted within subparagraph (C) above;
provided, however, that in the event of an emergency or other special
circumstance, the burning of landscape waste (including leaves) may be
authorized for a definite period of time by the City Manager upon the written
recommendation of the Fire Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department, or by the
Mayor by written declaration, or by the City Council by resolution. In
addition, individuals who own five or more acres of contiguous property may
burn landscape waste (including leaves) within the confines of their respective
property, provided that only landscape waste which is generated from that
property shall be burned; and individuals in possession of a valid permit
issued by an agency of the State of Illinois or of the United States
authorizing the burning of landscape waste may burn landscape waste in
accordance with the terms of the permit; each of said fires being “permitted
landscape fires”. In no event shall any person burn any landscape waste
(including leaves) upon any public street, public sidewalk, any drainage ditch
within the public right-of-way, or any manhole cover or upon the property of
another without written permission. No permitted landscape fire shall be burned
or shall be permitted to smolder between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
   (E)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of the Section shall be
subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon. In
addition, any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section shall be
liable for and shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by
the City, including without limitation any labor expenses, man hour costs,
machinery and equipment costs, and any material costs, incurred by the Mt.
Vernon Fire Department, associated with or relating to responding to the
violation and/or fire or the containment of said fire, and all reasonable
attorney’s fees and other costs incurred by the City in the collection of said
costs and expenses.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.8)
§ 90.09 LOUD NOISES.
   No person shall, within the City, make or create any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noises and the making or creating of any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noises is declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.9)
§ 90.10 REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall store or place any refrigerator, ice box or ice chest in any
open, unattended or unguarded place within the City limits without first
removing the door or doors therefrom, and placing or storing any such article
in any such place without first removing the door or doors is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.10)
§ 90.11 COMPLAINTS, FINES, LIENS.
   (A)   When complaint shall be made by any person to the Police Department of
the City, the Inspection Department of the City, or the City Manager of the
City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that exists within the City which is a
nuisance to the public, including any condition or thing described in this
Article, the Police Department, the Inspection Department, the City Manager or
the designee of any of them or other agency of the City, is hereby authorized
to serve or cause to be served a notice in writing upon the owner, occupant,
and lien holders of the premises upon which such nuisance shall be alleged to
be located and such notice shall state the condition of the thing alleged to be
a nuisance and shall require such owner, occupant, and lien holder to abate
such nuisance within the reasonable time of not more than five (5) days after
service of such notice in writing either personally or by regular mail (service
being complete upon deposit within U.S. Mail Box) or to the last-known address
of such person or persons or if no address is known, by posting notice upon the
property. In the event the owner, occupant, or lien holder shall fail, neglect,
or refuse to abate such nuisance within five days after the service of notice,
the City may proceed to abate such nuisance, and the reasonable costs and
expenses of such abatement by the City will be and the same is hereby assessed
against such owner and occupant personally as well as against the property
respectively. The costs and expenses of abatement of the nuisance shall, in all
events be a lien upon the premises superior to all subsequent liens and
encumbrances except tax liens, and if notice has been given as provided above
superior to prior or existing lien holders, if within 120 (one hundred twenty)
days after such costs and expenses incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon or by the
person performing the service by authority of the City of Mt. Vernon in his or
its own name files notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder of Jefferson
County, Illinois.
   (B)   (1)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out (1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) the amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or payable
for the service, and (3) the date or dates when such costs and expense were
incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon.
      (2)   The lien of the City shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement of
the nuisance and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, and the lien of the
City shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or
whose right in and to the premises arises prior to the filing of the notice of
lien and to whom notice was not personally served or mailed as provided above.
      (3)   If notice to a mortgagee or lien holder was given by personal
service or by mail then the lien of the City shall be valid, prior and superior
to any lien or claim of said mortgagee, judgment creditor, or lien holder. Such
lien may be foreclosed by the City of Mt. Vernon; or, at the City’s election,
the City may sue and recover from any owner or occupant if he fails, neglects,
or refuses to abate such nuisance within the aforesaid five-day period for the
reasonable costs and expenses of such abatement by the City provided that the
City may file and foreclose such lien or suit personally or both. Reasonable
costs and expenses of abatement shall include (but shall not be limited to)
inspection and reinspection fees; abstracting and title costs; postage or
service fees; cost of notice preparation; labor expenses; man hour costs;
machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time for equipment to and from
the property; other costs associated with abatement of the nuisance; all costs
of disposal of material, debris, or other such items; administrative and
clerical costs; recording fees, including costs incurred for filing of lien and
release of same; all reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from
preparation, institution, enforcement, collection or forfeiture of any lien or
suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other costs or expenses incurred by
the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder.
   (C)   The foreclosure of any lien hereunder shall be a remedy coexistent
with any other remedy of the City, including the imposition of a fine for the
maintenance of any such nuisance or the violation of any Section of this
Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.11)
§ 90.12 INOPERABLE OR JUNKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this Section.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.
         (a)   Any motor vehicle which for a period of at least thirty (30)
days has for any reason been incapable of being actually driven under its own
power.
         (b)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include motor vehicles that
are kept within a building when not in use or to a motor vehicle on the
premises of a place of business lawfully engaged in wrecking or junking motor
vehicles.
      JUNKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle including but not limited to recreational
vehicles and equipment, farm and other machinery which because of one of the
following characteristics, constitutes a threat to public health and safety:
         (a)   Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window,
headlight, taillight or any other cracked or broken glass;
         (b)   Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood
ornament, window handle, running board, steering wheel, trunk handle, radio
aerial, tailpipe or decorative piece, or machinery with rotted, rusted or loose
parts;
         (c)   Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, snakes
or other vermin or insects;
         (d)   Any vehicle which contains gasoline or other flammable fuel; or
         (e)   Any other vehicle which because of its defective condition
constitutes a serious threat to the public health and safety of the citizens of
the City.
      PROPERTY. Any real property within the City of Mt. Vernon.
      STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
      VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transports persons or property or pulls machinery and shall include without
limitation automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
   (B)   Except the term junked vehicles shall not include vehicles stored
within a locked garage or on the premises of a place of business lawfully
engaged in wrecking or junking motor vehicles.
   (C)   No person shall keep or have any inoperative motor vehicle as defined
herein on public or private property; same is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   No person shall store any junked vehicles as herein defined upon
private property nor shall any person place, leave or keep any junked vehicle
upon public property; same are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (E)   No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating or
wrecked vehicle or junked vehicle on any street or highway in the City; same
are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (F)   No person shall use any motor vehicle or permit any motor vehicle to
be used for storage of anything or item. Any motor vehicle used for said
purpose is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (G)   No person shall park, store, place, leave or keep any motor vehicle
required to be licensed by the State of Illinois upon public or private
property unless said vehicle is properly licensed for the current year as
required by law; any unlicensed vehicle is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (H)   (1)   If any vehicle is found to be kept, stored or left in violation
of this Ordinance, the person in possession of the property upon which such
vehicle is kept, stored or left, or in absence of such person, any known or
ascertainable owner of the vehicle, shall be liable for such violation.
      (2)   Possession of the property upon which the vehicle is kept, stored
or left, or ownership of the vehicle in absence of any person known to be in
possession, shall be prima facie evidence of responsibility and liability for
the condition giving rise to the nuisance.
   (I)   Any person who violates Subsection (C), (D), (E), (F) or (G) shall be
subject to a fine as provided in §
10.99 of the Revised Code in addition to such other remedies as permitted or
provided by law.
   (J)   (1)   Upon discovery of any vehicle which reasonable appears to be in
violation of this Ordinance, the corporate authorities of the Chief of Police
or his duly designated agent shall notify in writing the person in possession
of the property upon which the vehicle is kept, stored or left, or in absence
of such person, shall notify any known or ascertainable owner of the vehicle,
that:
         (a)   The vehicle constitutes a nuisance under the provisions of this
Section;
         (b)   The person must within ten (10) days remove or repair the
vehicle or otherwise abate the nuisance;
         (c)   The failure to remove or repair the vehicle or abate the
nuisance will be sufficient cause for its removal by the City under the terms
of this Section; that the continued failure of the person to remove or repair
or abate may also subject him to a fine as provided in this Subsection; and
that the person receiving the Notice may appear before the Building Official
for the City of Mt. Vernon and show cause why the motor vehicle should not be
removed or repaired.
      (2)   If the person in possession of the property upon which the vehicle
is kept, stored or left, or in absence of such person, any known or
ascertainable owner of the vehicle, fails to remove or repair the vehicle or
abate the nuisance in accordance with the terms of this Section, the Chief of
Police or his duly designated agent shall abate such nuisance by causing the
vehicle to be towed or transported to a designated storage place as determined
by the City and the cost of the towing transportation and storage shall be
charged and assessed to each person who shall have received a Notice to Abate
Nuisance hereunder and shall be assessed against the motor vehicle. Such
charges shall be assessed and collected and such vehicle shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle after passage of
30 days in accordance with §
72.05(M) of the Revised Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.12)
§ 90.13 SMOKE, DUST OR FUMES EMISSION.
   (A) Definitions.
      ASHES. Includes cinders, fly ash or other solid material resulting from
combustion and may include other solid material resulting from combustion and
may include unburned combustibles.
      ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION. Discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts,
vents, ducts, openings, premises, structures, vehicles, processes or other
source, or any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or obnoxious
acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic substances, waste,
particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter or any other materials in such
place, manner or concentration as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or
annoyance to the public or to endanger the health, comfort, repose, safety or
welfare of the public, or in such manner as to cause or have a natural tendency
to cause injury or damage to business or property.
      CINDERS. Particles not ordinarily considered as fly ash or dust because
of their greater size, consisting essentially of fused ash and/or unburned
matter.
      DUST. Includes fly ash, cinders, dirt, grime and any other solid
particles resulting from any industrial process or other source.
      FLY ASH. Includes particulate matter capable of being gas-borne or
airborne and consisting essentially of fused ash and/or burned or unburned
material.
      FUMES. Include gases, acids or vapors that are of such character as to
create an unclean, destructive, offensive or unhealthful condition.
      PARTICULATE MATTER. Includes material, other than water, which is
suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a
liquid or solid.
      RINGLEMANN CHART. Includes and mean that chart published and distributed
by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 and on which are
illustrated the graduated shades of gray or black for use in estimating the
light obscuring capacity of smoke.
      SMOKE. Small, gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion
consisting predominantly of carbon and other combustible material and present
in sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other
solids.
      SMOKE UNITS. Means and represents the number obtained by multiplying the
density of the smoke observed and determined in Ringlemann numbers under the
Ringlemann Chart by the time of emission in minutes.
      SOOT. Includes agglomerated particles consisting essentially of
carbonaceous materials.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful within the City of Mt. Vernon for any person
owning or operating, either as principal agent, or an employee, any burning
combustion equipment or device, or process equipment device or portable boiler,
or any other device, to cause, suffer or allow emission or discharge into the
open air of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other particulate matter, air
contaminant or atmospheric pollution from any single such source, except in
conformity with the limits set forth hereinafter:
      (1)   Not more than 15 smoke units under the Ringlemann Chart shall be
permitted per hour.
      (2)   No smoke more intense than number two on the Ringlemann Chart shall
be allowed, except that during one hour of a 24-hour day, 30 units of smoke may
be emitted but with no more soot or intensity than number three on the
Ringlemann Chart.
      (3)   No smoke, dust, soot, fumes or other particulate matter, air
contaminant or atmospheric pollution shall be permitted in quantities
sufficient to produce an opacity at any point greater than number three on the
Ringlemann Chart, except a plume consisting entirely of condensed steam.
      (4)   The total quantity of emitted solids from any single source shall
not exceed one pound per hour, per acre.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (B) hereof, it shall be
unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of
dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other particulate matter, air contaminant or
atmospheric pollution in such places as to be detrimental to any person or the
public or to endanger the health, safety or welfare of any person or the public
and the escape of such is declared to be a public nuisance.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the handling,
loading, unloading, storing, transferring, transporting, placing, depositing,
or scattering of any ashes, fly ash, cinders or dust collected from any
combustion process, any dust, dirt, chaff, wastepaper, trash, rubbish, waste or
refuse matter of any kind, or any other substance or other material whatever,
which is likely to be scattered by the wind, or is susceptible to being wind-
borne, without taking reasonable precautions or measures so as to minimize
atmospheric pollution and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate,
maintain or cause to be operated or maintained, any building, structure or
premises or other place which has or involves any matter, material or substance
likely to be scattered by the wind or susceptible to being wind-borne so as to
minimize atmospheric pollution.
   (E)   Observations of smoke or emissions described above under the
Ringlemann Chart shall be made by comparing the observed density of the smoke
with the Ringlemann Chart numbers and where the density of smoke observed falls
between two consecutive Ringlemann Chart numbers, the lower Ringlemann Chart
number shall be considered the density of the smoke or other condition
observed.
   (F)   Any emission or escape of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or other
particulate matter, air contaminant or atmospheric pollution, in the sense of
the limits described above, or in such quantities and in such place as to be
detrimental to any person or the public or which shall endanger the health,
safety or welfare of any person or the public, is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and shall be abated in the manner described in §
90.12 of this Article. The City Manager is further empowered to institute legal
proceedings on behalf of the City for abatement or prosecution of any such
nuisance.
   (G)   In order to determine the quantity of dust, soot, fumes, smoke or
other air contaminant or atmospheric pollution emitted or escaping into the
open air from any source, it shall be the duty of any person owning any burning
combustion equipment device, process equipment device, or portable boiler or
other device at his own expense to make or cause to be made an annual
examination and test thereof by a competent person or firm approved by the City
Manager, to determine whether same complies with the provisions of this
ordinance and shall submit the results of such test to the City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.13)
§ 90.14 WEEDS.
   (A)   That any rank or growing weeds over the height of one foot growing on
any lot or tract of land within the City limits of the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, are hereby declared a nuisance. Such weeds shall be cut and removed
by the owner or person having control of such lot or tract of land within five
(5) days after notice in writing to the last known address of such person or if
no address is known by posting notice upon the property by the Bureau of
Inspection or other City official to cut the same. Any person failing to cut
such weeds on any premises owned or controlled by him within five (5) days
after such notice shall be deemed guilty of violation of this Article and upon
conviction thereof be fined.
   (B)   In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of any person, firm or
corporation to abate such nuisance within five (5) days after the service of
notice as herein provided, the City may abate such nuisance, and the reasonable
cost and expense of such abatement by the City will be and the same is hereby
assessed against such firm or corporation, personally, as well as the several
lots or parcels of land, respectively. Such lien may be foreclosed by the City
of Mt. Vernon, Illinois; or, at the City’s election, it may sue and recover
from any person, firm or corporation who fails, neglects or refuses to abate
such nuisance within the aforesaid five-day period for the reasonable costs and
expenses of such abatement by the City provided that the City may file and
foreclose such lien or sue personally, or both. Reasonable costs and expenses
of abatement shall include (but shall not be limited to) inspection and
reinspection fees; abstracting and title costs; postage or service fees; costs
of notice preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and equipment
costs and fees; travel time for equipment to and from the property mowed; other
costs associated with mowing; all costs of disposal of materials, debris or
other such items; administrative and clerical costs; recording fees including
costs incurred for filing of lien and release of same; all reasonable attorney
fees and costs arising from preparation, institution, enforcement, collection,
or foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other
costs or expenses incurred by the City pursuant to exercise of its authority
hereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.14)
§ 90.15 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall permit any dog, cat or other animal within the
City owned, kept, in the care of, or controlled by such person to be or run at
large upon any street, sidewalk, park, or public place or public property nor
to be or run at large upon the private property of another person without said
person’s consent.
      (2)   An animal shall not be deemed running at large when off the
premises of its owner, caretaker, or keeper, if such animal shall be restrained
by a leash, cord, or chain not exceeding ten feet in length or confined within
a secure animal carrier or confined within a motor vehicle.
   (B)   In the event any dog, cat or other animal is apprehended while running
at large within the City and detained or confined within the facilities of the
Jefferson County Animal Shelter or other City authorized facility, then the
owner, keeper or other person claiming and removing the animal from the
facilities shall pay a ten dollar ($10.00) reclamation fee, in addition to any
other fees or charges imposed by the facility or other authority.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.15)
§ 90.16 PROHIBITED STORAGE, INCLUDING SHIPPING CONTAINERS.
   No person shall use any motor vehicle, truck, van, mobile home, trailer,
recreational vehicle, bus body, or similar prefabricated item originally built
for purposes other than storage of goods and materials for storage of anything
or of any item; no person shall use a “shipping container” for storage of
anything or of any item, unless such use of the shipping container is expressly
and specifically permitted within §
161.065 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Use of any prohibited item described
herein for storage is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.17)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided within this Chapter 90, any
person who shall violate any section or provision of this Chapter 90 shall be
subject to the following fines:
      (1)   A fine of $50 per day for each violation arising from a single
Notice to Abate Nuisance during a calendar year;
      (2)   A fine of $100 per day for each violation arising from a second
Notice to Abate Nuisance during a calendar year;
      (3)   A fine of $200 per day for each violation arising from a third
Notice to Abate Nuisance during a calendar year.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each
day on which a violation occurs or continues after the date of service of the
Notice to Abate Nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 13, § 13.16)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
Section
   
91.01   Adoption of Fire Codes
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Prohibition of storage of flammable liquids in outside, above-ground
tanks
   
91.04   Permits
   
91.05   Amendments made in the Fire Prevention Code
   
91.06   Adoption of further regulations
   
91.07   Appeals
   
91.08   Regulation of sale and possession of fireworks
   
91.09   Fire alarm systems and components
   
91.10   Auxiliary protection signaling systems for fire alarm service
   
91.11   Alarm systems in general, including fire alarm
   
91.12   Fire apparatus access road
   
91.13   Manual shut-off requirements for gas service
   
91.14   Hazardous materials
   
91.15   Assessment and recovery of third party expenses
§ 91.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODES.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire or explosion those certain Codes known as the International
Fire Code 2021 Edition issued by the International Code Council and the NFPA
101 Life Safety Code 2021 Edition, issued by National Fire Protection
Association, the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are
hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which Codes not less than one
copy of each have been and are now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City
of Mt. Vernon, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the date on which this Ordinance shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between the two foregoing referenced Codes,
the more restrictive or stringent provision of the respective codes shall
control.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.1) (Ord. 2024-37, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be held to mean the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   (B)   Wherever the term CORPORATE COUNSEL is used in the Fire Prevention
Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois.
   (C)   Wherever the term FIRE OFFICIAL is used within the Codes adopted
herein, it shall be held to mean the Fire Prevention Inspector for the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois, or such fire official as designated by the Chief of the
Mt. Vernon Fire Department.
   (D)   Wherever the term FIRE PREVENTION CODE is used herein, it shall be
held to mean Chapter 91 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Vernon and the Codes adopted thereby.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.2)
§ 91.03 PROHIBITION OF STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE, ABOVE-GROUND
TANKS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of the Codes adopted herein, the storage of
flammable liquids in outside, aboveground tanks is prohibited within the zoning
jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon except upon real estate having an
Industrial Zoning Classification and except for a propane tank upon real estate
having a Conditional Use Permit for a Propane Filling Station within a B-2, B-
3, B-PL, or IPCA-PUD Zoning Classification, provided all provisions of the
Codes adopted herein shall be applicable to said storage upon said real estate.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.3)
§ 91.04 PERMITS.
   All permits or license referred to in the Fire Prevention Code shall be
valid for a period of one year from May 1 to April 30 only and must be renewed
annually.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.4)
§ 91.05 AMENDMENTS MADE IN THE FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of Section F-307.0 of the
International Fire Code, the following provisions shall also apply:
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or other open
burning fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained within the
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon:
      1.   Except as provided in Section 13.8 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
      2.   Except in an incinerator constructed pursuant to specifications
which hereinafter follow.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of the Section shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon. In addition, any person who shall violate the provisions of
this Section shall be liable for and shall reimburse the City for all costs and
expenses incurred by the City, including without limitation any labor expenses,
man hour costs, machinery and equipment costs, and any material costs, incurred
by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department, associated with or relating to responding to
the violation and/or fire or the containment of said fire, and all reasonable
attorney’s fees and other costs incurred by the City in the collection of said
costs and expenses.
   (B)   Incinerators shall be subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The incinerator shall be built with primary and secondary
combustion chambers. It shall include a down pass and/or other means of
creating turbulence for the gases of combustion to assure thorough mixing of
gases of the products of combustion prior to their entering the secondary
combustion chamber. Total heat release in the entire incinerator, excluding ash
pit, shall not be more than 24,000 B.T.U.’s per cubic foot per hour.
      (2)   The secondary combustion chamber shall be designed so that the gas
velocity at some point in this chamber shall not exceed nine feet per second at
1400°F. The length of this gas travel shall be a distance not less than the
cross sectional area of that part of the passage in which that velocity is
attained.
      (3)   Charging doors for the incinerator shall be substantial in design
and weight, made of heavy, high-grade cast iron accurately hinged having straps
for anchoring securely into masonry, or as otherwise acceptable, and with ample
free air openings for aeration and secondary air.
      (4)   Cleanout and ash doors in hot areas shall be cast iron of
sufficient weight to avoid warping. Under-grate ash doors shall be steel or
cast iron of sufficient size to facilitate cleaning.
      (5)   Grates shall be of heavy duty cast iron construction dumping type,
all grate support members shall be such that the grates are supported
independent of the refractory walls. The free air opening shall be at least
40%.
      (6)   Exterior construction may be of common brick, sheet steel, or cast
iron. Interior construction shall have linings of first quality high heat duty
refractory (cone-31) with thickness in accordance with rated capacity of
incinerator. The incinerator roof is to be constructed of an acceptable
thickness high heat duty refractory supported by steel members bearing
independently of inner walls.
      (7)   Spark arrester shall be installed on top of stack made of high
temperature aluminum alloy or vitrified fire clay or cast iron or conical
design.
      (8)   Capacity - Incinerator shall be a Class 1 unit having a rated
capacity of not less than 25 pounds per hour suitable for Type 1 waste. All
establishments, commercial, industrial, or residential where burning inside or
outside is contemplated, shall first be investigated by the Fire Department for
load factor determination. Permission shall be granted to install incinerator
of an acceptable design within the load factor determination.
      (9)   Incinerator shall be constructed according to plans and
specifications available at the Mt. Vernon Fire Department or may be “portable”
or “package” unit fabricated in accordance with Incinerator Institute of
America and N.F.B.U. Standards.
      (10)   Classification 1.
 
a. Type of waste                     Type 1 Rubbish
                                     Combustible waste, paper cartons, rags,
b. Permissible components            floor sweepings, domestic, commercial, or
                                     industrial sources
c. Approximate composition by weight Rubbish 100%
                                    No garbage, animal, or human tissue,
                                     organic, or vegetable matter is permitted
d. Moisture content %                25% of weight
e. Incombustible solids %            10% of weight
f. BTU value/pounds of refuse        6500 as fired
 
   (C)   (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, using, or in
charge of any incinerator located within the Fire Limits of the City of Mt.
Vernon to cause, suffer, or allow the emission or discharge of smoke, dust,
fumes, gas, mist, or vapor from any such source into the atmosphere which is of
a shade in excess of No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart, as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines or of such capacity as to obscure an observer’s view to
a degree greater than does smoke of a shade equal to No. 1 on said Ringlemann
Chart.
         (b)   The effluent from the stack shall be odorless.
         (c)   The effluent from the stack shall not exceed a particular matter
emission of 0.4 grains per standard dry cubic foot of wet gas volume when
calculated to fifty percent (50 %) excess air; Except that smoke with a density
not exceeding No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart may be permitted for a period of
periods aggregating three (3) minutes in any hour.
      (2)   Any emission or discharge into the open air of smoke, particulate
matter, or other matter as herein above described, from any single such source
in excess of the limitations established in or pursuant to the above shall be
deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose
for sale, exchange, deliver, or install for use, in the Fire Limits any make,
model, or type of incinerator which does not meet the requirements of this
Article.
      (4)   In approving any make, model, or type of incinerator, the following
minimum standards shall apply and no such make, model, or type shall be
approved unless it shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in the
National Board of Fire Underwriters for Incinerators Bulletin No. 82 dated
July, 1958.
      (5)   All classifications for incinerators shall fall into one of the
following:
Class I
Class “A” Domestic and Small Industrial Type Incinerators
Class II
Class “B” Domestic and Small Industrial Type Incinerators
Class III
Class “C” Flue Fed Incinerators
Class IV
Class “D” Commercial and Industrial Type Incinerators
 
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.5)
§ 91.06 ADOPTION OF FURTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference the following:
Title 41: Fire Protection Chapter 1: State Fire Marshal Part 160, Storage,
Transportation, Sale, and Use of Gasoline and Volatile Oils:
   (B)   Rules and Regulations Relating to General Storage. Part 170, Storage,
Transportation, Sale, and Use of Gasoline and Volatile Oils: Rules and
Regulations Relating to Service Stations, Part 180, Storage, Transportation,
Sale, and Use of Gasoline and Volatile Oils: General Rules. Part 100, Fire
Prevention and Safety.
   (C)   In the event of a conflict between the foregoing and the Codes adopted
within §
91.01 herein, the more restrictive or stringent provision of the respective
Codes shall control.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.6)
§ 91.07 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Fire Prevention Inspector, designated fire official, or the
Chief of the Fire Department, shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
Code do not apply or that the intent and meaning of the Code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision to
City Manager within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision; thereafter
the decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council within 30-
days from date of decision of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.7)
§ 91.08 REGULATION OF SALE AND POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Fireworks are any explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation; fireworks shall include “Consumer
Fireworks”, “Display Fireworks”, and “Unregulated Fireworks” as hereinafter
described.
   (B)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS mean those fireworks that must comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the Consumer
Products Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. Parts 1500 and 1507 and
classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United States Department of
Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101. Consumer Fireworks (1.4G Fireworks) do
not include “Unregulated Fireworks” described within Subsection (C) herein and
shall not include “Display Fireworks” (1.3G Fireworks) as defined within the
Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act, but Consumer Fireworks shall include (but shall
not be limited to) the following:
      (1)   Blank cartridges;
      (2)   Toy cannons in which explosives are used;
      (3)   The type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same;
      (4)   Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrocket, Roman candles, bombs or other
devices of similar construction;
      (5)   Any fireworks containing any explosive compound;
      (6)   Any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, or
containing combustible substances providing visual effects;
      (7)   Sparkling devices which produce a shower of sparks upon ignition
(except Sparklers, defined below) including, but not limited to items commonly
known as “fountains”, “spinners”, “wheels”, or similar devices.
   (C)   The term UNREGULATED FIREWORKS shall mean and include snake or glow
worm pellets, smoke devices, trick noisemakers known as party poppers, booby
traps, snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, and auto burglar alarms;
sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other similar devices and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps as hereinafter specifically defined:
      (1)   SNAKES, GLOW WORM. Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that
produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the
pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate.
      (2)   SMOKE DEVICES. Tube or skewer containing pyrotechnic composition
that upon ignition produces white or colored smoke as a primary effect.
      (3)   TRICK NOISEMAKER. Item that produces a small report intended to
surprise the user; these devices include:
         (a)   PARTY POPPER. Small plastic or paper item containing not more
than 16 mg of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A string
protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper streamers
and producing a small report.
         (b)   BOOBY TRAP. Small tube with string protruding from both ends,
similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to
ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report.
         (c)   SNAPPER. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device
explodes, producing a small report.
         (d)   TRICK MATCH. Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the
match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.
         (e)   CIGARETTE LOAD. Small wooden peg that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette
containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced.
         (f)   AUTO BURGLAR ALARM. Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition
that produces a loud whistle and/or smoke when ignited. A small quantity of
explosive, not exceeding 50 mg may also be used to produce a small report. A
squib is used to ignite the device.
      (4)   SPARKLERS. A wire or stick coated with pyrotechnic composition
which shall not exceed one hundred grams per item that produces a shower of
sparks upon ignition.
      (5)   TOY PISTOLS, TOY CANES, TOY GUNS, AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES.
Devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five-hundredths grains
or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that
the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosive.
      (6)   TOY PISTOL PAPER OR PLASTIC CAPS. Item which contains less than
twenty five-hundredths grains of explosive material.
   (D)   Any term used within this Ordinance not otherwise defined herein shall
have the same meaning as provided within the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act (425
ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.).
   (E)   Neither the State of Illinois nor the City of Mt. Vernon recognizes
the term “Safe and Sane Fireworks” and any item labeled as such are subject to
the definitions contained herein. The labeling of a device shall not determine
whether the device is an Unregulated Firework or is a Consumer Firework. If the
possession, use, or sale of a firework is not authorized within this Ordinance
then it is prohibited; and if authorized, such possession, use, or sale is
restricted as provided within this Ordinance.
   (F)   No person may sell or hold for sale or distribute or offer for sale or
possess or purchase or discharge any “Consumer Firework” within the City of Mt.
Vernon, without first strictly complying with the provisions of the Illinois
Pyrotechnic Use Act, and without first complying with the provisions of this
Section of the Revised Code of Ordinances; provided that in the event of a
conflict between said Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act and this Section of the
Revised Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall control. Only
such “Consumer Fireworks” as are authorized by the Illinois State Fire
Marshal’s Office pursuant to the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act and as are
authorized and approved by the Fire Chief of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be
permitted for sale, distribution, or possession within the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   No person may sell, possess for sale, distribute or offer
for sale any fireworks, except Unregulated Fireworks, in the City of Mt. Vernon
unless such person has first obtained a permit to sell fireworks pursuant to
this Ordinance and also, if applicable, a transient merchant license under §
110.04 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. A permit to sell fireworks shall be
issued only for Consumer Fireworks as defined within Subsection (B) above; no
permit to sell fireworks shall be issued for Display Fireworks (1.3G Fireworks)
as defined within the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act, as sales of Display
Fireworks are prohibited. A separate fireworks permit to sell fireworks shall
be required for each location where Consumer Fireworks are sold, held for sale,
distributed or offered for sale.
         (b)   An applicant for a Permit to Sell Consumer Fireworks under this
Ordinance shall pay to the City of Mt. Vernon a fee in the amount of $25.00 per
location, which fee shall not be refundable; each Permit to Sell Consumer
Fireworks shall be issued for not longer than one (1) year and shall in all
events expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. A Permit to Sell
Consumer Fireworks shall be issued within 15-days from receipt of a proper
application if the applicant and location are in compliance with the provisions
of this ordinance and with State and Federal law.
         (c)   Any person who desires to obtain a Permit to Sell Consumer
Fireworks shall file a written application with the Fire Chief. The Application
shall be under oath and shall include the applicant’s name, permanent business
address (which must include a street address), residence address of the
applicant (if the applicant is a corporation the residence address of its
officers), residential and business telephone numbers, the location at which
the applicant intends to do business, a copy of the applicant’s certificate of
registration under the Illinois Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS
120\, a complete inventory and list of all fireworks to be sold or offered for
sale, and a certificate of insurance evidencing a general liability policy in
the amount of not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000). In addition, the
application shall provide a copy of a written lease or other written evidence
from the owner of the location where the applicant proposes to sell indicating
permission of the owner to use the location. Each Permit to Sell Consumer
Fireworks issued hereunder shall clearly designate that it is a “Permit to Sell
Consumer Fireworks” Unless the applicant has also complied with each of the
provisions of the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act no person shall be issued a
“Permit to Sell Consumer Fireworks”
         (d)   Prior to the issuance of a Permit to Sell Consumer Fireworks,
the applicant shall file with the Fire Chief a cash deposit in the amount of
$1,000 to secure compliance with this Ordinance unless the applicant is the
owner of real estate situated within Jefferson County, Illinois and provides
written proof of same. The Fire Chief shall hold the cash deposit as security
for compliance with this Ordinance and if the applicant or permit holder or any
employee or agent of same shall fail to comply with this Ordinance and a fine
shall be assessed under Subsection (N) then said cash deposit shall be applied
to payment of said penalty. Unless an alleged violation is pending, the cash
deposit shall be held for 30-days after expiration or surrender or termination
of the subject permit, at which time any balance of the cash deposit held by
the Fire Chief shall be refunded either personally to the permit holder or by
certified mail to the permit holder; provided, however, that if the permit
holder shall fail to keep the Fire Chief informed of a current mailing address
then said cash deposit shall be forfeited to the City after one attempt by the
Fire Chief or his designee to refund the bond by certified mail.
      (2)   No person may purchase or possess any Fireworks, except Unregulated
Fireworks, in the City of Mt. Vernon unless such person has first obtained a
permit, hereinafter designated as a Training Certification Card, to possess
said fireworks pursuant to this Ordinance and pursuant to the Illinois
Pyrotechnic Use Act. A Training Certification Card to possess fireworks shall
be issued only for Consumer Fireworks as defined within Subsection (B) above;
no permit to possess fireworks shall be issued for Display Fireworks (1.3G
Fireworks) as defined within the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act An applicant for
a Training Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks must be 18 years of
age or older. A Training Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks shall
issue for not longer than one (1) year and shall in all events expire on April
30 following the date of issuance. A Training Certification Card to Possess
Consumer Fireworks shall be issued within 15 days after the applicant provides
such information as required by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department and after the
applicant has completed a Fireworks Knowledge and Safety Training Course
administered by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department. Any person who desires to
obtain a Training Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks shall apply
for same by registering with the Mt. Vernon Fire Department to take the
Fireworks Knowledge and Safety Training Course. A Training Certification Card
to Possess Consumer Fireworks does not authorize the display of fireworks. In
addition to a Training Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks, a
person desiring to display Consumer Fireworks shall obtain the required Permit
to Display Consumer Fireworks under Subsection (L) herein before discharge or
display of any Consumer Fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon. No Training Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks shall
be issued unless all requirements, including training requirements, of the
Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act have been complied with.
   (H)   Fireworks shall be possessed, kept, stored, held for sale, distributed
sold, discharged, and/or delivered subject to the following additional
restrictions:
      (1)   Fireworks shall not be stored or kept for sale or offered for sale
at any location unless there are two (2) approved chemical fire extinguishers
readily available and equipped for use in extinguishing fires.
      (2)   Over each entrance to any room where fireworks are stored or kept
for sale or offered for sale there shall be designated a sign in conspicuous
type: CAUTION - FIREWORKS - NO SMOKING.
      (3)   No smoking shall be allowed and no person shall smoke within any
structure or room where fireworks are stored or kept for sale or offered for
sale. In addition, smoking is prohibited and no person shall smoke within
twenty-five feet (25’) of any location where fireworks are stored or kept for
sale or offered for sale.
      (4)   Fireworks shall not be exposed in windows where the sun shines
through glass on the merchandise displayed, except where such fireworks are in
the original package, and all fireworks kept for sale on front counters must
remain in original packages; provided, however, that fireworks in open stock
may be kept in showcases or in counters out of reach of the public.
      (5)   No fireworks shall be stored, kept, sold, held for sale or offered
for sale by any person within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of any gasoline
pump or gasoline bulk station or in any building in which gasoline or volatile
liquids are sold or present in quantities in excess of one gallon, except in
retail stores where cleaners, paint, and oils are handled in sealed containers
only.
      (6)   No firework shall be discharged by any person within one hundred
fifty feet (150’) of any location where fireworks are sold, held for sale,
distributed or offered for sale or within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of any
gasoline pump or gasoline bulk station or in any building or location at which
gasoline or volatile liquids are present.
      (7)   No person shall ignite any firework in any motor vehicle or throw a
firework from a motor vehicle nor shall any person place or throw any ignited
article of firework into or at a motor vehicle or at or near any person or
group of people.
      (8)   Fireworks shall not be sold to nor purchased by minors under the
age of 16-years, except that a minor under the immediate supervision of a
responsible adult may purchase Unregulated Fireworks; Consumer Fireworks shall
not be sold to nor purchased by persons under the age of 18 years of age or
less; Consumer Fireworks shall not be sold to nor purchased by persons 18 years
of age or older unless the person has a valid Training Certification Card to
Possess Consumer Fireworks.
      (9)   Fireworks shall not be sold to nor purchased by any intoxicated
person or person who appears to be intoxicated, nor to any person who is
otherwise so diminished in capacity such that it reasonably appears that he
creates a danger to himself or others by the use of fireworks.
      (10)   There shall be at least two exits from each booth, room, or
building from which fireworks are sold, held for sale, distributed, or offered
for sale.
      (11)   At each location where fireworks are sold, held for sale,
distributed or offered for sale there shall be a sales clerk who is at least
18-years of age on duty to serve consumers at the time of purchase or delivery.
      (12)   No firework shall be discharged upon any public street, alley,
parking lot, sidewalk or public way, upon any property owned by the United
States, the State of Illinois or other state or any municipality or other
political subdivision or agency thereof or upon any property, including
privately owned property, except a display subject to the provisions of
Subsection (L) herein
      (13)   Each permit holder, his employees, and agents are each subject to
the restrictions within this Section and, in addition, said permit holder and
his employees and agents shall strictly enforce all smoking and discharge
prohibitions described within this Ordinance upon any property owned or
controlled or in the possession of the permit holder.
      (14)   Fireworks shall be sold only from a permanent non-residential
structure. In no event shall fireworks be sold from a motor vehicle, any
temporary structure, or a private residence.
      (15)   No “Consumer Firework” shall be sold to nor possessed by any
person unless such person holds a valid Training Certification Card to Possess
Consumer Fireworks issued by the City of Mt. Vernon Fire Department. Each, the
seller and purchaser, shall have committed a violation upon sale of a “Consumer
Firework” to any person not possessing the required Training Certification Card
to Possess Consumer Fireworks.
   (I)   The Fire Chief or his designee, the Chief Building Inspector or his
designee, and the Mt. Vernon Police Department may at reasonable hours enter
and inspect the location or premises of any permit holder to determine
compliance with this Ordinance. If any permit holder or his agent or employee
has in his possession any firework in violation of this Ordinance the permit
shall be revoked and all such fireworks seized and the fireworks shall be kept
to be used as evidence. If any person is observed to have in his possession any
fireworks or to be using or possessing any fireworks in violation of this
Ordinance such fireworks may be seized and the fireworks shall be kept to be
used as evidence. Upon conviction of the offender or with the permission of the
offender, the fireworks shall be destroyed. If an alleged offender is
determined to be innocent of any violation, permissible fireworks shall be made
available for return to the person in whose possession they were found,
although said person must arrange for delivery of same within 30-days from date
of notice to said person.
   (J)   Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the Fire
Chief for good cause after notice and opportunity to be heard. The Fire Chief
shall afford to the permit holder an opportunity to present evidence bearing
upon the question of revocation or suspension of the license. Cause for
revocation or suspension shall include the violation of any provision of this
Ordinance or of any federal law or statute of the State of Illinois by the
permit holder or by any employee or agent of the permit holder or that the
permit holder has made a false statement on any application for permit under
this Ordinance or for reason that the permit holder has refused to permit any
police officer or member of the Fire Department of the City or Inspector of the
City to inspect the premises or the activities of the premises at reasonable
times. The decision of the Fire Chief suspending or revoking a license shall be
in writing and shall be subject to review by the City Manager upon written
request of the permit holder.
   (K)   If any person possesses or offers for sale or makes sale of any
fireworks without first having obtained the required permit under this
Ordinance, the Mt. Vernon Fire Department at the direction of the City Manager
may hold such fireworks or fireworks inventory of the person until he/she
obtains the required permit. If the property is held by the City of Mt. Vernon
for more than 60-days and the person whose property is being held does not
obtain the required permit under this Ordinance, the City may petition the
Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois for an order for the sale of the
property being held. If the court finds that the person whose property is held
has not obtained a Permit under this Ordinance prior to the filing of the
Petition the Court may order and authorize the City to sell the property or may
order the destruction of the property by the City. The proceeds of sale of the
property less reimbursement to the City of the reasonable expenses for the
storage and sale of the property shall be deposited in the General Corporate
Fund of the City.
   (L)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or allow to be
displayed Consumer Fireworks and/or Display Fireworks (as defined within the
Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act) within the corporate areas of the City of Mt.
Vernon without a permit to display fireworks. Prior to the issuance of the
permit to display or allow to be displayed Consumer Fireworks or Display
Fireworks each applicant shall file with the Fire Chief a cash deposit in the
amount of $1,000 to secure compliance with this Ordinance unless the applicant
is the owner of real estate situated within Jefferson County, Illinois and
provides written proof of same. The Fire Chief shall hold the cash deposit as
security for compliance with this Ordinance and if the applicant or permit
holder or any employee or agent of same shall fail to comply with this
Ordinance and a fine shall be assessed under Subsection (N) then said cash
deposit shall be applied to payment of said penalty.
      (2)   Unless an alleged violation is pending, the cash deposit shall be
held for 30-days after expiration or surrender or termination of the subject
permit, at which time any balance of the cash deposit held by the Fire Chief
shall be refunded either personally to the permit holder or by certified mail
to the permit holder; provided, however, that if the permit holder shall fail
to keep the Fire Chief informed of a current mailing address then said cash
deposit shall be forfeited to the City after one attempt by the Fire Chief or
his designee to refund the bond by certified mail.
      (3)   Pyrotechnic Displays. Pyrotechnic displays of Display Fireworks in
the City of Mt. Vernon shall be permitted upon compliance with the following
conditions:
         (a)   All persons shall file an application for a Permit to Display
Pyrotechnic Fireworks at least 15 days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display.
         (b)   The Application for a Permit to Display Pyrotechnic Fireworks
shall contain identifying information for the person sponsoring the display,
the exact location of the display, proof that the location has been authorized
in writing by the owner of the location property, the exact date and time of
the display, and identifying information for the individual who is the licensed
lead pyrotechnic operator supervising the display.
         (c)   The Application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Illinois evidencing a minimum of $1,000,000 in liability coverage.
         (d)   The Application shall also be accompanied by a current and valid
copy of the State issued lead pyrotechnic operator’s license.
         (e)   The Application shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief
or his or her designee.
         (f)   After the Permit has been granted, the possession, use and
display of Display Fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose only. No Permit
granted hereunder shall be transferrable.
         (g)   No permit shall be required for supervised displays of State or
County Fair Associations.
         (h)   Applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00.
         (i)   Provided that the application requirements have been met by the
applicant, a Permit to Display Pyrotechnic Fireworks shall be issued by the
Fire Chief.
      (4)   Consumer Displays.
         (a)   All persons shall file an application for a Permit to Display
Consumer Fireworks at least 15 days in advance of the date of the consumer
display.
         (b)   The Application for a Permit to Display Consumer Fireworks shall
contain identifying information for the person sponsoring the display, the
exact location of the display, proof that the location has been authorized in
writing by the owner of the location property, the exact date and time of the
display, and identifying information for the consumer operator handling the
display who shall have received training from a Consumer Fireworks training
class approved by the State Fire Marshall and who shall have a valid Training
Certification Card to Possess Consumer Fireworks.
         (c)   The Application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Illinois evidencing a minimum of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) in liability
coverage.
         (d)   The Application shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief
or his or her designee.
         (e)   The Applicant shall also be subject to a criminal background
check as a condition of issuing a permit.
         (f)   After the Permit has been granted, the possession, use and
display of Consumer Fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose only. No Permit
granted hereunder shall be transferrable.
         (g)   Applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00.
         (h)   Provided that the application requirements have been met by the
applicant, a Permit to Display Consumer Fireworks shall be issued by the Fire
Chief.
   (M)   The rules and regulations, as may from time to time be amended, for
the administration of the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act (425 ILCS 35/0.01 et
seq.), by the State Fire Marshal, including, but not limited to, National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 guidelines for outdoor displays, NFPA 1126
guidelines for proximate audience displays, audience proximity distances for
consumer Display Fireworks, and the list of approved Consumer Fireworks are
adopted herein by reference.
   (N)   (1)   Any person that violates any provision of this Ordinance shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 for each violation; each
Consumer Firework in the possession of the person shall constitute a separate
violation and each day that any firework is sold or offered for sale without a
permit or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
      (2)   Any person violating any of the provision of this Ordinance shall
also be subject to an injunction and to all other remedies and penalties of
this Ordinance and of the Illinois Pyrotechnic Use Act (425 ILCS 35/0.01 et
seq.), in addition to the imposition of a fine.
      (3)   Any person who is convicted (including a no contest or supervision
plea) of any violation of this Ordinance by a court of competent jurisdiction
shall be ineligible to receive a permit under this Ordinance for a period of 2-
years from the date of the conviction.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.8)
§ 91.09 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall install, maintain, or use any
fire alarm system and/or component in violation of the regulations set forth in
this Article and the Standards thereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, as
though set forth in full herein, the provisions of the National Fire Alarm Code
(NFPA 72), as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, at least
one copy of which such regulations is filed in the Office of the Fire Inspector
of the City of Mt. Vernon. Such regulations shall be kept by the Fire Inspector
available for public use, inspection, and examination. In the event of a
conflict between the specific provisions of this Article and NFPA 72, the
specific provisions of this Article shall control.
   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall attach, install, connect, or
maintain any fire alarm system or component unless same shall comply with the
provisions of this Article and the regulations adopted thereby; and no person,
firm, or corporation shall attach, install, connect, or maintain any fire alarm
system to the City property or to Central Dispatch within the Fire Department
or Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon unless same shall be approved by
the Fire Chief and shall be installed, maintained, and used in the manner
prescribed by this Article and the regulations adopted thereby. No alarm,
component, equipment, device, or system shall be installed upon or in City
property shall he owned, maintained, and controlled by the City or its
employees unless for fire protection to City property only, and the City shall
have or assume no liability for the maintenance or use thereof or for damage
thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.10)
§ 91.10 AUXILIARY PROTECTION SIGNALING SYSTEMS FOR FIRE ALARM SERVICE.
   (A)   Auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service within
the City Limits of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be installed only in compliance
with NFPA 72 and upon the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   Complete information regarding the system, including
specifications, wiring diagrams, floor plans, and zones, shall be submitted to
the City of Mt. Vernon for approval prior to installation of equipment or
wiring.
      (2)   All devices, combinations of devices, and equipment constructed and
installed in conformity with these standards shall be UL/FM approved for the
purpose for which they are intended.
      (3)   Upon completion of the installation of the system, a satisfactory
test of the entire installation shall be made in the presence of a
representative of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department.
      (4)   Auxiliary protective signaling systems for fire alarm service shall
be installed and operate on its own separate individual line or lines. It shall
not be combined with or utilize the lines of any burglar alarm or other alarm
system.
      (5)   Permission for the connection of the auxiliary system; the
applicant shall submit a written request on forms supplied by the City for
connection to the Fire Department or Central Dispatch alarm panels. Such
connections shall not be completed until approval is granted.
   (B)   System Operation.
      (1)   The actuation of any approved device shall cause its respective
zone alarm lamp on the main fire alarm control panel to illuminate and cause
the alarm signals to sound an audible signal throughout the protected premises.
Operating an alarm acknowledged push button (reset) on the main panel shall
silence the alarm signals. However, a subsequent alarm from another zone shall
automatically re-sound the signals and illuminate the corresponding zone lamp
until it is acknowledged. This shall continue until all actuated devices are
restored and the system is reset. Systems without the automatic resound
features are forbidden.
      (2)   In addition, the following shall occur upon the actuation of the
alarm devices:
         (a)   The initial operation of any manual station shall cause the
alarm signal to be transmitted over the telephone lines to the remote alarm
panels located at the Police Station;
         (b)   The initial operation of any automatic alarm initiating device
shall cause the alarm signal to be transmitted first to a remote dispatch
center which services the alarm system, which remote dispatch center shall
manually cause the alarm system to be transmitted over the telephone lines to
the remote alarm panels located at the Police Station;
         (c)   The transmitter shall be of the reverse polarity type.
      (3)   Power failures, open ground, or any disarrangements of the system
wiring or components shall be indicated by an audible trouble signal and a
visual signal. The audible trouble signal may be silenced; however, the trouble
lamp shall remain lighted until the system has been returned to normal
operating condition. Each new fault shall re-sound the trouble signal even
though a previous trouble signal may have been silenced.
      (4)   The system shall operate from a source of 120 VAC and automatically
transfer to standby batteries should the main power fail. Batteries shall be
rated at sufficient capacity to operate the system for 60 hours with the main
power source disconnected and then, at the end of that period, operate all
alarm systems in an alarm condition for 15 minutes. Disconnecting the
batteries, low battery voltage, or high battery voltage shall sound a system
trouble on the main control panel. Failure of the 120 VAC system and an
automatic transfer to batteries shall indicate and sound a system trouble at
the remote alarm panels.
   (C)   Auxiliary Generator. An auxiliary generator will be considered as a
standby power supply (in lieu of subsection (B)(4)), subject to the following:
      (1)   The generator shall be completely automatic in change over from the
normal power source to generator operation, or a specifically trained operator
shall be on duty at all times.
      (2)   Standards for the installation and operation of said generator
shall be governed by NFPA 72.
      (3)   In the event that an auxiliary generator is utilized in lieu of an
approved battery standby, attention is specifically called to NFPA 72, Section
1-5.2.5 which provides that a storage battery shall be provided that shall have
a sufficient capacity for operation of the alarm system for at least four
hours.
   (D)   Control Panel.
      (1)   The control unit shall be UL/FM approved, along with all necessary
components required to provide a complete fire alarm system. The control shall
contain all components necessary to provide a complete system. The control
shall contain features to accomplish a trouble and/or alarm signal and shall
provide the necessary supervised detection circuits, supervised alarm circuits,
and supervised audible alarm circuits. Lamps shall be provided on the cabinet
face to indicate AC power on, Alarm, and Trouble Conditions.
      (2)   Disconnect Transmitter Signal - A disconnect switch shall be
provided behind a locked cabinet door to disable the transmitter panel. The
transmitter disconnect shall be used when the system is tested or serviced and
shall not allow transmission of the alarm signal to the remote panel. When
operated, the disconnect shall provide a means to deter transmission and shall
operate an “OFF NORMAL” lamp and sound a trouble alarm. During such periods as
the disconnect circuitry is in operation, a trouble condition will be indicated
at the remote panel. When the system is reset and restored, the disconnect
shall reset and return to the normal condition. The disconnect switch shall be
under the sole control of the alarm user, and the disconnect of an alarm
transmitter shall be made only by the alarm user; upon an alarm user placing a
disconnect switch into the off position and disconnecting the alarm
transmitter, the alarm user shall provide 24-hour fire watch for the premises
served by the alarm system, which fire watch shall include regular and repeated
inspections and patrols, the frequency and nature of which shall be documented
in writing by the alarm user and maintained as a permanent record by the alarm
user.
   (E)   Installation and Design.
      (1)   All systems shall be installed in a workmanlike manner and in
accordance with the specifications and standards approved by this Department.
      (2)   Devices shall be so located and mounted that accidental operation
will not be caused by vibration or jarring.
      (3)   All systems shall test free of grounds except parts of circuits or
equipment which are intentionally and permanently grounded to provide ground,
fault detection, emergency ground signaling, or circuit grounding. All systems
shall be so designed that they do not depend upon the effectiveness of any
ground connection or normal operation.
      (4)   A system shall be so designed and installed so that it shall be
capable of performing its intended function at 85 percent and at 110 percent of
the rated voltage.
   (F)   Monthly Tests.
      (1)   The system shall be tested at least once each month as provided
within §
91.11(E) herein to verify the reliability of the system.
      (2)   A different component of the system (detector, pull box, etc.)
shall be used each month as a means of activating the system.
      (3)   The City’s Central Dispatch, the Fire Department, and the Police
Department shall be notified at least one (1) hour prior to the test.
   (G)   Approval.
      (1)   Applications for permission to install and connect auxiliary
systems shall be made to the City Building Inspector and to the Fire
Department. The Fire Department shall, when necessary, obtain the advice,
inspection, or other assistance of the Building Inspector, Electrical
Inspector, or other appropriate department.
      (2)   Final Action of any such application shall be made by the Chief of
the Fire Department or his duly authorized representative.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.11)
§ 91.11 ALARM SYSTEMS IN GENERAL, INCLUDING FIRE ALARM.
   (A)   Definitions.
      ALARM BUSINESS. Any business operated for profit, which engages in the
activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing,
selling, servicing, or responding to a burglary or holdup alarm system or fire
alarm, or which causes any of these activities to take place.
      ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS. Any person, firm, or corporation that sells,
leases, or installs signaling devices which, upon activation, either
automatically or manually, will transmit an alarm.
      ALARM SYSTEMS. Any signaling device which is electronically operated
which automatically sends visual and audible signals over a signal line to be
registered by indicators at a monitor panel in a receiving terminal of the
City’s Central Dispatch and/or alarm companies’ receiving location.
      ALARM USER. Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
with the City of Mt. Vernon.
      CITY OF MT. VERNON ALARM CONTRACTOR. The alarm company contracted by the
City of Mt. Vernon for the installation and maintenance of the Police or Fire
Department monitoring systems.
      CITY’S CENTRAL DISPATCH. The Dispatch Station at the Mt. Vernon Police
Station.
      FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his employee or agents. FALSE ALARM does not
include alarm signals activated by violent conditions of nature, telephone line
interruptions, acts of God, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to control by the alarm business installer or alarm user.
      FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department.
      LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. A system which produces a signal at the premises
protected.
      POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Mt. Vernon Police Department.
   (B)   Monitoring System. The City of Mt. Vernon may contract for the
installation of a uniform monitoring system to receive visual and audible
signals over a line or lines at a central location. Such system shall have a
capacity to meet present needs and the ability to expand for future needs and
shall be available to any subscriber who meets the requirements for a permit
for connection as defined in this Section.
   (C)   Application for Permit by Alarm Users.
      (1)   Each person within the City of Mt. Vernon who wishes to install in
his home, place of business, or other premises an alarm system subsequent to
September 1, 1987 which is connected to the Police Department or Fire
Department through the City’s Central Dispatch or which automatically directly
dials the City’s Central Dispatch or which produces an audible signal at the
premises, other than a single station smoke detector, shall obtain an
installation permit for each separate alarm system he/she wishes to connect.
      (2)   Application for each separate fire alarm system shall be submitted
to the Fire Chief, and permits for each separate police alarm system shall be
submitted to the Police Chief and shall be subject to the approval of the
respective Chief. Provided, however, that application for alarms in conjunction
with new construction may be submitted to the Building Inspector, although such
application shall be subject to the approval of the respective Chief. No
application fee shall be charged for a permit.
      (3)   (a)   The application for an alarm system user permit shall include
the following: name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm user; and the
type of business organization (individual, partnership, or corporation); if a
partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, the
names and addresses of the principal officers and the state where incorporated.
The application shall also include the name and address of an authorized
individual who shall be available during any hour of any day.
         (b)   The issuance of a permit shall in no way constitute a warranty
of the signaling device involved, and issuance of said permit shall be
specifically subject to the City of Mt. Vernon’s disclaimer of liability as
detailed in this Section and further detailed in the Local Governmental and
Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.
         (c)   The alarm user applicant shall provide a “hold harmless”
statement with the application. The hold harmless statement will contain the
following wording:
“In consideration of the issuance of a permit for the installation of the
requested direct police and/or fire alarm connection to the Police and/or Fire
Department, the owner-applicant herein on behalf of himself and his co-workers,
if any, his heirs, administrators, executors, and assigns hereby releases the
City of Mt. Vernon, a municipal corporation, its officers, employees, and alarm
monitoring contractor from any and all liability, suits, judgments, claims of
any kind or nature, including attorney fees and court costs arising or which
may arise from the use, utilization, or maintenance of said alarm system upon
the premises at (address), whether such claim is brought by the applicant or
any third party or entity, and the applicant further agrees to defend any legal
action, whether it is based on an allegation jointly or severally, against the
City of Mt. Vernon, a municipal corporation, its officers, employees, and alarm
monitoring contractor for any action or nonaction on their parts.”
   (D)   Subscriber Charges. The permit holder shall pay the alarm equipment
installer for all equipment charges and connection fees to the monitoring
system, and maintenance charges necessitated by the installation, operation,
and maintenance of signaling devices in the monitoring system. The company
supplying and maintaining the monitoring system shall have the right to charge
subscribers or their equipment installer a reasonable fee for connection to,
and maintenance of, the system.
   (E)   Direct Connection Alarms.
      (1)   Revocation of Permit. The respective Fire Chief or Police Chief may
revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Section,
after giving written notice to the holder and an opportunity for the permit
holder to effect compliance within 72 hours, if it is determined that the alarm
system under said permit has been installed, maintained, or operated in
violation of the provisions of this Section or of any terms or conditions of
said permit or in violation of any law.
      (2)   Right of Inspection. The City of Mt. Vernon shall have the right to
inspect any alarm system on the premises where it is intended to be used, both
prior to and subsequent to the issuance of a permit, at reasonable times, to
determine whether a permit should be granted and whether it is being used in
conformity with the terms of the permit and in conformity with the Revised Code
of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, the Statutes of the State of Illinois,
and all codes and regulations adopted or issued relating thereto.
      (3)   No charges shall be made by the City for a routine inspection
conducted by the City upon the City’s own initiative. A charge of Ten Dollars
($10.00) each for all other inspections shall be charged, except that each
alarm user who has a new alarm system installed shall be entitled to three
inspections by the City without charge during the sixty (60) days after the
initial installation of the alarm system.
      (4)   Testing. There shall be no testing or demonstrating alarm systems
without first notifying the City of Mt. Vernon, in accordance with procedures
established by the city, prior to such test or demonstration, and obtaining
permission of the respective Fire Chief or Police Chief or such person
delegated by each. Any activation due to a test of demonstration without said
notice and permission shall be deemed a false alarm. The respective Fire Chief
or Police Chief shall be notified in writing by the alarm installer of the
expected completion date of the initial installation, major alteration, or
addition of an alarm system prior to completion of said work. All fire alarms
shall be tested at least once a month on either the first or third Monday
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; or if the first or third Monday falls on a
holiday, then testing shall occur on the first Monday following the holiday.
      (5)   Maintenance. Each person, firm, or corporation holding a permit for
the operation and maintenance of an alarm system shall be responsible to
maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the alarm system; and each
shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by the device which they
operate or maintain. The failure to maintain, repair, or keep in good working
order the alarm system as required herein shall, subject to the hereinafter
provisions for notice and opportunity to be heard, be cause to suspend or
revoke any permit issued hereunder and shall be cause for removal of the alarm
system. The City of Mt. Vernon shall maintain a record of all false alarms and,
subject to the hereinafter provisions for notice and opportunity to be heard,
may revoke or suspend any permit for the operation of the alarm system involved
in the transmission of two (2) false fire alarms or four (4) false police
alarms in any one calendar year.
      (6)   Charges.
         (a)   In addition to any other penalty herein provided, the City of
Mt. Vernon shall charge a fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per false fire
alarm to the owner or occupant of the premises for each automatic alarm
transmitted to the City of Mt. Vernon by activation on the premises of an
automatic or manual alarm system, in excess of two (2) fire alarms in each
calendar year from the said premises, and a fee of Twenty five Dollars ($25.00)
for each false police alarm in excess of four (4) in any calendar year.
         (b)   Charges shall be payable to the City of Mt. Vernon by the user
permit holder upon receipt of a statement for such charges. Activation of an
alarm by an act of God or by an independent cause not within the control or
responsibility of the alarm user shall not constitute a false alarm for
purposes of imposition of the charges herein.
      (7)   No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for sixty (60) days
after initial installation of thirty (30) days after major alterations or
additions, nor shall false alarms during that period be counted toward the
false alarms allowed per calendar year provided written proof satisfactory to
the City of such major alterations is submitted to the respective Fire Chief or
Police Chief by the permit holder within five (5) days after receiving a
billing of charges for the false alarm, provided only one such waiver of
charges shall be permitted each calendar year.
      (8)   Hearings. Every alarm user shall upon written request be entitled
to a hearing before the City Manager and Police Chief and Fire Chief, or
designated agents of each of said officers, upon receipt of a billing of
charges for false alarms or upon receipt of notice of suspension or revocation
of any permit. Said hearing must be requested by the alarm user within five (5)
days after receiving a billing of charges for the false alarm or after
receiving notice of suspension or revocation of the permit. At the hearing, the
alarm user will be given the opportunity to present evidence and argument to
show that the permit should not be suspended or revoked, or that the alarm
activation was not false, or that the alarm activation comes within one of the
permissible exceptions or that the permit should not be suspended or revoked.
      (9)   Liability. The City of Mt. Vernon shall take reasonable precaution
to assure that alarm signals received by the City of Mt. Vernon are given
appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. However, the City of
Mt. Vernon and the alarm contractor shall not be liable for any failure or
neglect of any person in connection with the installation and operation of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, and the relaying of such signals.
In the event that the City of Mt. Vernon finds it necessary to disconnect a
defective signaling device, the City of Mt. Vernon shall incur no liability by
such action.
      (10)   Automatic Dialer-type Alarms. The procedures and requirements for
automatic dialer-type alarms shall be the same as for direct connection alarms,
except as herein provided. The City of Mt. Vernon shall provide a distinct and
separate trunk line(s) apart from emergency telephone trunk lines for the use
of automatic dialer-type alarms, and only those lines may be used to
automatically transmit a signal to Central Dispatch. Under no circumstances
shall the automatic dialer-type equipment be permitted to automatically connect
to the emergency telephone lines. Automatic dialer-type fire alarms shall be
subject to the provisions of §
91.10(B)(2).
      (11)   Local Alarm System. The procedures and requirements for local
alarm systems shall be the same as for direct connection alarms, except as
hereinafter provided. Every local alarm system installed subsequent to the
effective date of this Section shall be constructed, equipped, and installed in
such fashion as to be incapable of sounding for more than thirty (30) minutes
after a signal activation thereof. A fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
shall be assessed to the owner or occupant of the premises whose local alarm
system activates to sound for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes after
the City’s Central Dispatch is notified of said alarm. All single station smoke
detectors that are installed in a home, place of business, or other premises
shall be exempt from this Section.
      (12)   Resetting the Alarm. The alarm user shall be solely responsible
for resetting the alarm system after activation. If the alarm system is in good
working order, the resetting of the alarm system shall occur as soon as the
condition giving rise to the alarm, activation permits; or, in the case of a
false alarm, the resetting of the alarm system shall occur immediately.
      (13)   Penalties. Except as otherwise provided, whoever violates any
provision of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than Five
Dollars ($5.00) or more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.12)
§ 91.12 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD.
   (A)   Fire apparatus access roads (i.e. fire lane) shall be provided and
maintained as required within § 503 of the International Fire Code.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of § 503 of the International Fire
Code, each fire lane shall be twenty (20) feet wide and shall completely
encircle the structure.
      (2)   In the event there is a sidewalk adjacent to the structure, the
fire lane shall extend eighteen feet from the curb. In the event there is an
awning or other overhang attached to and projecting from the structure, the
fire Lane shall extend twenty (20) feet from the edge of the awning or
overhang.
      (3)   All curbing affected shall be painted yellow, and each lane shall
be striped with yellow lines diagonal to the lane at eight-foot intervals, or
each lane shall be clearly marked by an approved sign.
   (C)   (1)   The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle within
any fire lane designated by this ordinance, or the blocking or obstructing of
any fire lane designated by this Ordinance, or the blocking of access to any
fire lane is hereby prohibited, except by authorized emergency vehicles as
defined in Title VII of the Revised Code, except by attended delivery vehicles,
and except within designated areas approved in writing by the Chief of the Fire
Department and the Chief of Police.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this paragraph shall
be punishable by a penalty of $20.00 if paid within 72 hours of the violation,
which offense shall be charged by means of a citation or “hang-on” ticket;
failure to pay the penalty within 72 hours shall subject the violator to the
penalties stated within §
10.99 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.13)
§ 91.13 MANUAL SHUT-OFF REQUIREMENTS FOR GAS SERVICE.
   In addition to other applicable requirements, premises receiving gas service
shall be subject to the following “manual shutoff valve” requirements:
   (A)   Valves Controlling Multiple Systems:
      (1)   Accessibility of Gas Valves: Main gas shutoff valves controlling
several gas piping systems shall be readily accessible for operation and shall
be installed so as to be protected from physical damage.
      (2)   Shutoff Valves for Multiple House Lines:
         (a)   In multiple tenant buildings or buildings adjacent to each other
supplied through a master meter or meters or where meters are not readily
accessible from the equipment location, an individual shutoff valve for each
apartment or tenant line shall be provided at a convenient point of general
accessibility.
         (b)   In a common supply system serving more than one building,
exterior shutoff valves shall be installed at each building.
   (B)   Equipment Shutoff Valves and Connections: Any gas utilization
equipment connected to a piping system shall have an accessible, approved
manual shutoff valve installed upstream of any connector and within six (6)
feet of the equipment it serves.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.14)
§ 91.14 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (A)   The Mt. Vernon Fire Department is hereby authorized to control and
eliminate hazardous materials and hazardous material emergencies. The Fire
Department shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate, and remedy all
hazardous material emergencies or incidents within or without the corporate
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon which are dangerous or prejudicial to public
health or public safety. Expenses incurred by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department
shall be the joint and severable liability of the owner or owners of the
hazardous material, the owner of the means of transport, and all other persons
having responsibility for or contributing to the hazardous material emergency
or incident whether resident or nonresident.
   (B)   The Mt. Vernon Fire Department as determined by its Chief or his
designee is hereby authorized to seek and obtain the services of an independent
hazardous material specialist or to seek and obtain the service of a hazardous
material specialist associated with the company or companies responsible for
the removal, abatement or remedy of a hazardous material emergency or incident.
The expenses of removal, abatement or remedy shall include but be limited to
charges for all materials used; a charge for all firefighting services
including equipment and manpower; charges for experts, specialists or other
consultants; and all other charges associated or related to the hazardous
material emergency or incident.
   (C)   The Fire Chief of the Mt. Vernon Fire Department shall ascertain the
expenses incurred in removing, abating or remedying the hazardous material
emergency or incident and shall notify the responsible party informing said
party that all expenses and charges are due and payable within 30-days from
date of notice of the charges. Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the
expenses of removal, abatement or remedy shall be responsible for all
attorneys’ fees, collection costs and other collection costs and other expenses
incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon in effecting collection of the amounts
owing. Monies collected hereunder as expenses for removal, abatement or remedy
of any hazardous material emergency or incident shall be used by the City of
Mt. Vernon to purchase materials, training and programs for controlling and
containing hazardous material emergencies and incidents.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.15)
§ 91.15 ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY OF THIRD PARTY EXPENSES.
   The Mt. Vernon Fire Department, as determined by its Chief or his designee,
is hereby authorized to seek and obtain the services of independent or third
party contractors or providers to provide manpower, materials, and equipment to
assist the Mt. Vernon Fire Department in providing any service required to be
provided or authorized to be provided by the Mt. Vernon Fire Department,
including but not limited to firefighting, fire suppression, fire rescue,
safety services, and emergency services. The expenses may include, but shall
not be limited to, charges for materials, labor, and equipment provided by
independent contractors or third party providers requested by the Mt. Vernon
Fire Department to respond to or to provide assistance at a fire scene,
emergency scene, or incident scene where the services of the Mt. Vernon Fire
Department are being provided. Expenses incurred for such materials, labor,
equipment shall be the joint and several liability of the owners and of the
possessors of the real estate for which the services are provided, whether said
person is a resident or non-resident of the City of Mt. Vernon. The Chief of
the Mt. Vernon Fire Department shall ascertain the expenses incurred, shall
assess the expenses, and shall invoice the liable party or parties; all
expenses shall be due and payable within 30 days from date of the invoice. A
liable person who shall fail or refuse to pay the expenses described herein
shall be responsible for and shall pay all reasonable attorneys’ fees,
collection costs, and other expenses incurred by the City of Mt. Vernon in
effecting collection of the amounts owing.
(Prior Code, Art. 9, § 9.16)
CHAPTER 92: TREES, SHRUBS, AND OTHER PLANTS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Tree species to be planted
   
92.03   Unsuitable trees
   
92.04   Spacing
   
92.05   Distance from curb or sidewalk
   
92.06   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
92.07   Utilities
   
92.08   Public tree care
   
92.09   Tree topping
   
92.10   Pruning, corner clearance
   
92.11   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
92.12   Interference with City Tree Board
   
92.13   Arborist, license and bond
   
92.14   Review by City Manager
   
92.15   Violation and penalty
   
92.16   Severability
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the City, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within the City.
   TREE BOARD. The Board established by §§
32.105 through
32.108 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 1)
§ 92.02 TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   (A)   The following list constitutes the official tree species for Mt.
Vernon, Illinois. No species other than those included in this list may be
planted as Street or Park Trees without written permission of the City Tree
Board. Only desirable trees of good appearance, beauty, and adaptability that
are generally free from injurious insects, diseases, or other limitations may
be planted. The overall objective of proper tree selection is to select the
right tree for the right location in order to benefit from trees without being
subject to future maintenance liability or hazards.
SMALL TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
SMALL TREES
Scientific Name          Common Name
Acer ginnala             Amur Maple (tree form)
Acer griseum             Paperbark Maple
Acer Palmatum            Japanese Maple
Acer Pennsylvanicum      Striped Maple
Amalanchier canadensis   Shadblow Serviceberry (tree form)
Amalanchier grandiflora  Apple Serviceberry (tree form)
Amalanchier Laevis       Allegany Serviceberry (tree form)
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura Tree
Cornus alternifolia      Pagoda Dogwood
Cornus florida           Flowering Dogwood
Cornus kousa             Japanese Dogwood
Crataegus sp.            Hawthorn (Thornless)
Euonymus sp.             Wahoos
Halesia carolina         Carolina Silverbell
Koelrevteria paniculata  Goldenrain Tree
Malus sp.                Flowering Crab
Ostrya virginiana        Ironwood
Rhus typhina             Staghorn Sumac
 
   (B)   Small Trees are appropriate in street locations where due to space
limitations larger trees cannot be properly utilized without creating space
conflicts with existing trees. Height limitations imposed by overhead utilities
also necessitate the use of appropriate Small Trees in order to avoid line
conflicts and the necessity of excessive utility trimming that results in
disfigured trees. On the whole, Small Trees tend to be more ornamental than
their larger counterparts and can create an added aesthetic dimension to the
streetscape.
MEDIUM TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
MEDIUM TREES
Scientific Name          Common Name
Alnus glutinosa          Black Alder
Betula nigra             River Birch
Carpinus betulus         European Hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Cladrastic lutea         Yellowwood
Eucommia ulmoides        Hardy Rubber Tree
Juniperus virginiana     Juniper-Eastern Red Cedar
Magnolia kobus           Kobus Magnolia
Phellodendron amurense   Amur Cork Tree
Picea pungens            Blue Spruce
Prunus sargentii         Sargent Cherry
Pyrus calleryana         Callery Pear
Sassafras albidum        Sassafras
Sophora japonica         Pagoda tree
Zelkova serrata          Zelkova Tree
   
   (C)   Medium-sized trees are generally better suited for planting as Street
Trees rather than their larger counterparts.
LARGE TREES
Scientific Name Common Name
LARGE TREES
Scientific Name         Common Name
Acer saccharum          Sugar Maple
Acer rubrum             Red Maple
Alnus incana            Tag Alder
Cary illinoensis        Wild Pecan
Celtis occidentalis     Hackberry
Celtis laevigata        Sugar Hackberry
Fagus grandifolia       American Beech
Fagus sylvatica         European Beech
Fraxinus americana      White Ash
Fraxinus pennsylvanica  Green Ash
Ginkgo biloba           Ginkgo (male)
Gymnocladus dioicus     Kentucky Coffee (male)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Magnolia acuminata      Cucumber Tree
Nyssa sylvatica         Blackgum
Picea abies             Norway Spruce
Picea engelmanii        Engleman Spruce
Pinus echinata          Shortleaf Pine
Pinus strobus           White Pine
Prunus serotina         Black Cherry
Quercus acutissima      Sawtooth Oak
Quercus alba            White Oak
Quercus bicolor         Swamp White Oak
Quercus coccinea        Scarlet Oak
Quercus imbricaria      Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa      Bur Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii   Chinquapin Oak
Quercus pagodafolia     Cherrybark Oak
Quercus phellos         Willow Oak
Quercus robus           English Oak
Quercus rubra           Red Oak
Quercus shumardii       Shumard Oak
Taxodium distichum      Bald Cypress
Tilia americana         Basswood
Tilia cordata           Littleleaf Linden
Tilia euchlora          Crimean Linden
Tilia heterophylla      Beetree Linden
Tilia platyphyllos      Bigleaf Linden
Tilia petiolaris        Pendent Silver Linden
Tilia tomentosa         Silver Linden
 
   (D)   Large Trees require more living space, and for this reason it is
recommended they be planted on the private side of the sidewalks whenever
possible.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 2)
§ 92.03 UNSUITABLE TREES.
   (A)   (1)   The following is a listing of the trees more or less common to
our area not suitable as Street or Park Trees. Their lack of suitability is
based on the undesirable growth habits, fruiting habits, form, susceptibility
to serious diseases, propensity to storm damage, and a host of other
limitations too numerous to mention.
      (2)   The limitations listed for each tree or species group are not all
inclusive, and list only the more serious problems encountered locally.
   (B)   Any tree listed as unsuitable presently growing within City parks as a
result of previous unrestricted and natural plantings constitutes a maintenance
expense to the City; and, therefore, upon removal, shall be replaced with the
appropriate, approved Small, Medium, or Large Tree.
UNSUITABLE TREES
Scientific Name Common Name Problem or Limitation
UNSUITABLE TREES
Scientific Name         Common Name              Problem or Limitation
Albiers sp.             Fir                      Form-visibility hazard
Acer negundo            Boxelder                 Weak wooded
Acer platenoides        Norway Maple             Local problem
Acer saccharinum        Silver/Soft Maple        Subject to rot
Aesculus sp.            Horsechestnut            Foliar diseases
Ailanthus altissima     Tree of Heaven           Weak wooded, aggressive
Albizzia sp.            Mimosa                   Not hardy
Betula sp. (non-native) Birch                    Environmental stress, borers
Catalpa                 Catalpa                  Littering fruit
Diospiros               Persimmon                Littering fruit
Elaeagnus spp.          Russian and Autumn Olive Aggressive, littering fruit
Gleditsia sp.           Honey Locust             Serious disease
Juglans sp.             Walnut                   Littering fruit
Mulus sp.               Common Apple             Littering fruit
Morus sp.               Mulberry                 Littering fruit
Paulownia tomentosa     Royal Paulownia          Aggressive, thin skinned
Pines nigra             Austrian Pine            Storm damage
Pinues resinosa         Red Pine                 Storm damage
inus sylvestris         Scotch Pine              Storm damage
Pinus taeda             Loblolly                 Storm damage
Platanus occidentalis   Sycamore (American)      Disease
Populus sp.             Poplar                   Weak wooded
Pyrus sp.               Common Pear              Littering fruit
Robinia sp.             Black Locust             Shallow rooted
Salix sp.               Willow                   Weak wooded
Thulja sp.              Arbor-vitae              Form-visibility hazard
Ulmus sp.               Elm                      Disease
 
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 3)
§ 92.04 SPACING.
   The spacing of trees will be in accordance with three species size classes
listed in §
92.02 of this Ordinance, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following: Small Trees - 30 feet; Medium Trees - 40 feet; and Large Trees - 50
feet; except in special plantings designed and/or recommended by a landscape
architect and approved by the City Tree Board. Any person desiring to make a
special planting shall submit such request in writing to the Tree Board and
shall provide such information and attend such meetings as may be required by
the Tree Board.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 4)
§ 92.05 DISTANCE FROM CURB OR SIDEWALK.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
92.02 of this Ordinance, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
curbline and sidewalk than the following: Small Trees - 2 feet; Medium Trees -
3 feet; and Large Trees - 4 feet.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 5)
§ 92.06 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersecting curb or curblines. No tree shall be
planted closer than 10 feet of any fireplug.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 6)
§ 92.07 UTILITIES.
   No trees other than those species listed as Small Trees in §
92.02 of this Ordinance may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any
overhead utility pole or over or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. No tree may be planted
within 10 lateral feet of any utility pole.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 7)
§ 92.08 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The City has the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants,
and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares,
and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve
or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 8)
§ 92.09 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall top any Street, Park, or other tree on public property
or within the public right-of-way. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   (B)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees creating a
hazard under utility wires or other obstructions, shall be exempted from this
prohibition.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 9)
§ 92.10 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8’) above the surface of
the street or sidewalk. Said owner shall remove all dead, diseased, or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public.
   (B)   The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control
device.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 10)
§ 92.11 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The City shall have the right to cause removal of any dead or diseased
tree on private property within the City, when such tree constitutes a hazard
to life and property, or harbors insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the City, or otherwise creates a
nuisance.
   (B)   The City Tree Board or designated City Department will notify in
writing the owner of such tree(s). Removal shall be done by said owner at their
expense within sixty days after the date of service of the notice.
   (C)   In the event of failure of the owner to comply with such provisions,
the City shall have the authority to remove such tree(s) and place a lien on
the owner’s property to recover all costs incurred, including a reasonable
attorney’s fee; which lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as other City
liens. The owner of the property shall also be personally liable for all costs
and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 11)
§ 92.12 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
City Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any Street
Tree, Park Tree, or trees on private grounds, as authorized by this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 12)
§ 92.13 ARBORIST, LICENSE AND BOND.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing Street or Park Trees within the
City without first applying for and procuring a license.
   (B)   The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance; provided,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or
City employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.
Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of
possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $50,000.00 for
bodily injury and $100,000.00 for property damage indemnifying the City or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 13)
§ 92.14 REVIEW BY CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decisions of the City Tree Board. Any person may appeal any ruling of the City
Tree Board to the City Manager, who may hear the matter and make a final
decision.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 14)
§ 92.15 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or who fails to
comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
upon being found guilty of violation,’ shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each separate offense; each day during which
any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall occur or continue shall
be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 15)
§ 92.16 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid by any court, other provisions or applications of
this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this
Ordinance are declared to be severable.
(Prior Code, Art. 25, § 16)
CHAPTER 93: RECREATION
Section
Regulations for Jaycee Lake and Miller Lake
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Regulations
   
93.03   Regulations for Jaycee Lake only
   
93.04   Regulations specific for Lake Miller
   
93.05   Permits
   
93.06   Steering rules for water craft
   
93.07   Nuisances
   
93.08   Right to inspect
   
93.09   Declaration of emergency
   
93.10   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
REGULATIONS FOR JAYCEE LAKE AND MILLER LAKE
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   CITY. Shall mean City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   CUSTODIAN. Refers to any lease from the City of any marginal land for
cottage or other purpose.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The entire area of land and water that drains into the
reservoir.
   INTAKE. The place where the water supply for the City is taken from the
reservoir.
   MARGINAL LAND. The land owned or controlled by the City adjacent to the
shore line and not flooded by the waters of the reservoir.
   RESERVOIR. The artificial lake and water impounded therein by means of a
public water supply dam, known as Jaycee Lake generally situated over parts of
Sections Five and Eight of Township Two South, Range Three East of the Third
Principal Meridian, Jefferson County, Illinois, and/or the artificial lake and
water impounded therein by means of a public water supply dam, known as Lake
Miller situated over parts of Sections Twenty-eight, Twenty-nine, Thirty-two,
and Thirty-three of Township One South, Range Three East of the Third Principal
Meridian, Jefferson County, Illinois, and any structure or structures
heretofore or hereafter constructed within the limits of the herein defined
drainage area which is used, or for use as water supply for the City.
   SHORE LINE. The extended point where the plane of the surface of the
reservoir touches the land.
   WATER COURSE. Any stream, natural or artificial, channel, spring, or
depression of any kind in which water flows continually or intermittently over
any part of the drainage area directly or indirectly into any part of the
reservoir.
   WATER LINE FOR JAYCEE LAKE. The contour known as 491.00 feet above sea level
according to United States Government elevation as obtained from the bench mark
established in Mt. Vernon, Illinois in the Post Office therein.
   WATER LINE FOR LAKE MILLER. The contour known as 520.00 feet above sea level
according to United States Government elevation as obtained from the bench mark
established in Mt. Vernon, Illinois in the Post Office therein.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33a)
§ 93.02 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All provisions of this Section, except where expressly otherwise
provided, shall apply to Jaycee Lake reservoir and Lake Miller reservoir and
the marginal lands adjacent thereto.
      (1)   No building or structure, whether for habitation or otherwise,
including but not limited to any dock, shall be constructed, altered or
maintained within the waterline of the reservoir, unless a permit in writing
therefor based upon a written application setting forth the location,
specifications and intended use thereof, shall be granted by the City of Mt.
Vernon.
      (2)   No person not an authorized employee of the City shall make any
connection with, uncover, alter or disturb any raw water pipe or main, or any
filtered water line or main, conduit, electric wire or line, sewer or other
utility constructed or maintained by the City and between the reservoir dam and
said City limits, or open any manhole, intercepting chamber of any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City based upon a
written application setting forth the location and nature of the work to be
done, together with a description thereof or copy of plans or specifications
therefore of the contemplated connection or alteration and a depositing with
the City such a sum of money as the City shall estimate will fully cover all
damage of any kind which may be caused by the connection or alteration or
filing an appropriate bond, guaranteeing restoration, in form, amount and with
surety, as approved by the City, if requested by the City to do so.
   (B)   After said alteration or connection has been completed, the City
Engineer shall be notified in writing and allowed to inspect the work done and
thereafter the sewer, water pipe or main, conduit, electric wire or line,
manhole or intercepting chamber shall be immediately restored to as good a
state or condition as prior to the doing of said work, to the satisfaction of
the City or by the City, as the City may elect. If the completion of the
restoration be without expense to the City and to its satisfaction, the sum
deposited shall be refunded but if any of the work be done by it, the City
shall certify the actual expense incurred and shall refund to the holder of the
permit the difference, if any, between the amount deposited and the amount
certified; in the event the amount so certified shall be in excess of said
deposit, the holder of the permit shall immediately pay said excess to the
City.
   (C)   No person shall place, throw, discharge or cause to be discharged, any
sewage, garbage, waste, saltwater, oil, oil and gas well products, or other
polluting substance into the reservoir or into any natural or artificial
watercourse or open or covered sewer, ditch, tile or drain flowing directly or
indirectly, continuously or intermittently, into the reservoir; no person shall
construct any open or covered sewer ditch, tile or drain or make any change
therein or connected therewith so as to cause any pollution or polluting
substance to flow into or reach more quickly, the reservoir.
   (D)   No person shall cause or permit any domestic livestock or poultry to
run at large upon the reservoir or marginal lands of another. Any livestock or
poultry found at large may be taken up by the City and sold to pay the expense
of taking, keeping, advertising and selling such livestock or poultry, and to
pay all damage incurred by the City of its property by such livestock or
poultry. No livestock, animal or poultry shall be allowed to stand, wallow,
wade, or swim or be washed or watered in the reservoir.
   (E)   No person shall upon the reservoir or upon any marginal land by
violent or tumultuous or obstreperous conduct or by loud and unusual noises
disturb the peace nor shall any person upon the reservoir or any marginal land
use profane, obscene or offensive language calculated to provoke a breach of
the peace, nor shall any person assault, strike or fight with another, with or
without his consent, or permit any such condition in or upon any premises upon
the marginal land leased, possessed or controlled by him.
   (F)   No clothing, bedding, carpet, vehicle, receptacle, utensil or article
that tends to pollute the water shall be washed in the reservoir.
   (G)   No person shall willfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
injure, or destroy any property upon the reservoir or the marginal land,
whether such property is owned by the State, County, City, or other
governmental body or owned by any private person firm, or other association. No
person upon the reservoir or upon the marginal lands shall throw or cast any
stone or missile upon any public property or upon private property of another
or at any other person.
   (H)   (1)   No person shall enter into or upon any lot or parcel of ground
which has situated thereon any building or structure or which is occupied for
residential purposes, and while on such lot or parcel of ground look into any
door, window or aperture in such building or structure without the consent of
the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. No person shall intrude or enter upon
the enclosed premises of another or willfully or needlessly walk, ride, or
drive upon any lawn, grass plot, flower garden or other property of another
without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant.
      (2)   No person shall enter into or upon any lot or parcel of ground nor
upon any marginal land without the permission of the owner, lessee, or person
in control of said land. No person shall intrude or enter upon any dock,
boathouse, or boat of another without the consent of the owner thereof. No
person shall fasten any trot line, any boat or other item to any dock,
structure, post, tree or other item owned or leased by another or upon the
property owned or leased by another without the consent of the owner or lessee.
No person shall place any trot line, throw line or similar device within 25
feet of the shoreline of the reservoir; provided nothing herein shall prohibit
an owner or lessee and their permitted guests from fishing with a pole or poles
from a dock or from land adjacent to the shoreline owned or leased by him.
   (I)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear nude or in a state
of nudity in a public place, all as defined within §
130.05 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (J)   No person shall place or maintain upon the reservoir any houseboat or
water craft with sleeping accommodations or water craft constructed, occupied
or intended for use as a temporary or permanent residence. No person shall
permit or allow or use any boat, vessel, or other floating device, except for a
water craft as defined and licensed by the State of Illinois; in addition,
paddle boats are permitted; inner tubes, air mattresses, and similar devices
are prohibited. No person shall permit or allow or engage in the use of or
racing of model boats or similar devices of any type upon any portion of the
reservoir. Boating of any kind or character is prohibited in the reservoir at
the spillway and within 50 feet thereof.
   (K)   No person shall stock or place any fish or other aquatic life and
within the reservoir, except commercially purchased minnows for fishing and
except fish first caught from said reservoir which are being returned to the
reservoir and except as permitted by resolution of the City Council or as
permitted within any license or lease granted by the City Council.
   (L)   No person shall use the marginal land, except pursuant to a lease or
license authorized by the City Council; use of marginal land shall be in strict
conformance with any applicable lease or license.
   (M)   No person shall allow or engage in the racing of water craft or in the
careless or reckless operation of any boat or water craft upon the reservoir.
   (N)   No person shall permit or allow or engage in any ice skating, ice
cutting, ice fishing, or other ice activities upon the reservoir, except as
permitted within a license or lease granted by City Council; nor shall any
person allow or operate any snowmobile, off-road vehicle or any vehicle or
device upon any iced over portion of the reservoir.
   (O)   No person shall permit or allow or engage in any hunting; nor shall
any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties,
discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol or other firearm, unless permitted by
resolution of the City Council or unless otherwise permitted in writing by the
City Council.
   (P)   No person shall use or permit or allow use of the reservoir or of any
marginal land for any business, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or
irrigation purpose. Watering of lawns and gardens, use of the reservoir as a
private domestic water source, and similar restricted residential use of the
reservoir is permissible pursuant to a duly authorized lease or license, unless
otherwise restricted or prohibited by City. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
current licensee, Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmens Club, from leasing boats not to
exceed ten (10) in number to its members nor from charging its members a fee
for use of its camping facilities or from charging its members a membership
fee.
   (Q)   No person under 10-years of age may operate any boat or craft. Persons
at least 10-years of age and less than 12-years of age may operate a boat or
craft only if they are accompanied on the boat or craft and under the direct
control of a parent or guardian or person at least 18-years of age designated
by a parent or guardian. Persons at least 12-years of age and less than 18-
years of age may operate a boat or craft only if they are accompanied on the
boat or craft and under the direct control of a parent or guardian or a person
at least 18-years of age designated by a parent or guardian or if such person
between the ages of 12 and 18 is in possession of a boating safety certificate
issued by the Department of Natural Resources, Division of Law Enforcement,
authorizing the holder to operate motorboats. Violations of this subparagraph
done with the knowledge of a parent or guardian shall be deemed a violation by
the parent or guardian.
   (R)   No person shall operate or place upon the reservoir any boat or craft
larger than 20-feet in centerline length, except a pontoon boat may be 24-feet
in length; provided that any lessee of marginal land or owner of real estate
immediately adjacent to the waterline of the reservoir may place upon the
reservoir a pontoon boat not to exceed 28-feet in length if the certificate of
title for said pontoon boat evidences that said lessee or owner owned the
pontoon boat prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
   (S)   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any boat or craft
equipped with a motor or internal combustion engine, regardless of whether such
motor or engine be temporarily or permanently attached to said boat or craft,
on any of the waters of the reservoir, unless such motor or engine is equipped
with an efficient muffler, in good working order and constant operation so as
to prevent excessive noise and annoying smoke. No outboard motor or internal
combustion engine shall be deemed equipped with an efficient muffler, unless
the exhaust gases are discharged under water or are muffled as to be not
noisier or more annoying than an internal combustion engine of like power
equipped with an underwater exhaust.
   (T)   No person shall use on any boat or craft on the waters of the
reservoir with a muffler cut-out or any device whatsoever that operate to
discharge exhaust gases or any motor or engine without such gases passing
through an efficient muffler.
   (U)   No person shall operate any boat or craft at a speed greater than
thirty-five (35) miles per hour between the hours of sunrise and sunset upon
Jaycee Lake reservoir nor greater than twenty-five miles per hour between the
hours of sunrise and sunset upon Lake Miller Reservoir. No person shall operate
any boat or craft at a speed greater than five miles per hour between the hour
of sunset and sunrise. The speed limit at the spillway and boat ramp and within
100 feet of each shall be 5 mph at all times. No boat or craft shall be
operated at a speed that creates a wake within any area marked with a buoy and
designated as a no-wake area. Any cove marked with a buoy at its entrance shall
be a no wake area; other no wake areas may be designated and marked by the City
Manager.
   (V)   No boat or craft of any kind or character shall be operated on the
reservoir unless it carries for each occupant an adequate life preserver
(personal flotation device) for each person especially designed for that
purpose; each person under the age of 13-years shall wear a life preserver when
an occupant of a boat or craft when said boat or craft is underway. No person
shall participate or engage in water skiing (if otherwise permitted) except
when wearing an adequate life preserver, provided, however, that the City
Council may from time to time upon Jaycee Lake authorize water skiing
exhibitions or performances without the use of life preservers. All boats or
crafts shall be equipped with all safety equipment as required by the Illinois
Boating Act and approved by the U.S. Coast Guard.
   (W)   No person shall engage in the business of renting boats for hire or
carrying passengers for hire on the reservoir, except as may be authorized by
special concession granted by the City.
   (X)   No persons required to be licensed by the laws of Illinois now and
hereafter, shall take, catch, or attempt to take or catch any species of fish,
frogs or turtles without a State of Illinois Fishing License in full force and
effect, issued to said person and in his possession; all persons shall strictly
adhere to the Game and Fish Code of the State of Illinois and the amendments
thereto; in addition, all persons shall observe and adhere to all valid fishing
restrictions and regulations enacted or authorized by the City Council within
this Ordinance. The privilege of fishing the reservoir or any part thereof may
be suspended by the City at any time whenever such suspension shall be deemed
proper to conserve aquatic life or to prevent any tendency to pollute the
waters of the reservoir, or to promote the improvement or convenient
maintenance, or control of said reservoir, or any part thereof. The posting of
any authorized sign shall suspend the privilege of fishing at such location.
All persons using the waters of the reservoir for fishing purposes shall so use
the same as not to create any unsanitary condition in or about said water or so
as to pollute or make any part of the waters unwholesome or unfit for use. No
person shall conduct, sponsor or permit or participate in any fishing
tournament or contest upon the reservoir except as authorized by resolution or
ordinance of the City Council.
   (Y)   Any person picnicking or making other use of the reservoir shall keep
the reservoir and premises clean and neat, and shall pick up and remove in a
sanitary manner all paper, garbage, rubbish and debris, and before leaving the
premises and shall put out any fire by him made. No person shall deposit or
place any paper, can, garbage or litter into the reservoir.
   (Z)   No person shall upon the reservoir or the marginal lands permit any
dog owned, kept or controlled by such person to be or run at large within any
street, sidewalk or other public place unless such animal shall wear a good and
substantial muzzle; nor shall any person permit any cat or other animal be or
run at large within any street, sidewalk or public place. No person shall allow
or permit any dog, cat or any other animal owned, kept or controlled by such
person to be at large and to go upon the private premises of another person.
Any dog or cat found or other animal running at large may be taken up by the
City and if not promptly called for may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of,
all without liability on the part of any officer performing such duty, or the
City. No person shall permit or allow any dangerous, fierce or ferocious dog
owned, kept or controlled by such person to annoy or endanger any other person.
Any dog which shall bite or injure any person or shall destroy or injure any
other animal is hereby declared to be nuisance and shall be taken up and
impounded. Any person who shall be the owner, keeper or in control of the dog
and shall know or be notified that such dog has bitten or injured any other
person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall deliver such dog for
impoundment shall cause such dog to be chained and confined not less than two
weeks. If any such dangerous, fierce or vicious dog cannot be safely taken up
and impounded it shall be slain by any law enforcement or rabies control
officer of the City and if any such dog having been slain shall have bitten or
caused an abrasion on any person, the carcass of such dog shall be delivered to
the rabies control officer.
   (AA)   No person shall ride, park or use any 3-wheeler, 4-wheeler,
motorcycle, dirt bike, motor bike, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or other
similar motor vehicle upon any marginal land, except mowing and maintenance
equipment operated by City personnel or persons specifically authorized by
resolution or ordinance of the City Council; provided, however, that a
motorized device (such as a wheelchair or golf cart) which is actually used
solely to accommodate a physically impaired person is not prohibited. Nothing
herein shall prevent use of a private drive improved as a roadway for access to
marginal land or for parking, but said private drive shall not be used as a
riding track or for repetitious recreational riding.
   (BB)   No fireworks or balloons shall be lighted or set off upon the
reservoir or upon any marginal land, except as may be permitted in writing by
the City Council. No fire shall be lighted or used except at such places as may
be designated by the City for such purpose and except by any lessee, his family
and guests on the parcel of marginal land leased to such lessee by the City.
   (CC)   No person shall willfully, maliciously, or negligently cut, break,
climb on, carry away, conceal, transfer, tamper with, mark upon, or in any way
injure, damage, or deface the reservoir dam or any tree, shrub, plant, or any
hydrant, regulating device, transformer, meter, wire, wiring, pole, or any
fence, wall, bridge, railing, bench, building, or other structure of any kind
or property, or take down, alter, mar, move, injure, destroy any sign, trail
marker, placard, notice, post, pile or buoy posted or placed by the City or
authorized to be posted or placed by the City or drive any motor car, vehicle,
boat or craft in such a manner as to cause the same to collide with, run
against, strike or cause to strike, injure or deface or damage any such
property, but custodians of the marginal land surrounding said reservoir may
make changes and improvements as permitted in their leases from the City.
   (DD)   No person shall solicit alms or do anything pertaining to soliciting,
peddling or hawking. The erection or maintenance of any sign or bill, poster,
the posting or placing of any advertising poster, placard, or card, or the
distributing of any advertising matter by handbills, or otherwise, except
regulatory signs posted by City, is prohibited.
   (EE)   No person shall make an ascent in any balloon, aeroplane, hydroplane
or any other device or any descent in any aeroplane, balloon, hydroplane or any
flying device or parachute without a written permit from the City, except in a
declared emergency. No person shall go upon any portion of the reservoir or
marginal land where a sign or notice, posted or authorized to be posted by the
City, prohibit same.
   (FF)   (1)   No building or structure or anything erected or constructed on
the face thereof or in any way connected therewith, shall extend into, upon or
over any boulevard, road or parkway unless a written application setting forth
the location and specifications of the encroachment shall have been made. No
person shall move any building on, along or across, or obstruct or excavate in
any road unless a permit in writing therefor shall have been procured from the
City, based upon a written application setting forth the dimensions of the
building to be moved and its contemplated route. or the location or nature and
specifications of the proposed excavations or obstructions and upon depositing
with the City such a sum of money as the City shall estimate will cover all
damages to the roadway, trees, shrubs, grass, lamp posts and other property and
improvements upon said road, or upon filing appropriate bond to guarantee such
complete restoration as requested by the City.
      (2)   After said work shall have been completed, the road, grass, trees,
shrubs, lamp posts and other property and improvements shall be immediately
restored to their former condition by the holder of the permit to the
satisfaction of the City or by the City, as the City may elect. If restoration
be made without expense to the City, and to its satisfaction, the sum deposited
shall be refunded, but if any of the work be done by it, the City shall certify
the actual expense incurred and shall refund to the holder of the permit the
difference, if any, between the amount deposited and the amount so certified by
the City; in the event the amount so certified should be in excess of said
amount deposited, the holder of the permit shall immediately pay such excess
amount to the City.
   (GG)   Any walk, opening, excavation, projection or obstruction which shall
be constructed, erected, placed or maintained in or upon any road, contrary to
any of the provisions of any Ordinance of the City, may be filled up, removed
or abated by the City at the expense and risk of the person constructing,
erecting, placing or maintaining the same.
   (HH)   All persons shall obey all official signs and traffic signals and
police officers of the City. The display of unauthorized traffic signs and
signals is prohibited.
   (II)   No vehicle shall be driven except upon roadways and parking places
constructed or designated by the City for such use and except by any lessee or
permittee of lessee upon lands leased to said lessee.
   (JJ)   No vehicle shall be permitted to stand in any of the following places
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with
the directions of any police officer.
      (1)   Where parking or standing is indicated to be prohibited by an
authorized sign.
      (2)   In any intersection or crosswalk.
      (3)   Upon the roadway of, or approaches to, any bridge or the impounding
dam forming the reservoir.
      (4)   At any place where the standing and parking of a vehicle shall
block the use of any walk or driveway.
      (5)   At any place where the standing and parking of a vehicle will tend
to obstruct the flow of a single line of traffic in each direction or cause
either of such lines of traffic to veer from its course in the center of the
roadway.
      (6)   Upon any marginal land, except that a lessee or licensee or
permittee of same may park upon the premises subject of his lease or license.
   (KK)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any road or driveway at a
speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard for the traffic and
the use of the way and so as not to endanger the life, limb, or injure the
property of any person. The City from time to time may designate the maximum
rate of speed on all roads, based on the location, nature and amount of traffic
on the same and shall erect suitable signs indicating such maximum rates of
speed. If the rate of speed of any motor vehicle operating on any road shall
exceed the rate of speed designated for said location, said rate of speed shall
be prima facie evidence that the person operating such motor vehicle was
running at a rate greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard for the
traffic and the use of the highway.
   (LL)   No person shall make, aid or countenance or assist in making any
improper noise, racket, disturbance, breach of peace, or anything tending to a
breach of the peace or be guilty of any disorderly or offensive conduct or
collect or assemble any body or group of persons for any unlawful purpose or
for the annoyance or disturbance of any other person or persons or the damage
or destruction of property of the City or of any other person.
   (MM)   No person intoxicated by alcohol nor any person under the influence
of any unlawful drug shall appear or remain be present upon the reservoir or
upon any other public place or upon the private premises of another without the
owner’s consent.
   (NN)   No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee
or agent of the City while engaged in any work or the improvement, care or
supervision of the reservoir.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33b)
§ 93.03 REGULATIONS FOR JAYCEE LAKE ONLY.
   (A)   (1)   All facilities including without limitation the trailer parking
lot, boat ramp, and land used and adjacent to the boat launching area, and the
pavilion and picnic area on the south and east sides of Lake Jaycee and all
marginal land not subject to a lease, shall be closed and the use thereof
prohibited after 10:00 o’clock p.m. or prior to 5:00 a.m. of each day; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or use any of such facilities or
land after 10:00 o’clock p.m. or prior to 5:00 a.m. each day.
      (2)   Lessees of marginal land adjacent to the reservoir may use the
reservoir for any permitted use during each hour of any day.
   (B)   Swimming, skin diving, bathing, wading, or any similar water activity
(except skiing) in the reservoir is prohibited, except in such areas and at
such times as may be determined from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
   (C)   (1)   Water skiing shall be permitted upon Jaycee Lake reservoir
unless otherwise prohibited by the City Council by resolution or ordinance.
Each boat towing any person or persons on water skis, aquaplane, or any other
object shall have a minimum of two persons aboard and one of said persons shall
act as an observer at all times.
      (2)   Water craft engaged in skiing shall travel in a clockwise direction
when towing a skier. No person shall ski nor shall any person operate a boat
having a skier in tow, except during the hours from sunrise to sunset. Skiing
shall mean use of any water ski, aquaplane, or other similar object or
contrivance intended, constructed or actually used in tow behind any boat.
   (D)   No person shall enter or remain at the boat launching ramp or at the
trailer parking lot adjacent thereto or within fifty-feet of the boat launching
ramp or trailer parking lot except for the purpose of and during the launching
or trailering of a boat. No person shall fish within fifty-feet of any part of
the boat launching ramp.
   (E)   No person shall place any fishing jug or similar device upon Jaycee
Lake nor shall any person place any trot line, throw line, or similar device
upon Jaycee Lake, except within a cove designated as a no wake area.
   (F)   (1)   No person shall place or operate a boat or water craft of any
kind upon Jaycee Lake unless said person has secured and shall have in his or
her possession a license as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   (a)   No boat or craft of any kind may be propelled, kept or used
on Jaycee Lake reservoir until the owner thereof shall have secured a written
license from the City based upon a written application, setting forth the
length of such boat or craft, its means of locomotion, and if propelled by an
internal combustion motor engine, the piston displacement thereof, the maximum
number of passengers said boat or craft may safely carry, its contemplated use,
and other and further information as the City may from time to time require.
         (b)   Such license when granted shall be in writing and may be further
evidenced by an official number sticker or marker to be yearly furnished by the
City to the licensee and such sticker or marker shall be placed on the outside
upper right hand corner of the rear transom, and such license shall be
exhibited on request to any agent of the City. In addition, a second sticker or
marker shall be furnished by the City and affixed to the trailer for said boat.
      (3)   Such license shall be effective from May 1 of the year of issue
through and including April 30 of the next ensuing year and may be annually
renewed by filing a like application before said boat or craft may be lawfully
propelled, kept, or used in the reservoir. Each application or renewal must be
accompanied by the payment of an annual license fee as follows:
 
(a) Boat or craft propelled by oars, or sail or electric trolling motor $5.00
(b) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine owned by any
resident of Jefferson County, Illinois or any person who is a Lessee of $50.00
marginal land
(c) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine owned by a
non-resident of Jefferson County, Illinois and non-lessee of marginal   $100.00
land from City or operated for testing by a boat retailer, boat dealer,
boat mechanic or other commercial entity
 
      (4)   (a)   All applications for permit shall state the kind and type of
public liability insurance carried by the applicant, the name of his insurer
and limits of coverage. No permit shall be issued hereunder unless the
applicant shall present to the City Clerk proof of public liability insurance
coverage in an approved company and in an amount not less than $300,000 per
person and per occurrence or in such other amounts as shall be determined by
the City Manager, in his discretion.
         (b)   The within provisions requiring a license shall also
specifically apply to boat retailers, boat dealers, boat mechanics, and other
persons operating a boat or craft upon the reservoir for test driving, provided
the license sticker for the boat shall be in the possession of the boat
operator and the license sticker for the trailer shall be displayed within the
motor vehicle pulling the boat trailer in the front window on the driver’s
side. No testing shall occur except on Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. and on Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
   (G)   Mountain Bike Park:
      (1)   The riding of mountain bikes and other non-motorized bicycles shall
be permitted within the area designated within Ordinance 2017-9 as a Mountain
Bike Park at such locations as may be designated by the City Manager within
said Mountain Bike Park; picnic activities shall also be permitted within said
Mountain Bike Park at such locations as designated by the City Manager.
      (2)   The Mountain Bike Park and bicycle trails within the Park shall be
subject to regulations as provided within this Chapter 93 (formerly Article 33)
of the Revised Code of Ordinances. In addition, the Mountain Bike Park and
trails shall be subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage within
the Mountain Bike Park, including without limitation, upon any bike trail or at
any picnic or parking area of said Park.
         (b)   No person shall operate any motorized bike or motorized vehicle
upon a bike trail or upon any property within the Park (except authorized
maintenance equipment or a wheel chair or similar device which is operated
solely to accommodate a physically impaired person) except within areas
designed for such use (such as parking).
         (c)   No person shall ride or operate any mountain bike or bicycle
within the Park except at the specific locations designated as a mountain bike
trail or designated for vehicle use.
         (d)   No person shall ride or operate a mountain bike or other bicycle
upon a bike trail unless wearing a safety helmet manufactured for such
purposes.
         (e)   No person shall ride upon a mountain bike trail if said trail is
covered, in whole or in part, by snow nor during wet conditions where use of
the mountain bike trail creates an indention from use of a bike upon the trail
of one quarter inch or greater.
         (f)   The Mountain Bike Park and trails shall be open for use only
during the period from sunrise to sunset each day, except as may be permitted
in writing by the City Manager or Park Director; and it shall be unlawful for
any person to go upon or to use the Park or any trail during any period of time
after sunset or prior to sunrise, except by written permission as described
above.
         (g)   The City Manager is authorized to erect signs identifying the
bike trails and regulating their use; and the City Manager is also authorized
to establish additional regulations as may be needed for the safe and efficient
operation and use of the Park. Such regulations shall be posted at conspicuous
places within or adjacent to or near the Park or bike trails.
   (H)   Any person who shall violate this Ordinance or other applicable
Ordinance of the City or any regulation posted upon an authorized sign shall be
subject to such penalties as provided within the Revised Code of Ordinances; in
addition, such person shall be subject to injunctive relief prohibiting use of
the Park and trails by such person.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33c)
§ 93.04 REGULATIONS SPECIFIC FOR LAKE MILLER.
   (A)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or by other action of the
City Council, use of Lake Miller shall be restricted to and is permitted only
by lessee’s of marginal land and by owners of real estate immediately adjacent
to the waterline of the reservoir or by members of the Mt. Vernon Gun and
Sportsmen’s Club, Inc., a current licensee of Lake Miller as of the date of
adoption of this ordinance; this provision shall supersede any provision within
a lease for marginal lands requiring membership in the Mt. Vernon Gun and
Sportsmen’s Club, Inc. Use of Lake Miller shall be restricted to fishing and
boating. Any lessee or owner herein described who places or operates a boat or
craft upon the reservoir and who is not a member of the Sportsmen’s Club shall
have an official City sticker affixed to his water craft and any lessee or
owner fishing Lake Miller without a boat or craft shall not be required to
acquire an official City sticker but shall have satisfactory proof of an
existing lease with the City or of current ownership of the land from which he
is fishing. No guest of any lessee or owner or of any Sportsmens Club member
shall place any boat upon the reservoir except a boat having the required City
sticker or Sportsmens Club membership number as set forth herein, except
nothing herein shall prohibit a guest or family member of a lessee or owner or
an authorized guest of the Sportsmens Club from using the properly licensed
(sticker) boat of said lessee or owner or properly identified boat of a
Sportsmens Club member. All members of the Sportsmens or guests of same engaged
in fishing or boating upon Lake Miller shall have in his or her possession a
current annual membership card or a membership guest card in the Mt. Vernon Gun
and Sportsmens Club, Inc., which membership or guest card shall be promptly
produced upon request by an authorized representative of the Mt. Vernon Gun and
Sportsmen’s Club, Inc. or upon the request of any representative of the City
and each member shall also have his Sportsmen’s Club membership number affixed
and clearly visible upon his boat or motor. In the event any person shall not
display the required City sticker or shall not promptly produce the required
membership card then either Mt. Vernon Gun and Sportsmen’s Club, Inc. or City
may demand said person to immediately cease using the Lake. Upon failure of the
person to cease using Lake Miller, said person shall be in violation of this
ordinance and shall be guilty of a criminal trespass. In the event Mt. Vernon
Gun and Sportsmen’s Club, Inc. shall cease holding a license for the Lake then
use of Lake Miller shall be as provided by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council.
      (2)   Any lessee of marginal land or owner of real estate immediately
adjacent to the waterline of the reservoir desiring to place a boat or craft
upon Lake Miller but who does not desire to obtain membership in the Mt. Vernon
Gun and Sportsmen’s Club, Inc. shall obtain a license from the City based upon
a written application setting forth the length of each boat or craft, the means
of locomotion of each boat or craft, and such further information that the City
from time to time may require; upon request each applicant shall provide a copy
of the certificate of title for the boat or water craft evidencing that said
boat or water craft is titled in the name of the applicant. Such license
granted shall be in writing and may be further evidenced by an official sticker
or marker to be yearly furnished by the City to a licensee and such sticker or
marker shall be placed on the outside upper right-hand corner of the rear
transom, and such license shall be exhibited upon request to any agent of the
City. Such license shall be effective from May 1 of the year issued through and
including April 30 of the next ensuing year and shall be annually renewed by
filing a like application before said motor craft may be lawfully propelled,
kept or used in the reservoir. Each application or renewal must be accompanied
by the payment of an annual license fee as follows:
 
(a) Boat or craft propelled by oars, sails, or electric trolling motor $5.00
(b) Boat or craft propelled by internal combustion engine              $50.00
 
   (B)   On May 1 of each year the Sportsmen’s Club or other licensee of the
Lake shall file with the City Clerk a list containing the names, current
addresses, and membership number for each member of the Sportsmen’s Club
(licensee) and a list of the names, addresses and each officer, director or
employee of the Sportsmen’s Club (licensee).
   (C)   Swimming, skin diving, bathing, wading, skiing or any similar water
activity in the reservoir is prohibited, except in such areas and at such times
as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   No person shall place, use, or operate upon Lake Miller any boat or
water craft with a motor having horsepower of 10-horsepower or more. Failure to
strictly comply with this provision shall result in a fine of not less than
$100.00 per violation and shall subject the violator to an injunction which
prohibits the violator from using the Lake for a period of 12-months from date
of imposition of the fine.
   (E)   No person shall fish from the banks or shoreline adjacent to Lake
Miller except for lessees or custodians and their guests fishing from property
subject to the lease or license of such lessee or custodian.
   (F)   No person shall park upon any private or public road or upon any
marginal land to fish or otherwise use the reservoir, except that a lessee of
marginal land and guests of same may park upon the premises subject of the
lessee’s lease.
   (G)   No person shall fish from the dam nor the spillway nor from any boat
launching ramp nor from any bridge situated upon or adjacent to the reservoir.
   (H)   No person shall ride, park or use any motor vehicle, three wheeler, 4-
wheeler, motorcycle, dirt bike, motor bike, off-road vehicle, snowmobile, or
vehicle of any type (except mowing and maintenance equipment operated by City
personnel or persons authorized by resolution of the City Council) upon the
dam, the dam’s face, the dam’s toe, the spillway or within 200 feet of any part
of the dam or the spillway nor upon any marginal land except marginal land
leased to King City Dirt Riders by resolution of the City Council.
   (I)   No person (including any lessee of marginal land or owner of real
estate adjacent to the shoreline) shall construct any boat ramp or boat access
nor permit any access to the public or access to any person not authorized to
use the reservoir, except such boat ramp or access as may be authorized in
writing by the City Council, provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prohibit a lessee of marginal land or an owner of real estate adjacent to the
shoreline from having, placing, maintaining, or constructing a private boat
access solely for the personal use by said lessee or owner.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33d)
§ 93.05 PERMITS.
   (A)   All applications for permits or license herein provided for shall be
directed to the City Clerk. All permits and license herein provided for that
may be issued by the City shall not be transferable in any way, and all
benefits which may be derived therefrom shall accrue only to the person or
persons to whom the permit was originally issued by the City. Each permit or
license, whether or not issued for a consideration, shall be subject to
revocation by the City whenever the licensee or holder of such permit in any
way violates or permits the violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation
for the regulation, care, protection, or control of the reservoir, drainage
area or water supply of the City.
   (B)   Each custodian of marginal land and each licensee or holder of any
permit from the City herein provided for, shall at all times keep his or her
post office address on file with the City Clerk and any provision for written
notice to any custodian, licensee, or holder of any permit from the City herein
provided for shall be deemed for all purposes to have been complied with when
the same in writing shall have been deposited in the United State registered
mail, postage prepaid, and properly addressed to such designated address. The
affidavit of the person so mailing such notice, together with the registry
receipt, shall be prima facie evidence of the mailing thereof.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33e)
§ 93.06 STEERING RULES FOR WATER CRAFT.
   The following steering rules shall govern the use and operation of boats on
the reservoir;
   (A)   RULE 1. When two motor or engine driven boats are meeting head on, or
nearly head on, so as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter her course
to starboard (right) so that each shall pass on the port (left) side of the
other.
   (B)   RULE 2. When two motor or engine driven boats are crossing so as to
involve risk of collision, the boat which has the other on her own starboard
(right) side shall keep out of the way of the other.
   (C)   RULE 3. When a motor or engine driven boat meets, crosses the course
of or overtakes a boat propelled by oars or muscular power, the motor or engine
driven boat shall keep out of the way of the other.
   (D)   RULE 4. Where, by any of the rules herein prescribed, one of the two
boats shall keep out of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed.
   (E)   RULE 5. Where, by any of the rules herein prescribed, one of two boats
shall keep out of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed.
   (F)   RULE 6. Every motor or engine driven boat which is directed by these
rules to keep out of the way of another boat, shall on approaching her, if
necessary, slacken her speed or stop or reverse.
   (G)   RULE 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, every boat
or craft overtaking any other shall keep out of the way of the overtaken boat
or craft.
   (H)   RULE 8. In obeying and construing these rules, due regard shall be had
to all dangers of navigation and collision and to any special circumstances
which may render a departure from above rules necessary in order to avoid
immediate danger.
   (I)   RULE 9. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any boat or craft, or
the owner or operator thereof, from the consequences or any neglect to keep a
proper outlook, or of a neglect of any precaution which may be required by the
exercise of due care and caution or by the special circumstances of the case.
   (J)   RULE 10. No boat or craft shall collide with, run against, strike
injure, deface or damage any buoy, stake, sign, piling or other structure
installed by the City or with the City’s consent, or be anchored or moored so
as to obstruct the view of any buoy or navigation sign or signal.
   (K)   RULE 11. No boat or craft commonly known as a houseboat or craft on
which the occupants have sleeping accommodations shall be permitted on the
reservoir.
   (L)   RULE 12. Persons using or operating any boat or craft on the waters of
the reservoir shall do so in such manner as not to create any unsanitary
condition in or about said waters and shall not pollute said waters by the
discharge, in any material amount, of oil or other polluting liquid or solid
tending to make said waters unwholesome or unfit for water supply purposes or
injurious to the aquatic life thereof.
   (M)   RULE 13. No boat or craft shall be used or operated, nor any horn or
sound device sounded so as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or quiet.
   (N)   RULE 14. The City shall at all times have power and authority to
prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance or
operation of any or all boats and crafts on the waters of the reservoir, should
it become necessary to do so in the interest of the public health or safety, or
for the protection or improvement of the reservoir or other cause.
   (O)   RULE 15. Any boat or craft found abandoned or adrift in the reservoir
or any unlicensed boat or craft thereon shall be taken up by the City and the
City shall have a lien thereon for all license fees therefor and the expenses
of taking, towing, keeping, advertising and selling of the same and for all
damages caused by such craft to property of the City, and may enforce such lien
by advertisement and sale of such craft in like manner as chattel mortgages may
be foreclosed under the laws of this State. Nothing herein shall be construed
as exonerating the owner or operator of any boat or craft from personal
liability to the City, or any other person, for any damage, or injury caused by
such boat or craft.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33f)
§ 93.07 NUISANCES.
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit any part of the reservoir or the water
thereof, to be used, kept or maintained so as to cause the pollution of any
part of the waters in the reservoir or so as to create, continue, or contribute
to the creation or continuance of any public or private nuisance upon marginal
lands.
   (B)   The violation of any provision of this Article whereby any unsanitary
condition is created is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   No person shall keep, maintain, or allow upon the reservoir or upon
the marginal lands any carrion, pigsty, decaying animal or vegetable matter,
stagnant water, or any other thing that may be injurious to the health of or
offensive to the public or by which any noxious or offensive smell may be
created. The keeping, maintaining, or allowing of any such matter or condition
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (D)   No person shall dump, throw, place, deposit, maintain, store or keep
any street, alley, premises, public property, private property, or land within
the reservoir or upon any marginal land any junk, trash, waste, garbage or
other debris and the dumping, throwing, placing, depositing, maintaining,
storage or keeping of aforesaid is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (E)   No person shall keep any cattle, hogs, sheep or goats, poultry, or
other animals upon the marginal lands in such manner as to create any offensive
smell or noise or to create any condition dangerous to the health of the
public; same is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (F)   No person shall store or place any refrigerator, icebox, or ice chest
in any open, unattended or unguarded place upon the reservoir or within the
marginal lands without first removing the door or doors therefrom; and the
placing or storing any such article in any such place without first removing
the door or doors is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (G)   (1)   No person shall keep or have any inoperative motor vehicle or
junked vehicle as defined within §
90.12 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, except that “vehicle” shall also
include water craft, upon the reservoir or upon the marginal lands, nor upon
any street or highway; same is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
      (2)   No person shall use any motor vehicle or permit any motor vehicle
to be used for storage of any thing or item; any motor vehicle used for said
purpose is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall park, store,
place, leave or keep any motor vehicle required to be licensed by the State of
Illinois upon any public or private property unless said vehicle is properly
licensed for the current year as required by law; any unlicensed vehicle is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. Abatement of any nuisance involving a motor
vehicle shall be abated as provided within §
90.12 of the Revised Code of Ordinance.
   (H)   No person shall permit any dog, cat or other animal owned, kept or
controlled by such person to be or run at large within any street, sidewalk or
other public place; same is hereby declared to be a nuisance. A dog, cat or
other animal shall be deemed running at large when off the premises of its
owner or keeper without being under adequate control of its owner or keeper.
   (I)   Any item or thing declared to be a nuisance herein shall be abated as
provided within and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 90 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33g)
§ 93.08 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of any lease authorized by the City Council,
the City, by its authorized representatives, shall have the right to go upon
and into the reservoir every part thereof and the improvements thereon at any
and all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting the same; also, to gain
access to other land, plant and care for trees and other vegetation; to
construct or cause to be constructed and maintain, sewer, water and gas pipes,
electric and telephone lines and pipes, pipes and lines for other services and
their appurtenances; to improve and protect shoreline and to do any other work
pertaining to the improvement, protection, sanitary control and regulation of
the reservoir and its environs.
   (B)   Nothing within this Ordinance shall apply to or be construed to
prevent or penalize any act done or caused to be done by the City in
constructing, operating, improving, repairing, maintaining, patrolling,
policing, protecting, or caring for said reservoir, the aquatic life there in,
the shores thereof, the bird and natural life thereon, or any part of the
waterworks system of said City.
   (C)   The City does not assume, expressly or impliedly, any liability by
reason of theft, damage, or injury to any person, boat, motor, equipment,
cottage or other things, and no such liability shall be imputed to it.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33h)
§ 93.09 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   In the event the City Council shall, by resolution or ordinance, declare the
existence of an emergency necessitating use of water from Jaycee Lake or Lake
Miller, immediately upon such declaration of emergency, all swimming, bathing
and wading within the reservoir, if otherwise permitted as provided herein,
shall be prohibited and no person shall operate any boat or craft upon the
reservoir at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour, nor operate any boat
or craft upon the reservoir with an internal combustion engine of more than ten
horsepower.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33i)
§ 93.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The City may appoint and employ such number of special
policemen, deputy sheriffs and deputy game wardens to act as police officers,
who shall be known as “Lake Police” as the City may determine to be necessary
to enforce the provisions of this Section.
      (2)   Each such officer so appointed shall have authority to enforce the
provisions of this Section and any and all Ordinances, Rules and Regulations of
the City for the government, control and protection of the reservoir and all
sanitary regulations and ordinances, any and all Laws, ordinances, regulations
and rulings of any governmental authority, applicable to the reservoir and
marginal land, and it shall be his duty to do so.
   (B)   Each such officer herein provided for shall have the power and it
shall be his duty to preserve the peace and good order and to protect all
property within the reservoir, to arrest any person found in the act of
violating or attempting to violate any Law of this State or Ordinance, rule or
regulation of the City, for the protection and control of the reservoir, or
anyone aiding and abetting such violation or attempted violation.
   (C)   Each such officer shall have the power and authority within the limits
of the reservoir and marginal land to serve and execute warrants or other legal
process for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with or held for
the commission of any crime or misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance,
rule or regulation of the City governing and controlling the reservoir and
marginal land and while serving, or executing or assisting in the service or
execution of any such warrant or legal process he shall be vested with all the
common law and statutory powers of a law enforcement officer for such purposes.
   (D)   Any such officer herein provided for may at any time call upon any
able-bodied person above the age of eighteen years to aid him in arresting,
retaining or holding in custody any person guilty of having committed any
unlawful act or charged therewith or to aid such officer in preventing the
commission of such unlawful act and whoever shall neglect or refuse to give
such aid or assistance when so required shall incur a penalty of not less than
Five Dollars ($5.00), nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each
offense.
   (E)   Whoever shall resist or in any way, hinder or prevent such officer in
the discharge of his duty, or shall endeavor to do so, or whom shall in any
manner assist any person in the. custody of any such officer to escape or
attempt to escape from such custody, or who shall attempt to rescue any person
in such custody, shall be fined not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more
than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33j)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this Section shall become subject to
revocation and/or suspension of his privilege to use the reservoir where the
violation occurs and, in addition, liable for all damage and expense thereby
caused to the City, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by City, by
reason of such violation or by reason of enforcing the provisions of the
ordinance. In addition, the penalties provided within §
10.99 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall apply to each violation of any
provision of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 33, § 33k)
CHAPTER 94: CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Unlawful camping or storage of personal property in public places
   
94.04   Enforcement; warnings; removal and confiscation of debris and personal
property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent harm to the health and safety of
the public and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
prohibiting unauthorized camping and storage of personal property on public
property within the City, which interferes with the right of others to use the
areas for the purposes for which they were intended.
(Ord. 2024-30, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
   BRIDGE. A structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to
afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other
right-of-way, or to afford passage under or over existing public roads,
railroads, or other rights-of-way.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To pitch, use, or occupy camp facilities, or to use camp
paraphernalia, or both, for the purpose of habitation. CAMP or CAMPING does not
include the use of public property or public facilities for recreational use or
for authorized public or private events that involve the use of tents, awnings,
or other structures in connection with such recreational use or authorized
public or private event.
   CAMP FACILITIES. Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary
shelters, campers, recreational vehicles, or trailers. CAMP FACILITIES do not
include tents, huts, or temporary shelters, when used temporarily in a park for
recreation or play during daylight hours when the park is open to the public.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds,
sleeping bags, hammocks, blankets, mattresses, or cooking facilities and
similar equipment.
   PARK. Any publicly owned area controlled by the City or other governmental
entity for park purposes. PARK also includes all associated areas, including
parking lots for parks.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property, building, structure, equipment, sign,
shelter, vegetation, greenspace, playground, bench, trail, picnic shelters,
recreational and athletic fields, and public open space, including all
associated areas such as parking lots, controlled or owned by the City of Mt.
Vernon or any other governmental agency.
   STORE or STORING. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location, leaving one’s personal
property such as, without limitation, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping
bags, luggage, shopping carts, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more
than one hour.
   STREET. Any highway, lane, road, street (including adjacent shoulders,
medians, and terrace areas), right-of-way, sidewalk, boulevard, alley, and
every way or place in the City open as a matter of right to public pedestrian
and vehicular travel.
   UNAUTHORIZED ENCAMPMENT. The collection of camp facilities, camp
paraphernalia, and/or personal property used for unauthorized camping in
violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-30, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 94.03 UNLAWFUL CAMPING OR STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, or to engage in the activity of
unauthorized camping, or to store personal property, including camp facilities
or camp paraphernalia as defined in this Section of the ordinance, within the
following areas:
   (A)   Any street; or
   (B)   Any bridge; or
   (C)   Any park; or
   (D)   Any public property, improved or unimproved; or
   (E)   Any public property where camping obstructs or interferes with the
intended public use of property.
(Ord. 2024-30, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 94.04 ENFORCEMENT; WARNINGS; REMOVAL AND CONFISCATION OF DEBRIS AND PERSONAL
PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police, or their designee(s), will have primary responsibility
for the enforcement of the camping regulations herein. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the Police Chief, or their designee(s), from obtaining voluntary
compliance by way of warning, notice, education, or coordination with other
willing public or private entities and/or community members.
   (A)   Prior to issuing any citation pursuant to this Chapter, the
investigating officer shall provide a verbal and written warning to cease such
unlawful conduct and a verbal and written referral for possible alternatives to
their present camping practices, such as, (without limitation), transportation,
shelter, and/or contact information to public or private agencies who may be
able to provide services or support. Any public or private entities who wish to
assist the Mt. Vernon Police Department (“Department”) in effectively and
humanely transitioning individuals from unauthorized encampments on public
property to an environment consistent with City ordinances should contact the
Department with a description of what services they can provide and effective
contact information. The Department will develop and maintain a policy to
include procedural guidance regarding the implementation of this ordinance. The
Department shall consult relevant professional resources and engage interested
community members, service providers, or other willing public or private
entities when designing and implementing this policy. The policy shall be
published and implemented no later than 6 months after the passage of this
ordinance. The policy shall provide for the collection of relevant data that
shall be used to review and revise the manual every three (3) years, or as
needed. Said revision shall be made in the same manner the policy is developed.
   (B)   Police shall exercise discretion to ensure that individuals are not
cited for violating this ordinance due only to a true personal necessity that
requires their present unauthorized camping practices. When possible, the
Department may work directly with community members, service providers or other
willing public or private entities to determine whether a true personal
necessity exists in a particular circumstance. The Department shall provide
specific support, guidance and contacts for officers. But it shall be construed
as direct evidence that no true personal necessity exists if the individual who
is camping refuses to take advantage of proffered alternatives to their present
camping practices (which could include, in the most extreme cases, short term
use of another location more easily monitored by the Department).
   (C)   Upon a determination by law enforcement that an area constitutes an
unauthorized encampment, regardless of whether an individual is cited for a
violation of this ordinance, City officials shall have the right to remove any
debris, contraband, or personal property that creates a legitimate health and
safety concern, or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the
environment. No warning is required prior to such confiscation relating to
health and safety concerns.
   (D)   Materials confiscated pursuant to this ordinance that are unsanitary
or a danger to the health and safety of any person may be immediately disposed
of. Otherwise, the Department shall provide 24-hour written notice prior to
confiscating property. The Department shall retain personal property
confiscated pursuant to this ordinance in a manner consistent with the handling
of other confiscated property and must not dispose of such personal property
for a period of at least 30 calendar days, during which time the owner may
retrieve such property from the Department, pursuant to the procedure outlined
in the policy. Nothing prevents Department members from disposing of property
with the consent of the property owner. When Department members have received
consent to dispose of property, City officials shall assist Department members
when necessary.
(Ord. 2024-30, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter as a first offense
may be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). All
fines under this ordinance may be satisfied by cash payment or community
service.
   (B)   Any person who commits a subsequent violation of this chapter,
occurring within one year of a violation, may be punished by a fine of not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). All fines under this ordinance may
be satisfied by cash payment or community service.
   (C)   Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter or, in the case of a
continuous violation, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a
separate offense and shall be punishable separately.
(Ord. 2024-30, passed 9-3-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
      
112.   REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
113.   POOL, PINBALL, BOWLING ALLEYS, COIN OPERATED DEVICES (EXCEPT VIDEO
GAMING)
      
114.   VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
      
115.   RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
      
116.   REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SERVICES
      
117.   REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
118.   FOOD AND BEVERAGES
      
119.   DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   License issuance and duration
   
110.02   Billboards/posting
   
110.03   House movers
   
110.04   Transient merchants/itinerant vendor
   
110.05   Pawn brokers
§ 110.01 LICENSE ISSUANCE AND DURATION.
   (A)   All licenses authorized or required to be issued by the City of Mt.
Vernon shall be issued only upon written application from the applicant to the
City Clerk, which application shall contain the name and address of the
applicant, the license applied for, the term of the license and conditions
thereof, and all other facts necessary to be stated under terms of ordinances
or articles governing the issuance of such license, and such application shall
be accompanied by the license fee provided therefor.
   (B)   All licenses shall be granted for a period of one year only, ending on
the thirtieth (30th) day of April next succeeding, except as otherwise
expressly provided by ordinance, and shall be signed by the City Clerk and
sealed with the official seal of the City. Such licenses as are required to be
approved by any other person, such as the Liquor Control Commissioner for Dram
Shop license, shall be so approved prior to licensing. The City Clerk shall
keep a register of all licenses issued by the City.
   (C)   In the event any applicant for any license shall have previously been
licensed on an annual basis and shall apply for renewal thereof; and by reason
of the terms hereof shall have to apply on or before April 30 for renewal of a
license which does not by its term expire until June 30 or some other date
after April 30, applicant shall be required to pay only a pro-rated license fee
based on the number of months from the expiration date of his current license
to April 30 of the next year.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.1)
§ 110.02 BILLBOARDS/POSTING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall carry on the business of posting handbills,
posters, cards, signs, circulars, or advertisements of any kind (hereinafter
called billposting), or distributing handbills, cards, circulars, samples of
merchandise or advertisements of any kind within the City without first having
obtained a license therefor. Each applicant shall pay the annual license fee of
thirty dollars ($30.00) for a license for billposting. Each applicant shall pay
the license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for a license for distributing
handbills, cards, circulars, samples of merchandise and advertisements of any
kind except that the fee for a license for one day shall be three dollars
($3.00).
      (2)   Applications for such license shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall contain a statement of the nature of the article, merchandise, card, or
advertisement to be distributed or posted and the name of the applicant and the
name of the manufacturer or distributor of such article or service advertised.
      (3)   No person, whether licensed hereunder or not, shall post or place
any handbill, sign, poster, circular, advertisement, or any other thing upon
any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place, nor shall he post or place
any article upon any lamp post, telegraph, telephone, or electric light pole,
fire hydrant, or any tree, private wall or door, or any private structure or
property without the consent of the owner in writing thereof.
   (B)   (1)   The term BILLBOARD is hereby defined to mean, and for the
purpose of this section shall be construed to mean, any structure the sole or
primary purpose of which is to be used for the display of advertisements or
notices.
      (2)   No billboard shall be erected in the City of Mt. Vernon by any
person unless a license shall first have been obtained therefor from the City
Clerk. Each application shall state the location for such billboard and if same
is to be located on private property. The fee for each such license for each
billboard shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year.
      (3)   No billboard shall be permitted to become unsightly by reason of
the accumulation of old bills thereon or dilapidated or in lack of repair; nor
shall any billboard be constructed or located in violation of any other
provision of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon; nor
shall any billboard be constructed or maintained so as to constitute a health,
fire, or safety hazard.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.4)
§ 110.03 HOUSE MOVERS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall remove or move any buildings along public
streets, alleys, or public places within the City, unless he shall first have
obtained a license of a house mover. The fee for such license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum and each applicant shall first execute and
deliver to the City Clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the
applicant’s curing and paying for any and all damages which shall be sustained
to any streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other public places or any telegraph,
telephone, or electric light pole, or wire within the City.
      (2)   The applicant shall further furnish to the City a policy of public
liability insurance, issued by a company or companies approved by the City
Clerk, which shall protect and indemnify the City from all judgments, costs,
and expenses which may accrue against said City in consequence of the granting
of such license, in the amount of not less than $50,000.00 for each person and
$100,000.00 for each occurrence.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall move or remove any building or structure along
public streets, alleys, or other public places of the City, even though he may
be licensed as a house mover hereunder, without having first obtained a
building permit therefor from the City Clerk under the Building Code. Such
licensed house mover shall make application for such permit upon forms supplied
by the City Clerk and shall state thereon the building proposed to be moved,
its present location and proposed location, the route to be taken, and the time
required therefor. No permit shall be issued for moving or removing of any
structure which, because of size or description would not be permitted upon the
location where it is proposed to be moved, and in particular, no building shall
be moved to any place within the fire limits which shall not comply with the
Building Code.
      (2)   Such application for permit shall be referred by the City Clerk to
the City Manager, City Engineer, and Building Official, and shall determine
whether such permit may be issued under provision of ordinances of the City,
and whether the route and proposed method of moving is feasible and safe,
considering public welfare.
   (C)   Each licensed house mover who shall have a permit to move any building
or structure shall, during such move, keep and maintain adequate warning
devices upon such structure, including red flashing lights or other similar
warning devices during the hours of darkness. Any such house mover shall
declare any damage or injury to any public street, sidewalk, or public place
caused or occurring during such move.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.6)
§ 110.04 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS/ITINERANT VENDOR.
   (A)   Definitions.
      ITINERANT VENDOR. Any person within the City who transports (by vehicle,
on foot, or similar means) tangible personal property for retail sale or who
solicits retail orders or sales for future delivery of tangible personal
property or who solicits (from a vehicle, on foot, or similar means) orders or
commitments for sale of services, whether for future delivery or not, and who
does not maintain in the City an established office, distribution house, sales
house, warehouse, service center, or lawful fixed location from which such
business is conducted. However, this Ordinance does not apply to any person who
delivers tangible personal property within the City who is fulfilling an order
for such property which was solicited or placed by mail, the internet, or other
similar means. Moreover, the term ITINERANT VENDOR shall not include a person
who makes sales of tangible personal property within the City during each week
during the calendar year or a person who makes sales of tangible personal
property within the City not less than five days of each week during a
consecutive 120-day period.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm,
association, or other entity; except that PERSON shall not include a person
soliciting as or on behalf of a tax exempt, not for profit, charitable,
religious, educational, or similar organization approved as a Qualified
Charitable Organization under § 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code or
a person soliciting as or on behalf of a similar bona fide organization or for
a bona fide similar purpose.
      TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail
sale of tangible personal property or in the solicitation of retail orders or
sales for future delivery of tangible personal property or in the solicitation
of orders or commitments for sale of services, whether for future delivery or
not, within the City and who, for the purpose of conducting such business,
occupies any building, room, structure of any kind or vacant lot. It shall be
prima facie evidence that a person is a transient merchant under this Ordinance
if the person does not transact business from a fixed location or if the person
does not own or lease for a term of at least six months the property from which
business is conducted. However, this Ordinance does not apply to any person
selling products, goods or merchandise, which are raised, produced, or
manufactured by him upon property owned by him or upon property on which he
resides, although said sales must comply with all applicable laws, including
zoning regulations. This Ordinance also does not apply to a person conducting a
sale of used property owned by him, commonly known as a garage, yard, rummage
or moving sale, upon property owned by him or upon property on which he
resides, if the duration of the sale is not more than three consecutive days
and if no such sale is held more than two separate occasions in any calendar
year, although said sale must comply with all applicable laws, including zoning
regulations; conducting a sale on more than two separate occasions in any
calendar year shall constitute a commercial or business activity. The term
TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not include persons who are leasing floor space within
a commercially zoned building or other retail space at a mall or shopping
center for a period of more than 30 days but less than 120 days.
   (B)   It is a violation of this Ordinance for any person, either as
principal or agent, to conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor within the City without each person, or if sales are made by an agent,
without each agent, first having obtained a license under this Ordinance and
without complying with the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/) as may
be required, including obtaining a Certificate of Registration and collecting
tax. The license obtained from the City under this Ordinance shall be
prominently displayed and visible at all times when selling or when soliciting
orders for tangible personal property and shall be presented to each customer
or solicitee, prior to any solicitation, for review when soliciting orders or
commitments for sale of services. Each license shall be returned to the office
of the City Clerk upon expiration of the license or upon the transient merchant
or itinerant vendor ceasing sales or solicitations, whichever occurs first.
Each license issued herein shall state in prominent and visible language the
following: The holder of this License is not affiliated with nor endorsed by
the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor shall file a written license application with the
City Clerk. The license application shall be under oath or certified under
penalties of perjury, and shall include the applicant’s name, telephone number,
email address, permanent business address (which must include a street
address), residence address of the principal (and if the applicant is a
corporation, the residence addresses of its officers), the location(s) at which
the applicant intends to do business, the nature of the business the applicant
intends to conduct, a copy of the applicant’s Certificate of Registration under
the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, a copy of the applicant’s driver’s license
or other photo identification or photo, a complete inventory of the goods the
applicant intends to offer for sale, a complete list and description of the
service or services the applicant intends to offer for sale, a list of all
licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant or an itinerant vendor
obtained by the applicant in the City of Mt. Vernon in the 12 months preceding
the date of filing of the application, and copies of any license issued by the
State of Illinois held by the applicant related to the goods or services
subject of the application. In addition, the applicant shall provide a copy of
a written lease or other written evidence from the owner of the location where
the applicant proposes to sell indicating permission of the owner to use the
location. An applicant for an Itinerant Vendor license shall also provide
certificates of insurance or other satisfactory proof of motor vehicle and
liability insurance as required within Section (F)(20) herein.
      (2)   Prior to issuance of the license, each applicant shall file with
the City Clerk a cash deposit in the amount of One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00), unless waived by the City Clerk in accordance with this Ordinance.
The City Clerk shall waive the cash deposit requirement unless, within the 12-
month period preceding the application, there has been filed with the City
Clerk either a certified copy of a Court Judgment against the applicant or
three written complaints from consumers or other persons describing a loss or
damage as the result of the purchase of merchandise or services from the
applicant or as the result of the negligent or intentionally tortious act of
the applicant or as the result of conducting business or making sales or
providing services within the City as transient merchant or itinerant vendor
without a license. The City Clerk shall hold the cash deposit for two years for
the benefit of any person who suffers loss or damage as the result of the
purchase of merchandise from said person licensed under this Ordinance or as
the result of the negligent or intentionally tortious act of the person
licensed under this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall pay any portion of the cash
deposit to any person in accordance with a Judgment or other Order of the
Jefferson County, Illinois Circuit Court without making an independent finding
as to the amount of the cash deposit that is payable to that person; any
balance of the cash deposit held by the City Clerk two years after the
expiration of a license of a person under this Ordinance shall be refunded by
certified mail to the person; provided, however, that if the person shall fail
to keep the City Clerk informed of a current mailing address that said bond
shall be forfeited to the City after one attempt by the City Clerk to refund
the bond by certified mail.
      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided, each transient merchant or
itinerant vendor shall pay a licensing fee at the rate of $25.00 per day or
$200.00 for a 30 day period, payable prior to issuing of the license, which
license shall state the specific dates (month, day, and year) that the license
is valid; provided that for any transient merchant or itinerant vendor for
which the City Clerk initially, or the City Manager upon appeal, reasonably
determines has been identified to be operating within the City without a
current valid license during any part of a 12 month period prior to date of
application, the application fee shall be double the stated amount.
   (D)   If any person makes retail sales or makes solicitations as a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor without having obtained a license under this
ordinance, the Mt. Vernon Police Department, as the direction of the City
Manager, may hold the inventory, vehicle, or other personal property of the
person until he obtains a license to conduct business as a transient merchant
or itinerant vendor. If the property has been held by the City of Mt. Vernon
for more than 60 days and the person whose property is being held has not
obtained a license under this Ordinance, the City may petition the Circuit
Court of Jefferson County, Illinois for an Order for the sale of the property
being held. If the Court finds that the person whose property is held has not
obtained a license under this Ordinance, the Court may order and authorize the
City to sell the property. The proceeds of the sale of the property less
reimbursement to the City of the reasonable expenses for the storage and sale
of the property and less any fine imposed for violation of this Ordinance shall
be deposited in the General Corporate Fund of the City.
   (E)   (1)   No itinerant vendor entering onto any premises in the City upon
which a residence is located shall use or attempt to use any entrance other
than the front or main entrance to the residence. Every itinerant vendor upon
going onto any premises in the City upon which a residence is located shall
first look for the Notice provided for in this Ordinance and examine the
Notice, if any is attached, and said itinerant vendor shall be governed by the
statement contained in the Notice. If the Notice is present, then the itinerant
vendor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. In addition,
any itinerant vendor who has gained entry to any residence, whether invited or
not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested
to do so by the occupant. Failure to comply with a Notice or other request
shall constitute a trespass and also a violation of this Ordinance.
      (2)   Notice by the occupant of a residence restricting solicitation by
an itinerant vendor shall be given in the manner following: a card or sign
shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence
indicating either “NO SOLICITORS” or “NO SOLICITING” or similar message; the
letters shall be at least one inch in height.
      (3)   No itinerant vendor shall go upon any premises upon which a
residence is located and ring the doorbell, or knock upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof to solicit sales or orders, in defiance of the Notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
      (4)   No itinerant vendor shall go upon any premises in the City upon
which a residence is located and ring the doorbell, or knock upon or near any
door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant to solicit sales or orders prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after sunset or 6:00 p.m. whichever is earlier, nor on any Sunday or any State
of Illinois holiday.
   (F)   No itinerant vendor shall stop, stand, or park and make or solicit
sales or orders at any location except in compliance with the following
requirements:
      (1)   No itinerant vendor shall stop, stand, or park and make or solicit
sales or orders within the public right-of-way, including without limitation,
upon streets, alleys, and sidewalks, except areas where parking is authorized
by the provisions of Title VII of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   No itinerant vendor shall occupy more than one parking space.
      (3)   No itinerant vendor shall stop, stand, or park and make or solicit
sales or orders upon any City property, upon any property owned by another
public entity, or upon private property except as may be specifically allowed
in writing by the City, by the other public entity, or by the private owner;
which written permission must be on the person of the itinerant vendor and
displayed to the City and its agents immediately upon request.
      (4)   No itinerant vendor shall stop, stand, or park and make or solicit
sales or orders upon any vacant parcel. For purposes of this section, a parcel
is considered “vacant” unless it contains a building that may be occupied
pursuant to applicable building codes.
      (5)   No itinerant vendor may locate or operate on the same or adjoining
property or location more than two days per week.
      (6)   No itinerant vendor shall block fire lanes, designated traffic
lanes or ingress or egress to or from a building or street.
      (7)   An itinerant vendor may operate each day beginning at 7:00 a.m. and
ending at sunset, unless otherwise more restricted within the property owner’s
permission.
      (8)   No tents, tables, chairs, or other displays (including A-frame
signage) shall be placed at the vending location if the itinerant vendor is
operating within the public right-of-way, except as permitted in conjunction
with a street closure for a special event.
      (9)   Itinerant vendor vehicles must be kept in good mechanical and
structural condition and must be licensed and equipped in accordance with the
rules and regulations of all local, state and federal agencies having
jurisdiction over such vehicles.
      (10)   Itinerant vendor vehicles shall only operate, stand, stop, or park
in areas where same is legally permitted and itinerant vendor vehicles shall
not operate, stop, stand or park in any area of the right-of-way that is
intended for use by moving vehicular travel (i.e. roadway, travel lane), except
in the event of a street closure for a special event.
      (11)   Itinerant vendor vehicles may not operate, stop, stand or park
that in any way impedes the flow of traffic, that interferes with ingress or
egress to or from any property or that presents an unsafe condition for
patrons, pedestrians or other vehicles.
      (12)   The operator of an itinerant vendor vehicle shall not place the
vehicle in reverse in order to make or attempt a sale.
      (13)   An itinerant vendor vehicle shall park facing the same direction
as traffic at a distance of no more than 18 inches between the curb face or
edge of pavement and with the service window of the vehicle facing the curb or
edge or pavement. Customers may be served from the side of the itinerant vendor
vehicle that is furthest from the area customarily used for motor vehicle
travel.
      (14)   When an itinerant vendor vehicle is allowed to operate in the
public right-of-way, no itinerant vendor vehicle shall be located within or
make sales within 50 feet of an intersection, except as permitted in
conjunction with a street closure for a special event.
      (15)   No itinerant vendor vehicle may operate in a location that is
situated within 200 feet of another itinerant vendor vehicle or in a location
that impedes the ingress to or egress from another business or otherwise causes
undue interference with access to another business or in a location that blocks
the lawfully placed signage of another business or that prevents access to
another business by emergency vehicles.
      (16)   No sounds may be produced by an itinerant vendor vehicle or by the
vendor which can be heard outside of the vehicle from 75 or more feet from the
vehicle’s location.
      (17)   No itinerant vendor vehicle may use stakes, rods or any other
method of support that must be drilled, driven or otherwise fixed into or onto
asphalt, pavement, curbs, or buildings.
      (18)   The area of an itinerant vendor operation must be kept neat and
orderly at all times. Operation of an itinerant vendor vehicle in an area is
deemed acceptance by the operator of the responsibility for cleanliness of the
area (not less than 50 feet from all parts of the vehicle) surrounding the
operations regardless of the occurrence or source of any waste in the area.
      (19)   (a)   Signage for each itinerant vendor vehicle shall be limited
to signs on the exterior or interior of the vehicle and one A-frame sign unless
prohibited by paragraph (F)(8) above. All signs on the exterior of the vehicle
shall be secured and shall not project more than six inches from the vehicle.
         (b)   One A-frame sign (unless otherwise prohibited) may be placed
outside the itinerant vendor vehicle, provided that the base of the sign must
be placed no further than two feet beyond the itinerant vendor vehicle. The A-
frame sign shall not exceed eight square feet per side with maximum height of
48 inches and shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (20)   Each itinerant vendor vehicle must maintain all motor vehicle
insurance coverage required by applicable state and federal laws and
regulations; and itinerant vendor must have and maintain liability insurance in
a minimum sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), issued by companies
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. The insurance certificate
evidencing the coverage shall contain an agreement signed by the insurance
company that, prior to modification, cancellation or termination of the subject
policy, written notice shall be sent to the City by said insurance company.
      (21)   An itinerant vendor vehicle operating at a location for a duration
of more than three hours must have a written agreement, available upon request
by the City, that permits the operator and/or employees to have access to a
flushable restroom no more than 200 feet of the vending location during all
hours of operation.
      (22)   An itinerant vendor may participate in a Food Truck Rally which
are described and permitted by §§
118.01 through
118.08 of the Revised Code of Ordinances upon compliance with the provisions of
§§
118.01 through
118.08 which are applicable.
   (G)   Each transient merchant immediately upon expiration of his license
shall remove all temporary buildings and structures erected by him or by his
benefit and each transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall at all times
maintain the location at which he makes sales in a clean and neat condition. No
transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall advertise, represent, or hold
forth the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise as an insurance, bankrupt,
insolvent, assignee, trustee, estate, executor, administrator, receiver,
wholesale, manufacturer’s wholesale, closing-out sale, or any sale of goods
damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, unless he shall as part of the
description of his inventory in his application for license under oath state
the facts supporting such description of such sale.
   (H)   Mobile Food Service Vendors (Food and Ice Cream Trucks) are subject to
§§
118.01 through
118.08 herein, and therefore are not subject to the provisions of this §
110.04.
   (I)   (1)   A person authorized and participating in an event, as
recommended by the City Manager and as approved by the City Council, designated
as a community-oriented event shall not be deemed to be a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor during the event at the event site for purposes of this
Ordinance.
      (2)   The Mt. Vernon Fall Festival, Cedarhurst Craft Fair, Mt. Vernon
Farmer’s Market, Fourth of July Salute to Freedom, Festival’s Inc. Market Days,
Paw Fest, Mt. Vernon Homebrewer’s Festival, Midwestern Herb and Garden Show,
Southern Illinois Home and Outdoor Expo, Southern Illinois Steel Guitar Show,
Midwest Light Aircraft Expo, Jefferson County Historical Village Heritage
Festival, Mt. Vernon Knife Show, Ash Bash Music & Art Festival, United Way Food
Truck Fest, Christmas Craft Fair, and Exotic Pet Expo are each designated
within this Ordinance by the City Council as a community-oriented event; other
events may be so designated by Resolution of the City Council.
   (J)   In addition to any suspension or revocation of a license or other
remedy provided herein, any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply
with this Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be fined the sum of $500.00;
a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day that a
violation occurs. In addition, any person who violates or omits or refuses to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance may be enjoined as provided by law
upon the filing of a petition therefor in the Circuit Court of Jefferson
County, Illinois from engaging in any activity or conduct as a transient
merchant or itinerant vendor within the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.7)
§ 110.05 PAWN BROKERS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person within the City who loans money on deposit of
personal property, or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or
loans money on deposit of pledge or personal property, bonds, notes, or other
valuable things or securities, or who loans or advances money on personal
property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon and takes or receives such
personal property into his possession, is hereby declared to be a pawn broker.
      (2)   No person shall exercise or carry on the business of a pawn broker
within the City without first having obtained a license therefor. The fee for
each license shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum and each
applicant shall, prior to receiving such license, deposit a bond in the amount
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Every pawn broker shall keep a written record in which shall be
entered in ink at the time of each loan or taking of pledge, an accurate
account and description of all goods or other things pawned or pledged, the
amount of money or valuables owned thereon, the time of such pledge, the rate
of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person
making such pawn or pledge. No person shall change, erase, or destroy any
original entry in such written record. Each pawn broker shall at the time of
each loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any article or thing, a
memorandum signed by the pawn broker and containing the substance of the entry
required to be made in such written record, kept by such pawn broker. No charge
shall be made by any pawn broker for the giving of such memorandum or making of
such written record. The written record required hereby shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer or law enforcement official at all reasonable
times.
   (C)   No pawn broker shall purchase any second-hand goods, articles, or
things offered to him as a pawn or pledge.
   (D)   Each pawn broker required to be licensed hereunder shall deliver to
the Police Department of the City before 12:00 noon each day a true copy of the
written record required herein to be kept, showing all personal property and
other things received by or pawned to him during the preceding day. No pawn
broker licensed hereunder shall receive in pawn or pledge any article from any
minor, intoxicated person, or person under any legal disability.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.9)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
Section
   
111.01   Construction
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Application/licensing
   
111.04   Payment of license and permit fees
   
111.05   License classifications, permits, and fees
   
111.06   Posting of license or permit
   
111.07   License of each specific premises, transfer to other premises owned by
licensee
   
111.08   Surrender of license
   
111.09   Number of licenses
   
111.10   Renewal
   
111.11   Location restrictions
   
111.12   Health and safety laws
   
111.13   Cessation of business
   
111.14   Hours of operation
   
111.15   Drive-in windows
   
111.16   Books and business records
   
111.17   Additional restrictions and regulations
   
111.18   Gifts of alcohol for commercial purposes
   
111.19   Liability of licensee for acts of manager, employees and other named
persons
   
111.20   Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.21   House rules
   
111.22   Status of annexed territory
   
111.23   Designated Outdoor Refreshment Areas (“DORA”)
   
111.24   Effective date
   
111.25   Severability
§ 111.01 CONSTRUCTION.
   This Article shall be liberally construed to the end that the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be
protected, and temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be
fostered and promoted by sound and careful control and regulation of the sale
of alcoholic liquors.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.1)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context clearly and unambiguously otherwise requires, the
following words and phrases as used in this Article shall be construed
according to the definitions set forth below:
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every
liquor or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
shall not include any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent or
less of alcohol by volume.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water and includes among
other things beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and the like.
   BOWLING ALLEY. An establishment or premises or part of an establishment or
building as the case may be wherein the game of bowling with composition balls
and ten wooden pins is played.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used, and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen
and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; PROVIDED that such club files with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under
this Article two copies of a list of the names and residences of its members
and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional
member his name and address; AND PROVIDED FURTHER that the affairs and
management of such club are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting, and
that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or
directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation
any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or
the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue
of the club.
   CONSUMPTION SALES. The sale or offering for sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the licensed premises where it is sold.
   CONTROL PREMISES. The licensed premises and all property adjacent to the
licensed premises which is owned or leased by or which is under the authority
or supervision of the licensee; control premises shall include, but shall not
be limited to, the licensed premises, parking lots, sidewalks and walkways.
Except as provided within §
111.05 with regard to a Hotel License, each building, facility or business
required for a particular classification (e.g. restaurant, hotel, lounge,
Package and Consumption Sales premises etc.) must be under the sole and
exclusive ownership and control of the licensee and no part thereof shall be
leased, contracted, subleased or subcontracted to another person by the
licensee, provided nothing herein shall prohibit the licensee from employing a
manager or contracting for management services for which the licensee retains
responsibility and liability.
   CONVICTED. Means and includes a plea of guilty, a plea of no contest, or
probation or any plea admitting guilt or admitting the facts of an offense; and
it means and includes any finding of guilt by a court, a jury, an
administrative agency or any other trier of fact.
   FESTIVAL AREA. Municipally owned property located at 207 S. 7th Street,
commonly known as the Armory, and municipally owned property and right of way
located upon 9th Street between Broadway and Casey Street, Main and Broadway,
and Harrison Street and Main.
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised,
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to transient
travelers and guests in which twenty-five (25) or more rooms are used for
sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and
dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity; said hotel must actually be engaged in the business of
renting, leasing or letting rooms and must be filing returns and paying the Mt.
Vernon Motel-Hotel tax.
   LICENSED PREMISES.
      (1)   The area as described in the application where alcoholic liquor is
served, consumed, stored, or sold and areas internally or externally connected
thereto by doorway, which areas are integrally related to the operation of the
licensed establishment.
      (2)   LICENSED PREMISES is meant and defined as the interior of a
building or a fully enclosed area and does not include a parking lot, a
sidewalk, walk, covered walkway, or any unenclosed area, except however,
LICENSED PREMISES shall include:
         (a)   The sidewalk dining area of a Restaurant Licensee or a
Restaurant with Lounge Licensee which is in compliance with Chapter 119 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances and which is subject to a Downtown Sidewalk Dining
Liquor Permit described within §
111.05(N) herein,
         (b)   Shall include the area described within the application and
License for a Festival Events License and
         (c)   Shall include the area described within the application and
License for a Retail Business Customer License.
   LICENSEE. Any individual, corporation, partnership, or other person holding
a license under the terms and provisions of this Article.
   LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   MOTEL-HOTEL TAX. The tax imposed by ordinance No. 87-27 of the City of Mt.
Vernon.
   MT. VERNON LIQUOR ADVISORY BOARD. The Liquor Advisory Board established by
Section 6.20 herein.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead,
or other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed,
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.
   PACKAGE SALES. The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor
in the original package and not to be opened to be consumed in whole or in part
on the premises where sold.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Means:
      (1)   Any public street, alley, sidewalk or public way,
      (2)   All property owned by the United States, the State of Illinois or
other State or any municipality or other political subdivision or agency
thereof and
      (3)   Any property, including privately owned property, which is open to
or held out for use by the public, except a “licensed premises” as defined
above.
   RESIDENT MANAGER or MANAGING AGENT. The person designated as manager within
the application for license. The RESIDENT MANAGER or MANAGING AGENT must be a
bona fide resident of Jefferson County, Illinois and must be a full-time
employee of licensee who is physically present on a daily basis at the license
premises not less than forty (40) hours per week; the RESIDENT MANAGER or
MANAGING AGENT must have management authority including control of the
premises, all books and records and must have the authority to make decisions
and give consent regarding any matter concerning the control premises. A
corporation and similar business entities must conduct business by a RESIDENT
MANAGER or MANAGING AGENT.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, whether for immediate or future delivery, for a consideration and
includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor,
agent, servant, or employee.
   SAMPLING. A supervised offering at a licensed premises of an alcoholic
product or products as a sales promotion of said products by a licensee,
provided that a sampling product may only be tasted in the following amounts:
distilled spirits, 1/4 ounce, wine 1 ounce, and beer 2 ounces.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Refer to and mean sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SERVICE BAR. A place or location not within the view of the public where
alcoholic liquor may be poured and served. A SERVICE BAR may only be located in
a kitchen, food preparation area or waiter or service station area of a
licensee.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended, or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or substances.
   TO SELL. To advertise for sale or to solicit or receive any order for or to
keep or expose for sale or to keep or possess with intent to sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including any such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above defined.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.2)
§ 111.03 APPLICATION/LICENSING.
   (A)   LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall sell or offer for sale, possess for
sale, advertise for sale or display for sale alcoholic liquor within the
corporate limits of the City without having first obtained a license to do so
as provided in this Article.
   (B)   NATURE AND EXTENT OF LICENSE.
      (1)   The license required by this Article shall be a retailer’s license
and shall permit the licensee to sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor at
retail upon the licensed premises specified and described in the licensee’s
application and as defined within this ordinance. Each license granted shall be
subject to the provisions of this Article, other applicable Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon, and all applicable laws of the State of Illinois and the
United States, including but not limited to the Illinois Liquor Control Act
(235 ILCS 5/).
      (2)   (a)   A license issued hereunder shall be a purely personal
privilege good for not to exceed one (1) year after issuance, and said license
shall not constitute property; nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution; nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to be encumbered or hypothecated; such
license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but
it shall cease upon the death of the licensee except as hereinafter provided.
         (b)   All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on April 30 following
issuance. Any sale of alcoholic liquor after expiration of a license shall
constitute sale of alcoholic liquor without a license; if an applicant seeks
renewal of an existing license, an application for renewal shall be submitted
with the required license fee prior to expiration of the existing license.
Expiration of a license shall occur by operation of law without any notice or
hearing and there shall be no right to reinstatement of any license, although
an application for a new license may be submitted. A licensed premises shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Inspector at all times.
      (3)   A license issued hereunder shall not be transferred or otherwise
conveyed through a change in ownership or change in interest of any licensed
premises or any licensee. Any change in stock ownership, a partnership interest
or other change in any ownership interest shall constitute an attempt to
transfer a license and shall terminate the license by operation of law without
notice or hearing.
      (4)   (a)   A license issued hereunder shall not be delivered to the
Licensee and no license issued for any premises shall be effective unless and
until the Licensee has obtained a valid Certificate of Occupancy for the
licensed premises under the Revised Code of Ordinances; a copy of the original
license may be provided to a Licensee prior to the issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy for the premises solely for the use by Licensee to obtain
financing, to obtain State licenses, to permit construction or remodeling, or
for other valid reasons approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner if
the Licensee and the City, by and through its Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, have executed an agreement which defines the Licensee’s
obligations and the restrictions on the license prior to delivery of the
original license.
         (b)   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made by any Licensee prior
to delivery of the original license to the Licensee. No remodeling, alteration,
or other construction shall be made to any licensed premises without a building
permit and compliance with all requirements and procedures associated
therewith.
   (C)   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
      (1)   All applications for licenses under this Article shall be in
writing, under oath, addressed to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and
filed in the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   (a)   Each application shall be signed by the applicant. If the
applicant is a partnership, all partners shall sign the application. If the
applicant is a corporation or club, the application shall be signed and
verified by the president and secretary.
         (b)   The information recited in the application shall be under oath
or affirmation as to each person signing the application. The willful making of
any false statement as to a material fact in any application shall constitute
cause for denial of a license or revocation of any license issued hereunder.
      (3)   (a)   The applicant has a duty to keep the City Clerk and the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner advised as to its current mailing address. The
applicant has a duty to file a completed application and to provide all
information required or requested.
         (b)   The applicant has a duty to timely comply with the requirements
of this Article and to diligently prosecute any application filed with the City
Clerk. The applicant has the burden of proof to establish the applicant’s
qualifications and the qualifications of the premises for a license.
      (4)   Each application shall include the following information and
statements:
         (a)   Name, birth date, social security number, residence address, and
citizenship (and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of
naturalization) of the applicant in the case of an individual.
         (b)   In the case of a partnership, the names, birth dates, social
security numbers, and residence addresses of all partners.
         (c)   In the case of a corporation or club, the names, birth dates,
social security numbers, driver’s license numbers, and residence addresses of
the officers, directors, managers; and the names, birth dates, social security
numbers, and residence addresses of all persons who own or have an interest in
over five (5) percent of the stock.
         (d)   In the case of a partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; or in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified to transact business in the
State of Illinois.
         (e)   The location where the applicant proposes to engage in the
business for which the application is submitted along with an affirmative
statement that the proposed location does not conflict with the location
restrictions detailed with §
111.11 herein.
         (f)   The class of license for which the application is submitted.
         (g)   The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased.
         (h)   The nature of the business which the applicant intends to carry
out and the amount of applicant’s anticipated gross revenue from other sources
within the proposed licensed premises.
         (i)   A list of the governmental entities to which the applicant has
submitted an application(s) for a liquor license; the date of the application;
the disposition of such application; amounts of and reasons for fines imposed;
and the dates, reason, and length of suspension or revocation of such license,
if any.
         (j)   A statement that the applicant, individual applicant, partners
of a partnership applicant, and officers, manager, directors, and stockholders
of any corporation applicant have never been convicted of keeping a house of
ill fame, convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality, or convicted of any felony under any federal or state
law.
         (k)   A complete criminal background and credit check authorization
for each person identified within the immediately preceding subparagraph.
         (l)   The name of any person identified within Subparagraph (C)(4)(j)
who has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current tax year.
         (m)   Evidence of dram shop liability insurance covering the entire
period of the license in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. The
certificate shall insure applicant and owner or lessor of the premises in such
amounts as may be required by the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/), or
in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.00, whichever amount is greater.
   (D)   PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO HOLD A LICENSE. No license shall issue to:
      (1)   A person who is not a bona fide resident of the City.
      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the City.
      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony or who has been
convicted of pandering or any other crime of morality or a person who has been
convicted of being a keeper of a house of ill fame under the laws of the State
of Illinois or any other federal or state law, unless the Commissioner
determines within his sole discretion that such person now warrants the public
trust.
      (5)   A person whose license issued under this Article or the Illinois
Liquor control Act (235 ILCS 5/) has been revoked for cause.
      (6)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this Article would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      (7)   A person whose business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless
such manager or agent is an actual resident of Jefferson County, Illinois and
possessed the same qualifications required of the Licensee and meets the
requirements of Resident manager or managing agent as defined in §
111.02.
      (8)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
      (9)   Any law enforcing public official, mayor, or any member of the City
Council; and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or
indirectly in the sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
      (10)   Any person, club, association, or corporation not eligible for a
state retail liquor dealer’s license.
      (11)   A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
      (12)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or residence within the
political subdivision, except however, the manager must be an actual resident
of the city.
      (13)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act (805 ILCS 5/) to transact business in Illinois.
      (14)   A person who has been convicted of any gambling act or offense as
prescribed by any criminal code or statute of any state, including but not
limited to Illinois, or as prescribed by any statute or regulation of the
United States or as prescribed by any ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon or
any other political subdivision of the United States or any state.
      (15)   A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period.
      (16)   A partnership to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period or if any of the partners
have been issued a federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the
current tax period.
      (17)   A corporation if the corporation or any officer, manager, or
director thereof or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five (5)
percent of the stock of said corporation has been issued a federal gaming
device stamp of a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period.
      (18)   A person in default of any payment to the City of Mt. Vernon,
including any licensing fee under this Article or under any other Article of
the Revised Code, any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any tax
imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer or garbage
services, or a person in default on any loan agreement or contract with the
City.
   (E)   BOND. No written Bond shall be required; however, each applicant
making application for license hereunder, by acceptance of a license, agrees to
indemnify the City against all losses or injury arising against said City by
reason of the conduct or operation of a business under such license.
   (F)   SEPARATE APPLICATION. Separate application by a licensee or a related
person must be filed for separate classes of licenses by any applicant desiring
to operate more than one licensed business, and a separate license must be
obtained by any applicant desiring to operate a licensed business at more than
one licensed premises.
   (G)   MULTIPLE LICENSES. Licenses permitting a person or related person or
entity to operate more than one (1) licensed premises are not desirable and an
application by an applicant or by a person or entity related to a current
license holder for a license or for a second license may be denied solely on
the basis that the applicant, or a related person or entity, including any
stockholder, partner or other interested party in said applicant, person, or
entity, is the holder of another license or is interested in, either directly
or indirectly, including as a shareholder, partner or other ownership interest,
in another license. RELATED means being employed by, owning stock in, being a
partner in, having any interest directly or indirectly in, or being related by
blood or marriage in the following relationships: spouse, parent, step-parent,
grandparent, step-grandparent, child, step-child, grandchild, step-grandchild,
brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle, aunt, niece or nephew. In
all events, no person or related persons or related entities shall possess more
than one license that permits sales of package liquor, except a Licensee having
two such (package sales) licenses as of August 21, 2017 may continue to renew
such existing licenses so long as each licensed premises continues in lawful
operation without interruption.
   (H)   APPLICATION PROCEDURE. Each applicant desiring to engage in the
business of sale of alcoholic liquor shall make application to the City Clerk
for a license to do so. Such application shall be referred to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, and if applicable to the Mt. Vernon Liquor Advisory
Board. The application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set
forth within this Article. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
sole authority to approve or reject such application. In the event such
application is approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, a license
shall be issued by the Clerk to such applicant signed by the Commissioner and
countersigned by the Clerk, who shall keep a complete record of all such
licenses issued.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.3)
§ 111.04 PAYMENT OF LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   All fees payable under this Article shall be paid in full by cash,
certified check, or money order and submitted at the time the application is
made; if the application is denied and no license or permit is issued, then the
license or permit fee shall be returned to the Applicant.
   (B)   The license fee for each license classification and any permit fee
shall be as provided within §
111.05; after a license or permit is issued, the fee paid for said license or
permit shall be non-refundable. When a license is issued prior to November 1 of
a licensing year, the full fee shall be paid; if a license is issued on
November 1 or thereafter of a licensing year, one-half of the fee shall be
paid; no additional proration of the fee shall be made.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.4)
§ 111.05 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, PERMITS, AND FEES.
   Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor shall be of the following classes:
   (A)   A “Package and Consumption Sales License” shall entitle the Licensee
to make consumption and package sales of alcoholic liquor. The license fee for
a “Package and Consumption Sales License” shall be Three Thousand Dollars
($3,000.00) per annum.
   (B)   A “Club License” shall entitle Licensee to make consumption and
package sales of alcoholic liquor. The license shall issue only for clubs and
bowling alleys; provided that no person shall receive a license to sell
alcoholic liquor upon any premises as a club unless it has the qualifications
described in the definition for club in §
111.02 of the Revised Code. The license fee for a “Club License” shall be Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum; provided, however, that with respect to
a club as defined within the definition for club in §
111.02 having a total membership of less than 300 members, the license fee
shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
   (C)   A “Restaurant With Lounge License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package
sales. This license shall issue only for licensed premises having a dining
area, a kitchen area, and a lounge area physically separate, divided, and apart
from one another, and no sales of alcoholic liquor shall occur within the
dining area except with meals. The dining area of a Restaurant with Lounge
License shall include any sidewalk dining area which is in compliance with
Chapter 119 of the Revised Code of Ordinances and which is subject to a
Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit described within subparagraph (N)
herein. The Licensee fee for a “Restaurant With Lounge License” shall be Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (D)    A “Restaurant License” shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption
sales of beer and wine only; the Licensee shall make no package sales. This
license shall issue only for restaurants as defined herein. No person shall
receive a “Restaurant License” to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises
unless it has the qualifications described in the definition for restaurant in
§
111.02 of the Revised Code and also meets all of the requirements hereinafter
stated. No restaurant licensed hereunder shall sell alcoholic liquor except
with meals and all meals served shall include food actually prepared within the
kitchen upon the premises. Meals shall be served during all times that the
licensed premises is open to the public. The restaurant’s total gross receipts
from food and non-alcoholic beverages shall be not less than 51% of the total
gross receipts from all sources including food, non-alcoholic beverages,
alcoholic beverages, and video gaming. No restaurant shall have any lounge or
bar or other similar area; only a service bar is permitted. The kitchen shall
be equipped with a stove or grill or other similar device, affixed to the
premises, having an open flame or exposed heat source upon which a majority of
all cooking shall occur; microwave devices and portable devices such as
hotplates and countertop ovens are not prohibited, but microwave and portable
devices shall not be the only, nor the predominant, cooking method. The dining
area of the Licensed Premises of the Restaurant License shall include any
sidewalk dining area which is in compliance with Chapter 119 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances and which is subject to a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor
Permit described within subparagraph (N) herein. The license fee for a
“Restaurant License” shall be Eight Hundred Dollars ($800.00) per annum.
   (E)   A “Hotel License” shall entitle the Licensee to make consumption sales
of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package sales; sale of
alcoholic liquor in the original package which is consumed upon the licensed
premises as hereinafter provided is a consumption sale as defined within §
111.02 (definitions for consumption sales and package sales) of the Revised
Code. This license shall issue only for hotels and motels. No person shall
receive a “Hotel License” to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises unless the
premises has the qualifications described in the definition for hotel in §
111.02. The license may issue to the hotel owner or hotel operator or may issue
to the Lessee of the restaurant situated within the hotel, provided that in all
events the licensed premises shall be the entire hotel property and the
Licensee shall be responsible with regard to the provisions of this Ordinance
for the licensed premises and control premises of the hotel. The dining area, a
kitchen area, and any lounge area of the licensed premises shall be physically
separate, divided, and apart from one another, and no sales of alcoholic liquor
shall occur within the dining area except with meals; consumption sales to the
general public may be made within the dining area and lounge. Consumption sales
may also be made upon the Licensed Premises to hotel guests and attendees of
registered users of the hotel (but not to the general public) for consumption
upon the remainder of the Licensed Premises, although neither possession nor
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted within any motor vehicle,
upon any parking lot, or upon any area designated for or used by motor
vehicles. Licensee shall be entitled to include or negotiate drinks of
alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package as permitted by 235 ILCS 5/6-28.5.
The license fee for a “Hotel License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00)
per annum. A violation of this Ordinance by a Licensee holding a license as the
Lessee of the hotel restaurant shall also be considered to be the violation of
the hotel premises for licensing purposes regardless of in whose name the
license is held or has been held.
   (F)   A “Hotel Patron License” shall entitle Licensee to make consumption
sales of alcoholic liquor only as specifically hereinafter provided; the
Licensee shall make no other consumption sales and shall make no package sales;
sale of alcoholic liquor in the original package which is consumed on the
licensed premises as hereinafter provided is a consumption sale as defined
within §
111.02 (definitions for consumption sales and package sales) of the Revised
Code. This License shall issue only for hotels and motels and shall issue only
to the hotel owner or hotel operator. No person shall receive a “Hotel Patron
License” to sell alcoholic liquor upon any premises unless the premises has the
qualifications described in the definition for hotel in §
111.02, except that the premises shall not be required to have a restaurant.
The Licensed Premises shall have only a service bar or pantry, and shall not
have any other bar area, counter area, or segregated lounge area that is
restricted or designated primarily for consumption of alcoholic liquor;
alcoholic liquor shall be served only by an employee of the Licensee and the
alcoholic liquor shall be consumed only upon the Licensed Premises; A Hotel
Patron The License shall entitle Licensee to make consumption sales only to
registered guests and to attendees of registered users of the hotel;
consumption sales shall not be made to the general public. The Licensed
Premises shall be the entire hotel property, although neither possession nor
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted within any motor vehicle,
upon any parking lot, or upon any area designated for or used by motor
vehicles. Licensee shall be entitled to include or negotiate drinks of
alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package as permitted by 235 ILCS 5/6-28.5.
The License Fee for a “Hotel Patron License” shall be Eight Hundred Dollars
($800.00) per annum.
   (G)   (1)   A “Package Sales License” shall entitle Licensee to make package
sales of alcoholic liquor; and, if applicable, limited consumption sales of
beer and wine only. Except as hereinafter provided as to a Licensee first
licensed prior to August 21, 2017, the Licensee shall make no consumption
sales. The license fee for a “Package Sales License” shall be Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum if only for package sales.
      (2)   A Licensee licensed prior to August 21, 2017 and who thereafter
remains continuously licensed and lawfully operating without interruption may
elect to make package sales of alcoholic liquor and consumption sales of beer
and wine as hereinafter provided by paying a licensing fee of Four Thousand
Dollars ($4,000.00); said Licensee shall comply with all of the requirements of
§§
114.01 through
114.09, of the Revised Code of Ordinances as well as all of the requirements of
this chapter of the Revised Code of Ordinances, with the most restrictive
requirement being applicable in the event of any conflict; said Licensee shall
not have any lounge or bar or other similar area, and only a service bar shall
be permitted and said service bar shall serve, and the consumption of beer and
wine shall only occur within, a restricted area where the video gaming
terminals are situated.
      (3)   No Licensee, except a Licensee initially licensed prior to August
21, 2017, may be issued a Package Sales License permitting consumption sales
nor be issued any license under §§
114.01 through
114.09, of the Revised Code of Ordinances by reason of the herein described
Package Sales License.
   (H)   A “Package Sales Beer and Wine License” shall entitle Licensee to make
package sales of beer and wine only; the Licensee shall make no consumption
sales. The license fee for a “Package Sales License” shall be Two Thousand
Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (I)   A “Wine-Makers License” shall entitle the Licensee to manufacture wine
and to store wine on the licensed premises, to make sales of wine manufactured
on the premises to distributors and to importing distributors for resale, to
sell and offer for “sale at retail” wine manufactured on the premises and also
beer, and to ship wine manufactured on the premises directly to a resident of
the State of Illinois who is 21 years of age or older for that resident’s
personal use and not for resale. “Sale at retail” upon the licensed premises as
to wine shall be for consumption or for sale by the package; but as to beer,
such sale at retail shall be for sale of beer for consumption upon the premises
only and not for package sales of beer. The license fee for a “Wine-Makers
License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (J)   An “Event Center License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package
sales. The license shall issue only for a place of business which has space and
facilities within the licensed premises used for accommodating banquets,
business meetings, trade shows, conventions, social gatherings, private
receptions, inside sporting activities, entertainment performances, and similar
indoor events. Licensee shall not permit consumption of alcoholic liquor except
during the scheduled time of the event. The manager or other employee of
Licensee must be on duty and on the licensed premises at all times any person
or persons are upon the premises and all events shall be under the supervision
and direction of the employee or employees of Licensee. No Licensee shall
operate a lounge or a bar upon the licensed premises at any time except during
and for the scheduled event. No video gaming terminal shall be permitted upon
the licensed premises and the licensed premises shall not be eligible for a
Video Gaming Terminal License described within §§
114.01 through
114.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The license fee for an “Event Center
License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (K)   (1)   A “Temporary Special Event License” shall entitle the Licensee
to make consumption sales of alcoholic liquor. This license shall be a
temporary license which shall be issued solely to a not-for-profit organization
for one (1) day, and no organization shall be entitled to more than three (3)
such temporary daily permits in any one calendar year.
      (2)   The application for such “Temporary Special Event License” shall
designate the premises for which a license is desired and the hours of
operation. The license fee for a “Temporary Special Event License” shall be
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per day. No premises or control premises shall be the
place for more than six (6) Temporary Special Event Licenses and/or Temporary
Special Use Licenses (either singly or in combination) during any one calendar
year. All beverages, including alcoholic liquors, served for consumption during
a special event shall only be served within and consumed from a paper, plastic,
or styrofoam cup or container; no beverage shall be served for consumption
during a special event within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can, cup,
or mug or similar type container.
   (L)   A “Temporary Special Event Permit License” shall entitle the Licensee
to make sales of alcoholic liquor; the license shall issue only to a Licensee
who holds a valid license under one of the other license classifications of the
City of Mt. Vernon and the Licensee shall be subject to the restrictions of
such license with regard to the type of sales which Licensee may make. The
permit license shall be a temporary license which shall be issued for one day
and no Licensee shall be entitled to more than 26 such temporary daily permit
licenses in any one calendar year. The application for such “Temporary Special
Event Permit License” shall designate the premises for which a license is
desired and the hours of operation. No permit license shall be issued for any
premises within one hundred (100) feet, measured from boundary lines, of any
property having a residential zoning classification within the Schedule of
District Regulations of Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The
license fee for a “Temporary Special Event Permit License” shall be One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per day. No Temporary Special Event Permit License shall
issue unless the applicant shall provide written authorization or permission
evidencing its right to use the premises subject of the Temporary Special Event
Permit License, provide general liability insurance in an amount required
within the permission or authorization, and comply with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter of the Revised Code of Ordinances. All beverages,
including alcoholic liquors, served for consumption during a special event
shall only be served within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam
cup or container; no beverage shall be served for consumption during a special
event within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can, cup, or mug or similar
type container.
   (M)   A “Temporary Special Use License” shall allow a holder of an Illinois
Winemaker’s Premises License to transfer a portion of its wine inventory from
its State licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby
created and to sell or offer for sale at retail only in the premises specified
in the license hereby created the transferred wine for use or consumption,
including package sales, but not for resale in any form. Each Temporary Special
Use License shall be for one (1) day and no winemaker shall be entitled to more
than three (3) such Temporary Special Use Licenses in any one calendar year.
The application for such Temporary Special Use License shall designate the
premises for which the license is desired and the hours of operation. The
license fee for a “Temporary Special Use License” shall be Fifty Dollars
($50.00) per day. No premises or control premises shall be the place for more
than three (3) Temporary Special Event License and or Temporary Special Use
License (either singly or in combination) during any one (1) calendar year.
   (N)   A “Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit” shall entitle the Permittee
to make sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption in accordance with the
provisions of its license within a sidewalk dining area licensed under Chapter
119 of the Revised Code of Ordinances; such Permit shall be subject to all of
the provisions of Chapter 119 of the Revised Code of Ordinances in addition to
the provisions and requirements of this chapter of the Revised Code of
Ordinances. A Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall issue only to a
Licensee who is holder of a valid Restaurant License or Restaurant with Lounge
License; it shall be a permit granting additional privileges to such Licensee.
The fee for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall be One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) per annum. A Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit shall
permit the Licensee to make sales for consumption within the sidewalk dining
area subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold, served, consumed, or possessed
within a sidewalk dining area during any period when a City permitted parade or
other City permitted event is conducted on the right-of-way that is adjacent to
said sidewalk dining area.
      (2)   No alcoholic beverage may be stored or mixed within the sidewalk
dining area.
      (3)   A sign must be posted in a visible location within the sidewalk
dining area that states: “It is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the
sidewalk dining area.”
   (O)   A “Festival Events License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of beer and wine on specific dates. The license shall issue
solely to a not-for-organization and shall issue only for a location situated
within a Festival Area as defined within §
111.02 of this Article. The application for a Festival Events License shall
designate the specific dates that alcoholic liquor shall be available for
consumption upon the licensed premises. The license fee for a Festival Events
License shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per day for each day specified
within the application, provided that the maximum fee during each licensing
year shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). No Festival Events
License shall issue unless the applicant shall provide written authorization or
permission evidencing its right to use an area within the Festival Area,
provide general liability insurance in an amount required within the permission
or authorization, and comply with all other applicable provisions of this
chapter of the Revised Code of Ordinances. All beverages, including alcoholic
liquors, served for consumption during a festival event shall only be served
within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or container; no
beverage shall be served within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal can,
cup, or mug or similar type container.
   (P)   A “Brew Pub License” shall entitle the Licensee to manufacture beer on
the licensed premises and to store the manufactured beer on the licensed
premises, to make sales of the beer manufactured on the premises to
distributors and to importing distributors for resale, and to sell and offer
for sale at retail the beer manufactured on the premises; such “sale at retail”
shall be for consumption upon the licensed premises or sale by the package only
at the licensed premises. A Brew Pub License shall also entitle Licensee to
make consumption sales of beer or package sales of beer which is not
manufactured on the licensed premises. The license fee for the “Brew Pub
License” shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (Q)   An “Interchange Video Gaming License” shall entitle the Licensee to
make consumption sales of beer and wine only. The license shall issue only for
establishments situated within a three-fourths mile radius (3,960 feet) of the
point of intersection of the center line of Interstate Route 57 Exit Ramp
Number 95 and the center line of Illinois State Route 15, or of the center line
of Interstate Route 57 Exit Ramp Number 94 and the center line of Veterans
Memorial Drive, or the center line of Interstate Route 64 Exit Ramp Number 80
and the center line of Illinois State Route 37. In addition, the license shall
issue only for establishments licensed under §§
114.01 through
114.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances having not less than 5 licensed video
gaming terminals; the Licensee must meet all requirements of Chapters 110, 111,
113, 114, 115, 116, 117, and 118 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, and in the
event of any conflict, the most restrictive requirement shall be applicable. No
premises licensed hereunder shall have any lounge or bar or other similar area;
only a service bar is permitted and said service bar and consumption sales
shall serve only the video gaming terminals or similar type additional
terminals, such as an internet station. The license fee for a Video Gaming
License shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (R)   A “Retail Business Customer License” shall entitle the Licensee to
make limited consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no
package sales. The Licensee shall, except during events subject to a Temporary
Special Event Permit License, make sales only of beer and wine. The License
shall issue only to a retail business making retail sales of goods or services
whose primary sales are not the sale of alcoholic liquor or food or
entertainment and for which the sale of alcoholic liquor is only an amenity
offered for sale to customers of the retail business. No video gaming terminal
shall be permitted upon the licensed premises and the licensed premises shall
not be eligible for a Video Gaming Terminal License described within §§
114.01 through
114.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The licensed premises shall have no
lounge, bar, or other similar area; only a service bar is permitted. The
licensed premises may include the entire business premises of Licensee, which
business premises shall be fully described with the Application for License.
All beverages served for consumption upon the business premises shall be served
only within and consumed from a paper, plastic, or styrofoam cup or container;
no beverage shall be served within a glass bottle, cup, or mug or metal can,
cup, or mug or similar type container. A Retail Business Customer License shall
also entitle Licensee to apply for a Temporary Special Event Permit License
which permits the sale of all alcoholic liquor for consumption and which is not
restricted to sale of beer and wine only. The Licensee fee for a Retail
Business Customer License shall be Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) per annum.
   (S)   (1)   A “Movie Theater License” shall entitle the Licensee to make
consumption sales of alcoholic liquor; the Licensee shall make no package
sales. The License shall issue only to a bona fide cinema or movie theater
venue having multi-screen operations each day of the week and shall issue only
for a business whose primary sales are not the sale of alcoholic liquor and for
which sale of alcoholic liquor is only an amenity offered for sale to a
customer in possession of a ticket for a movie being shown on date of the sale;
only a service bar is permitted and there shall be no other bar, counter area,
or segregated lounge area separate from the theater or movie viewing areas. As
provided within §
111.07(O) of the Revised Code of Ordinances, no person under 21 years of age
shall draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor, and waiters and waitresses (i.e.
any person serving or delivering an alcoholic beverage) must be at least 18
years of age.
      (2)   The licensed premises may include the entire interior of the
business premises of Licensee, but the license premises shall not include, and
no possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor shall occur within, any area
exterior to a building, including but not limited to any parking lot, sidewalk,
or similar area. Subject to the permitted hours for sale of alcoholic liquor
within §
111.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, sale and consumption of alcoholic
liquor shall occur only incidentally to the operation of the cinema or movie
theater venue and only during the regular business hours of operation of the
premises as a cinema or movie theater venue.
   (T)   Except as limited by the terms of the license of the permit, all
licenses and permits shall be annual licenses and permits, and same shall
expire on April 30 of each year following the date of issuance and shall
consist of the name of the Licensee, the address and description of the
licensed premises, and if applicable a notation permitting Sunday sales.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.5) (Ord. 2025-05, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 111.06 POSTING OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   Every person licensed under the provisions of this Article shall immediately
post and keep posted while in force in a conspicuous place upon the premises
described in such license the license so issued hereunder and also any license
required to be issued under the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/); all
permits shall also be conspicuously posted in the same manner as a license.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.6)
§ 111.07 LICENSE OF EACH SPECIFIC PREMISES, TRANSFER TO OTHER PREMISES OWNED BY
LICENSEE.
   (A)   A License issued hereunder shall apply only to the licensed premises
described in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one
location shall be so described in each license.
   (B)   After a license has been granted for a particular premises, a licensee
may request a transfer of said license to another premises owned by licensee.
The licensee shall file a request in writing and under oath that licensee
desires to transfer the license to a new premises owned by licensee; the
licensee shall also submit a non-refundable one Hundred Dollar ($100.00)
processing fee and shall submit an application for a license for the proposed
premises, which application shall be in the form and shall be subject to the
same application procedure as provided in §
111.03 and as provided within this Article. A licensee may not request a
transfer of a license to a premises not owned by or leased by licensee, nor may
licensee request transfer of the license to another person.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.7)
§ 111.08 SURRENDER OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee who desires to surrender and terminate a license issued
hereunder shall file in the Office of the City Clerk a written notice under
oath addressed to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner advising the
commissioner of the intent to surrender the license and the effective date of
the termination of the license. The termination of the license shall not be
effective until the date stated within the notice and may be withdrawn by the
licensee prior to the effective date by filing in the Office of the City Clerk
a statement in writing under oath withdrawing the notice of surrender, provided
that a notice of withdrawal shall be null and void and of no effect if filed on
or after the effective date of the termination. If no date of termination is
stated within the notice then the termination shall be immediately effective
upon filing of the notice.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.8)
§ 111.09 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)    Effective September 3, 2024 the following licenses are authorized to
be issued in the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois seven (7) Package and Consumption
Sales Licenses, six (6) Club Licenses, twenty (20) Restaurant with Lounge
Licenses, ten (10) Restaurant Licenses, three (3) Hotel Licenses, three (3)
Hotel Patron Licenses, nine (9) Package Sales Licenses, eleven (11) Package
Sales Beer and Wine Licenses, two (2) Wine-Makers Licenses, three (3) Event
Center Licenses, two (2) Festival Event Licenses, ten (10) Brew Pub Licenses,
fifteen (15) Interchange Video Gamin Licenses, ten (10) Retail Business
Customer Licenses, one (1) Movie Theater License, and an unlimited number of
temporary Licenses.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall restrict or limit the authority of the City
Council to change by Ordinance the number of licenses authorized and in
existence.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.9) (Ord. 2023-23, passed 6-5-2023; Ord. 2023-31,
passed 8-21-2023; Ord. 2023-32, passed 9-5-2023; Ord. 2024-1, passed 1-2-2024;
Ord. 2024-31, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 111.10 RENEWAL.
   (A)   A license may be renewed at the expiration thereof provided the
licensee is then qualified to receive a license at the premises for which such
renewal license is sought and complies with all ordinances of the City
including health, building, zoning, and fire safety ordinances.
   (B)   Applications for renewal of license shall be filed by the licensee
with the City Clerk in the same manner and under the same terms and conditions
as for an original application, except for an application for renewal should be
filed not less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the license (i.e.
March 1). The application procedure for renewal of a license shall be the same
as for an original application, except that such application shall not be
subject to review and action by the Liquor Advisory Board unless referred to
the Advisory Board by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall preliminarily or tentatively grant or deny in
writing the renewal of license without any hearing; provided that if the
applicant, within ten (10) days from date of the notice of the preliminary or
tentative decision of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, shall file in the
Office of the City Clerk a written request for hearing upon the application
then a hearing de novo shall be conducted by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner within thirty (30) days from date of the written request, which
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
111.20 herein. The preliminary or tentative decision of the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall be served by certified mail return receipt requested
to the address stated within the application; the date of mailing the decision
of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in a properly addressed envelope shall
be the date of the notice regardless of whether the applicant actually receives
the notice.
   (C)   The renewal privilege herein described shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prevent the City Council from decreasing
the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction. The City Council
may eliminate licenses, amend license classifications, and/or impose such
regulations and restrictions as deemed necessary by the City Council to protect
and promote the public interest.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.10)
§ 111.11 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any church; school; hospital; home for
the aged or indigent persons or veterans, their wives, their children; or any
military or naval station; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs,
restaurants, licensed premises within a Festival Area, or grocery stores.
   (B)   Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such
premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for
dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept
accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any
connection between such premises or such other portion of the building or
structure used only by the licensee, his family, and personal guests.
   (C)   No licensee shall hold forth or operate at any place other than the
licensed premises designated in his application for a license.
   (D)   No license except a Temporary Special Event License or a Temporary
Special Use License or a Festival Events License or Temporary Special Event
Permit License or Retail Business Customer License shall issue for any premises
except the interior of a building or a fully enclosed area adjacent to and
forming part of a building constituting a licensed premises which area is fully
enclosed by a permanent solid board fence not less than 8 feet in height and
which area has no entry or access except from the interior of a building
forming part of the licensed premises, provided that the required fence (which
must meet all other requirements) for a dining area where food is actually
served may be a wrought iron fence not less than five feet in height for a
premises licensed as a restaurant or as a restaurant with lounge upon the
written approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner after a determination
by said Commissioner that such wrought iron fence and the use thereof is
compatible with adjacent properties and uses. A Temporary Special Event License
or Temporary Special Use License or a Festival Events License or Temporary
Special Event Permit License may issue for the interior of a building and/or a
fully enclosed area which is fully enclosed by a permanent or temporary fence
not less than 4 feet in height and which area has no entry or access point
except entrances that are clearly designated as the only place of entry or exit
and which area (including without limitation the fencing and each entrance) is
monitored at all times by an adult agent of the Licensee who shall be not less
than 21 years of age. Sidewalk dining areas subject of a Downtown Sidewalk
Dining Liquor Permit shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 119 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (E)   No license except a except a Package Sales Beer and Wine License shall
be issued to an applicant whose principal business at the premises described in
the application is the sale at retail of groceries or drugs.
   (F)   No license except a Package Sales Beer and Wine License or Interchange
Video Gaming License shall be issued to any premises where gasoline, diesel,
petroleum fuels, or other fuels for motor vehicles as defined within the
Illinois Vehicle code are dispensed or sold nor to any premises immediately
abutting or adjacent to a premises owned, leased, managed, or controlled by a
Licensee in whole or part where gasoline, diesel, petroleum fuels, or other
fuels for motor vehicles as defined within the Illinois Vehicle Code are
dispensed or sold.
   (G)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such
minors.
   (H)   When a license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to any person for the period of one (1) year thereafter for the conduct
of business of selling alcoholic liquor at retail on the premises or on any
part of the premises subject of the revoked license.
   (I)   No license shall be issued to any massage parlor as defined within
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (J)   No license shall be issued to any sexually oriented business which
shall include an adult store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, escort
agency, semi-nude model studio, sexual encounter center or similar adult use.
   (K)   No license shall be issued to any tattoo shop, tattoo parlor or to any
similar business offering tattoo services.
   (L)   (1)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 800 feet of any massage parlor as defined within
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or within 800 feet of any
sexually oriented business or within 800 feet of any tattoo shop, tattoo parlor
or any similar business offering tattoo services.
      (2)   For purposes of this subparagraph measurements shall be in straight
line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (M)   Not more than one license shall be issued for the sale at retail of
any alcoholic liquor for any structure or for any lot as defined by
Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The location restriction within
this subparagraph shall not apply to a licensed premises having a valid license
for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor issued prior to December 18, 2006
for so long as the license for the premises in question is renewed each
subsequent year and continues in effect during all periods from such date (i.e.
The R & R Crossing and The Depot); nor shall the location restriction within
this subparagraph apply to a licensed premises forming part of a planned
shopping center situated upon real estate having the Zoning Classification B-
PL, Planned Business District.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.11)
§ 111.12 HEALTH AND SAFETY LAWS.
   (A)   All premises licensed pursuant to this Article shall be in compliance
at all times with the City’s building, fire, and zoning ordinances and all
state ordinances and all state statutes pertaining to health, sanitation, and
public safety.
   (B)   Licensees shall comply at all times with all other applicable
ordinances of the City and statutes of the State of Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.12)
§ 111.13 CESSATION OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   The death of a licensee, termination of a partnership, dissolution of
a corporation, or bankruptcy of a licensee shall cause the license to cease to
exist provided that the executor or administrator of the estate of any deceased
licensee may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order
of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such
insolvency or such bankruptcy until the expiration of such bankruptcy, or
insolvency of such licensee.
   (B)   (1)   A licensee who will be ceasing to do business or who closes his
or her place of business for more than ten (10) days shall give the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner written notice of such cessation or closing as soon
as practical after the decision to close or cease business is made, but in any
event before the cessation or closing. Such notice shall state the reason
therefor and the date of closing or cessation.
      (2)   Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his or her place
of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days and who fails
to show good cause shall be subject to having his or her license suspended,
revoked, or a fine imposed.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.13)
§ 111.14 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, to offer for sale, or deliver at retail, or
give away in or upon any licensed premises any alcoholic liquor except during
the following hours:
   (A)   Permitted Hours. Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one day and 2:00
a.m. of the succeeding day.
   (B)   New Year’s Day. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, persons,
firms, and corporations licensed to sell malt or alcoholic liquor may also
serve and sell malt and alcoholic liquor at the licensed premises between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. on New Year’s Day and 6:00 a.m. on New Year’s Day; provided,
however, that entry to the licensed premises, shall be denied to all persons at
2:00 a.m. on New Year’s Day, and no person shall be permitted to enter or
reenter the premises after said time until the licensed premises thereafter
opens for normal permitted hours (i.e. 6:00 a.m.) as provided above. All
persons or patrons within the licensed premises at said 2:00 a.m. on New Year’s
Day shall be permitted to remain and be permitted to purchase and to consume
malt and alcoholic liquor, although no person shall be permitted reentry upon
exiting or leaving the licensed establishment until the licensed premises
thereafter opens for normal permitted hours as provided above.
   (C)   General Provisions.
      (1)   Businesses primarily offering goods and services other than sales
of alcoholic liquor, such as restaurants, clubs, hotels, motels, gas stations,
and grocery stores, may remain open at all hours otherwise permitted by law,
but no alcoholic liquors shall be sold or delivered except during the hours
provided above. Furthermore, any lounge area or separate area for sale or
service of alcohol shall be closed. Businesses primarily offering sales of
alcoholic liquor shall remain open only during the hours provided above.
      (2)   Each licensee shall require and have all customers off and out of
said premises within twenty (20) minutes after the closing times provided
herein, which twenty (20) minutes shall be considered a grace period to all
time for closing and for all customers to leave the premises, but all sales or
deliveries shall cease at the closing hours herein specified.
      (3)   Whenever time is referred to in this Article, it shall be
understood and is hereby enacted that the same shall be consistent with the
official time of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, whether the same shall be
central standard time or central daylight savings time.
      (4)   No individual other than a licensee or paid employee who is
actually on duty for cleaning or maintenance purposes shall remain in licensed
premises after the closing time and grace time specified herein above.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.14)
§ 111.15 DRIVE-IN WINDOWS.
   (A)   Drive-in windows maintained and operated on premises duly licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquors within the corporate limits of the City shall be
adequately lighted during business hours by natural or artificial white light
so that all persons or vehicles transacting business at such windows shall be
clearly visible. From sunset until closing time, said drive-in windows shall be
directly lighted by no less than two (2), 300-watt incandescent lamps or their
equivalent, spaced at least eight (8) feet apart, located directly over or near
said drive-in window, with light rays so directed as to most effectively light
the outside area immediately adjacent to said window.
   (B)   In order to enforce this section, the City shall have the right to
require the filing with it of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the
lighting as above required. This paragraph shall constitute an additional
regulation of premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (C)   Only “package sales” are permitted at drive-in windows.
   (D)   Only a licensee having a Package and Consumption Sales License or
Package Sales license shall maintain and operate a drive-in window at which
alcoholic liquors are sold.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.15)
§ 111.16 BOOKS AND BUSINESS RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and maintain books and
records pertaining to all business conducted at the licensed premises. It shall
be the duty of every licensee to make the books and records available upon
reasonable notice for the purpose of investigation and control by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner. Such books and records need not be maintained on
the licensed premises but must be maintained in the state of Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.16)
§ 111.17 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No licensee shall cash checks or drafts to any purchaser or
prospective purchaser of alcoholic liquors, which checks or drafts have been
given such purchaser or prospective purchaser in payment of personal services,
nor shall he give alcoholic liquors to any customer on credit.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, no Licensee or any agent,
representative, manager, or employee of such Licensee shall permit or allow any
person under the age of 21 years to enter or remain upon any control premises,
nor shall any person under the age of 21 years enter or remain upon any control
premises. Provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to
persons under the age of 21 years who enter a licensed premises that primarily
offers and sells goods and services other than alcoholic liquor; nor shall the
prohibition apply to persons under the age of 21 years who enter a premises
licensed to make consumption sales of alcoholic liquor and who remain only
within a dining area, bowling area, or similar area which is physically
separate, divided, and apart from any bar, lounge, or other area designated or
designed primarily for consumption of alcoholic liquor; nor shall the
prohibition apply to persons under the age of 21 accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian who enter a licensed premises primarily offering packaged sales
of alcoholic liquor. In addition, the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to
persons between the ages of 18 and 21 years if the provisions of Subsection (O)
hereinafter set forth are applicable.
      (2)   A person charged with a violation in any court or administrative
hearing of this subsection shall have the burden of proving that he or she
meets one of the described exceptions.
   (C)   No waiter or waitress nor any other employee of licensee shall enter,
appear or remain within any dining area, any bowling area, or package sales
area or other area of the control premises where minors are permitted, nor
within any area which may reasonably be in view of a minor, unless said waiter,
waitress or other employee shall be wearing or attired in non-transparent
clothing which hides from view or prevents view of the breasts, the genitals,
the buttocks and all areas of the torso and thigh from the bottom of the breast
area downward to an area of the body which would cover from view the entire
buttocks and genital area of the body.
   (D)    Except as provided for in §
111.23 herein, no person shall possess any open container or consume any
alcoholic liquor upon any public property as defined in §
111.02 (definition of public property) within the corporate limits of the City.
No licensee shall allow or permit any individual to transport or carry any
alcoholic liquor out of the premises of the licensee except in the original
package and seal unbroken.
   (E)   No gambling devices of any kind or nature, games of chance, punch
boards, slot machines, dice, or any other instrument of gambling shall be
permitted or allowed upon any premises licensed for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors except video gaming terminals licensed and permitted under
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and §§
114.01 through
114.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (F)   (1)   No licensee nor any manager, agent, or employee of licensee
shall permit or allow any waitress, waiter, hostess, bartender, employee,
agent, patron, or any other person to enter or remain upon any licensed
premises or any control premises nor shall any such licensee, manager, agent,
waitress, waiter, hostess, bartender, employee, patron or any other person
enter or remain upon the licensed premises or control premises unless dressed
in non-transparent and opaque clothing which completely covers from view the
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if opaquely covered,
and the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, buttocks, anus, anal
cleft and anal cleavage, and the female breast below a horizontal line across
the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse,
shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided the areola or nipple
is not exposed in whole or in part. This subparagraph shall not be construed to
apply to a person engaged in the bona fide use of a single sex restroom for its
intended purpose or to an occupant(s), not otherwise visible to the public,
within a hotel or motel room situated upon a control premises.
      (2)   No licensee nor any manager, agent or employee of licensee shall
knowingly permit or allow any employee, agent, patron or any other person upon
the licensed premises or control premises to engage in nor shall any licensee,
employee, agent, patron or any other person knowingly engage in or knowingly
participate in the fondling, caressing, or erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic area, vulva, buttocks, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, or female breasts,
whether covered or not, of another person. This subparagraph shall be construed
so that each the person engaged in the touching and the recipient of the
touching are each in violation of this Ordinance.
   (G)   No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent,
or employee of such licensee shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of 21 years except as hereinafter provided or to any
intoxicated person or to any person known to him to be a habitual drunkard,
spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental
treatment or to any person who is known to be an object of charity or who is
known to be supported by any charitable association or institution or any
relief commission or organization. Upon violation of this Subsection, the
following fines and penalties shall be imposed upon the licensee and upon any
officer, associate, member, representative, employee, or other agent of
licensee.
      (1)   For the first violation of this Subsection, the licensee shall pay
a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and the officer, associate, member,
representative, employee, or other agent of licensee shall also pay a fine of
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
      (2)   For the second violation of this Subsection within any twelve (12)
month period, the licensee shall pay a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00),
and the officer, associate, member, representative, employee, or other agent of
the licensee shall also pay a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).
      (3)   For the third violation of this Subsection within any twelve (12)
month period, the licensee shall pay a fine of Three Thousand Dollars
($3000.00), and the officer, associate, member, representative, employee, or
other agent of the licensee shall also pay a fine of Five Hundred Fifty Dollars
($550.00).
      (4)   (a)   The intent of this Subsection and the fines and penalties
imposed hereunder are to punish both the licensee and the officer, associate,
member, representative, employee, or other agent of the licensee for each
violation.
         (b)   The foregoing fines and penalties shall be in addition to any
action taken or sanction imposed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and
shall not in any manner limit the authority of said Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, who shall have authority to impose any penalty described within §
111.20 herein, including suspension or revocation of the license.
   (H)   (1)   Any person to whom the sale, gift, or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession. Any person who violates this
Subsection shall be subject to the following fines and penalties:
         (a)   For the first violation of this Subsection, a fine of one
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) shall be imposed;
         (b)   For the second violation of this Subsection, a fine of Two
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) shall be imposed; and
         (c)   For the third violation within any twelve (12) month period, a
fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed.
      (2)   (1)   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this
Subsection, any licensee or his agent or his employee may refuse to sell or
serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate
written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of
21 years. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale
or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification
containing proof of age issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
         (b)   A reasonable belief by the licensee or his agent that a person
is 21 years of age or over shall not be a defense to any action under this
Article unless said licensee or agent shall have demanded and received some
form of positive identification as above-described that such person is 21 years
of age or over.
   (I)   No person shall sell, give, or furnish to any person under the age of
21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of
the age and identity of such person, nor shall any person sell, give, or
furnish to any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and
identification of any other person.
   (J)   No person under the age of 21 years shall present or offer to any
licensee, his agent, or employee any written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his own for the
purpose of procuring or attempting to procure the servicing of any alcoholic
beverage, nor shall any person under the age of 21 years have in his possession
any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and
identity.
   (K)   (1)   No licensee under this Article shall sell or deliver any package
containing alcoholic liquor to any other person or shall sell the contents of
any such package for consumption on the premises, unless such package shall
have affixed thereto all canceled revenue stamps which may be required by
federal or state laws and unless same shall also bear thereon a clear and
legible label containing the name of the manufacturer and the kind of alcoholic
content thereof.
      (2)   No licensee under this Article shall sell or have in his possession
or use any package or container of alcoholic liquor which does not comply
herewith at the time same was delivered to him.
   (L)   No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of 21 years except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service
and except as herein provided.
   (M)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of
age is forbidden except the consumption of alcoholic liquor by such person in
the performance of a religious service or ceremony or except under the direct
supervision of the parent or parents of such person in the privacy of the home
is not prohibited.
   (N)   No person under the age of 21 years (including a person in pursuance
of an order of his parents) shall have any alcoholic beverage in his possession
or on any street or highway or in any public place or any place open to the
public unless he is making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of
his employment; this prohibition shall not apply to waiters and waitresses
within the licensed premises of his or her employer.
   (O)   No person under 21 years of age shall draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic
liquor within or upon any licensed premises. Waiters and waitresses must be at
least 18 years of age within all licensed premises, except that waiters and
waitresses within a premises licensed as a Package and Consumption Sales
License premises must be at least 21 years of age.
   (P)   No room or place where alcoholic liquor is sold or dispensed, or any
room adjacent thereto, shall be connected by any elevator, lift, dumb waiter,
or similar device for carrying, transporting, or elevating food or alcoholic
liquor within any room or rooms upon any upper floor of the same premises;
provided this provision shall not apply to hotels.
   (Q)   No person except a manufacturer or distributor or importing
distributor holding a federal license therefor shall fill or refill in whole or
in part any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other
kind of quality of alcoholic liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks, or other
containers containing alcoholic liquor except in original packages.
   (R)   No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have any alcoholic
liquor in or about any motor vehicle except in the original package and with
the seal unbroken.
   (S)   Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell, ship, transport, or in
anywise dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or
brand known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of
the package or other containers of said alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause
any such act to be done, shall forfeit said alcoholic liquor and said packages
and containers and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties provided
for violation of this Article.
   (T)   No licensee shall permit any illegal, disorderly, or immoral practices
upon the control premises.
   (U)   No Licensee shall unlawfully discriminate against any person, either
with regard to the services that it offers or with regard to its employment
practices, and each licensee shall comply fully with all applicable state and
federal laws relating to discrimination.
   (V)   Each and every part of “An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors”, being
the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 LICS 5/), enacted by the General Assembly
of the State of Illinois approved January 31, 1934 as amended and regulations
promulgated thereunder which relate in any manner to the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquors is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
Article to the same extent and with the same legal effect as if fully set forth
herein except where otherwise specifically changed or amended in this Article.
Any violation of such applicable and adopted provisions of said Act shall be
deemed a violation of this Article and be subject to the penalties herein
provided.
   (W)   (1)   Bottle clubs and set-up establishments are prohibited. For
purposes of this Section, a set-up establishment means any public or private
premises not holding a liquor license pursuant to this Ordinance which sells,
gives away, serves, pours, stores, or otherwise dispenses and/or glasses mix,
ice, water, and soft drinks for the purpose of consumption of alcoholic liquors
on the premises.
      (2)   (a)   No individual, partnership, corporation or other person
operating as a public accommodation shall permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor on its premises unless licensed under this chapter of the Revised Code
of Ordinances. No person shall possess or consume alcoholic liquor at a public
accommodation unless said public accommodation is licensed under this chapter
of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
         (b)   For purpose of this subsection PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION means a
refreshment, entertainment, or recreation facility of any kind whose goods,
services, facilities, privileges or advantages are extended, offered, sold or
otherwise made available to the public.
         (c)   This subsection specifically, but without limitation, prohibits
all establishments generically known or referred to as “BYOB” (bring your own
booze/bottle/beer) or “Brown Bag” establishments. Each the person who possesses
or consumes the alcoholic liquor and the person in control of the public
accommodation who knowingly permits the consumption or possession of alcoholic
liquor in a public accommodation not licensed under this chapter of the Revised
Code of Ordinances shall be in violation of this subparagraph.
   (X)   No driver or operator of a cab or other vehicle for hire shall stop,
stand, or park at any drive-up window or any premises where alcoholic liquor is
sold, nor shall any driver or operator of a cab or other vehicle for hire make
any purchase of alcoholic liquor while driving or operating said cab (whether
on duty or off) unless the cab or vehicle for hire is actually occupied by a
fare or customer making a purchase of package liquor for the personal use of
said fare or customer.
   (Y)   (1)   No sales of alcoholic liquor, excluding certain sales permitted
by the “Wine Makers License” classification and except for sales permitted by §
5-1(d) of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/), shall be made except
by personal delivery of the alcoholic liquor at the licensed premises to the
customer making the purchase of the liquor; nor shall a customer’s order for
alcoholic liquor be made by phone, by internet, by intermediary, nor by any
other similar method unless the purchase is completed and actual delivery of
the alcoholic liquor is made in person to the customer at the licensed
premises.
      (2)   Section 5-1(d) of the Illinois Liquor Control Act permits the
holder of a retail liquor license to accept a customer’s order by phone, by
internet, or by similar method and to make delivery of the alcoholic liquor to
the customer in strict compliance with the following:
         (a)   DELIVERY means the movement of alcoholic liquor purchased from a
licensed retailer to a consumer through the following methods:
            1.   delivery within licensed retailer’s parking lot, including
curbside, for pickup by the consumer;
            2.   delivery by an owner, officer, director, shareholder, or
employee of the licensed retailer; or
            3.   delivery by a third-party contractor, independent contractor,
or agent with whom the licensed retailer has contracted to make deliveries of
alcoholic liquors.
         (b)   Under (Y)(2)1., (Y)(2)2., or (Y)(2)3. above, delivery shall not
include the use of common carriers. In all events delivery shall be made only
within 12 hours from the time the alcoholic liquor leaves the licensed premises
of the retailer for delivery, delivery of alcoholic liquor shall be in the
Original Package with the seal unbroken, and delivery shall be made by a person
21 years of age or older and shall be received by and signed for by a person 21
years of age or older.
   (Z)   (1)   During a temporary event or festival event licensed under §
111.05, no person shall serve for consumption or consume on the premises of the
event any alcoholic liquor or other beverage, except within or from a paper,
plastic, or styrofoam cup or container; no person during a temporary or
festival event licensed under §
111.05 shall serve or consume upon the premises of the event any alcoholic
liquor or other beverage within or from a glass bottle, cup, or mug or a metal
can, cup, or mug or similar type container upon the premises of the event.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates or
refuses to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be subject to the
provisions of §
10.99 of the Revised Code. In addition, Licensees shall be subject to the
authority of the Local Liquor Commissioner.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.17) (Ord. 2024-36, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 111.18 GIFTS OF ALCOHOL FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.
   (A)   No licensee nor any other individual, partnership or corporation or
other person shall give away any alcoholic liquor for commercial purposes or in
connection with the sale of nonalcoholic products or to promote the sale of
non-alcoholic products.
   (B)   No licensee nor any other individual, partnership or corporation or
other person shall advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under the subsection above. This
includes, but is not limited to, advertisements using the word “free” or
“complimentary” and includes sampling, test marketing or tasting.
   (C)   This subsection does not prohibit a licensee from giving a “sampling”
to patrons or customers at the licensed premises of the licensee; and this
subsection does not prohibit an individual, partnership, corporation or other
person from serving invited guests alcoholic liquor without charge or other
consideration at an open house or other social event for purposes of
commemorating a special event or occasion during a time that the site of the
event is not otherwise held out to the public for commercial purposes and no
sales nor promotions of sale of non-alcoholic products are occurring; provided
no individual, partnership, corporation or person shall have more than one (1)
open house or social event during any calendar year and said open house or
social event shall not advertise either prior to or during the event any
licensee nor any alcoholic liquor.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.18)
§ 111.19 LIABILITY OF LICENSEE FOR ACTS OF MANAGER, EMPLOYEES AND OTHER NAMED
PERSONS.
   Every act or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
provision of this Article or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/
) by any officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of the licensee
shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if the act or admission had been done or admitted by the
licensee personally.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.19)
§ 111.20 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   AUTHORITY. The Mayor of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the
applicable provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/) of this
Article and of Ordinances, Resolutions, rules and regulations relating to
alcoholic liquor as may be adopted. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
have such powers and duties as provided within the Illinois Liquor Control Act
and shall have such powers and duties as hereinafter specified:
      (1)   To receive applications; investigate applications; and grant, renew
or deny liquor licenses.
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed under this Article to determine whether any of
the provisions of this Article, the Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, laws
of the State of Illinois, or the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any rules or
regulations adopted by it, have been or are being violated and at such time to
examine the premises of the licensee in connection herewith.
      (3)   To receive complaints from any citizen of the City that any of the
provisions of this Article or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner
hereinafter provided.
      (4)   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
City Treasurer.
      (5)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof or any licensee under this Article upon
whom notice of suspension or revocation of license has been served; to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any applicant or licensee
under this Article; to authorize any law enforcing officer to require any
applicant or licensee to furnish said officer with a complete, current list of
all employees of said applicant or licensee including the names and addresses
of all employees; and to hear testimony and take proof for their information in
the performance of their duties and for such purposes to issue subpoenas. For
the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Commissioner
under this Article, he may authorize his agent to act in his behalf.
      (6)   To require fingerprints of any applicant for the local license or
for a renewal thereof (except as prohibited by law): for purposes of obtaining
fingerprints under this Subsection, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
collect a fee and forward the fee to the appropriate policing body who shall
submit the fingerprints and the fee to the Illinois Department of State Police.
      (7)   Suspend or revoke any license issued by him if he determines that
the licensee has violated any provisions of this Article or of any ordinance or
Resolution enacted by the City of Mt. Vernon or of any provision of the State
Liquor Control Act or any applicable rule or regulation issued by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner which is not inconsistent with law. Notwithstanding
any other language herein, a license may be revoked for a first offense. If a
suspension is imposed then said suspension may be up to thirty (30) days for
each offense. In lieu of a suspension, the commissioner may impose a fine of
not more than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation, although
the maximum fine that may be imposed upon any licensee for the period of the
license shall not exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) each license year.
A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
      (8)   To issue a written order immediately and summarily closing a
licensed premises for not more than seven (7) days without notice or hearing to
the licensee if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe
that the continued operation of the specified licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community, provided said written order
shall state the reasons for said order and shall advise the licensee of a date
and time for hearing to give the licensee an opportunity to be heard on the
matter.
   (B)   RECORDS. The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall cause to be
maintained a complete record of all licenses issued pursuant to this Article. A
copy of each license shall be maintained by the City Clerk.
   (C)   HEARINGS UPON APPLICATIONS.
      (1)   Applicants for a license, applicants for renewal of a license and
applicants for a transfer of a license to another location shall be entitled to
a public hearing before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner upon full,
complete and strict compliance with all provisions of this Article relating to
applications for same.
      (2)   The applicant shall be given written notice at least three (3) days
prior to said hearing. Upon completion of the public hearing, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall either grant or deny the application and shall make
findings of fact in support of the decision.
   (D)   HEARINGS UPON NON-APPLICATION MATTERS.
      (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, no license holder shall receive a
written reprimand, nor shall a license be suspended or revoked or a fine
imposed except at a public hearing before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. The licensee shall be given written notice of the charge at least
three (3) days prior to said hearing affording an opportunity to appear and
defend.
      (2)   A licensed premises may be immediately and summarily closed for not
more than seven (7) days without notice or hearing upon the issuance of a
written order stating the reason(s) for closing if the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that the continued operation of the specific
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community.
Within said seven days, a hearing shall be held giving the licensee the
opportunity to be heard on the matter.
      (3)   Upon completion of any public hearing, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall make findings of fact. If the commissioner determines that
any licensee has violated any provision of this Article or any state law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, the Commissioner may impose such
penalties and take such action as is authorized by this Article.
      (4)   (a)   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines that a
reprimand, suspension, fine or revocation is warranted, he shall issue a
written order after the hearing stating the reasons for the determination and
shall cause a copy of such order to be served upon the licensee by personal
service or by certified mail to the address of the licensee appearing of
record, with the date of deposit in the United States mail being the date of
service. In the event a fine is imposed, the order shall specify the date by
which the fine shall be paid.
         (b)   If the fine is not paid by the specified date, such shall
constitute cause to suspend or revoke the license. A copy of each order issued
by the Commissioner shall be maintained in the office of the City clerk.
      (5)   In making the determination to reprimand, suspend, revoke, or
impose a fine or in determining the length of a suspension imposed, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may consider the nature of the violation, past
violations of the licensee, and the facts and circumstances surrounding the
violation as presented at the public hearing.
   (E)   WRITTEN ORDER. The written order of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner required to be issued hereunder shall be issued within five (5)
days after a written transcript of the public hearing is received by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner from the certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter if either party orders said transcript and in any event, a
written order shall be issued within thirty (30) days from date of the public
hearing.
   (F)   HEARING PROCEDURES. All hearings before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be subject to the following procedures:
      (1)   The licensee shall be entitled to a three (3) day written notice of
the hearing.
      (2)   Witnesses shall be sworn, but in all other respects hearings shall
be informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
      (3)   A complete record of all evidence, testimony, and comments before
the commissioner shall be taken by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
      (4)   Review of the proceedings before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of the
proceedings. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided herein, appeals shall be in accordance
with § 7-9 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/7-9), although no
matter shall proceed to appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission unless
and until a hearing has been conducted by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
      (6)   Initial costs and hourly fees for the certified court or shorthand
reporter’s attendance at the formal hearings before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon; said costs and hourly
fees shall be assessed against the licensee if a reprimand, fine, suspension or
revocation is issued or imposed.
      (7)   All costs of preparing and transcribing an official record on
appeal to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be borne by the licensee
requesting a review of the official proceedings and shall be paid prior to the
date of the appeal hearing.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.21)
§ 111.21 HOUSE RULES.
   Licensee shall be permitted to enact “house rules” regulating conduct of
patrons; however, said house rules shall be reasonable, shall be consistent
with the provisions of this Article, and shall be subject to the approval of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No house rules shall unlawfully
discriminate against any individual.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.22)
§ 111.22 STATUS OF ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Effective September 1, 2014, all property within the corporate limits of the
City as to which the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor has been previously
permitted by local referendum or by petition and all other property within the
corporate limits of the City zoned or hereafter zoned Class B-1, Primary
Business District; Class B-2, Secondary Business District; Class B-3,
Interchange Business District; Class B-PL, Planned Business District; or Class
IPCA-PUD, Industrial Park Conservation Area, including territory hereafter
annexed to the City of Mt. Vernon, shall be property upon which the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted. However, as to such property as
to which sale at retail of alcoholic liquor is permitted only by reason of the
zoning classification, the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail shall not be
permitted upon such property upon the property being rezoned to a zoning
classification not listed above, nor shall the sale of alcoholic liquor at
retail be permitted as a nonconforming use upon such property after such
rezoning. All property upon which the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor is
permitted shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter of the Revised
Code of Ordinances, including without limitation, the requirement that a
license be obtained under §
111.03 herein.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.23)
§ 111.23 DESIGNATED OUTDOOR REFRESHMENT AREAS (“DORA”).
   (A)   Designation of DORA Areas: Open containers of alcohol and public
consumption of alcohol by individuals 21 years of age and older shall be
permitted upon public streets, sidewalks and other public places owned,
controlled or operated by the City which are identified as Designated Outdoor
Refreshment Areas (“DORA”). The DORA boundaries designated herein are generally
described as follows:
      (1)   Description of the boundary of the Downtown Mt. Vernon DORA:
Beginning at the intersection of N. 11th Street and Harrison Street; thence
proceeding Southerly along the N. 11th Street, which turns into S. 11th Street,
to the intersection of S. 11th Street and Jordan Street, thence Westerly along
Jordan Street to the intersection of Jordan Street and S. 12th Street, thence
Southerly along S. 12th Street to the intersection of S. 12th Street and Casey
Avenue, thence Easterly along Casey Avenue to the intersection of Casey Avenue
and S. 8th Street, thence Northerly along S. 8th Street, which turns into N.
8th Street, to the intersection of N. 8th Street and Harrison Street, thence
Westerly along Harrison Street to the intersection of Harrison Street and N.
11th Street, which is the point of beginning. DORA shall include the Right of
Way of each street included in the interior limits of the DORA boundary. The
exterior boundary shall be only the south side of Harrison Street, both sides
of 11th Street, both sides of Jordan Street, east side of S. 12th Street, north
side of Casey Avenue, and the west side of 8th Street. The DORA shall not
include the property on which the Jefferson County Courthouse resides. (See Map
of DORA attached to Ord. No. 2024-36 as Exhibit A).
      (2)   Such other areas as may be designated by the City Council by
ordinance duly adopted.
   (B)   Businesses located within the DORA holding a current liquor license
allowing for the sale of alcoholic liquors for on-premises consumption and
which are registered with the City in accordance with this paragraph, (each a
“Registered Business”) may sell alcoholic beverages permitted by such liquor
license to patrons for consumption within a designated DORA location. In order
to register, a business must: (i) Submit a written application to the City to
register for the DORA program, which application shall be in the form
prescribed by the City; (ii) Hold a current, valid City of Mt. Vernon liquor
license that authorizes retail sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption at the Registered Business premises; and (iii) Execute a DORA
program participation agreement in a form prescribed by the City, which shall,
at a minimum, provide that the Registered Business agrees to:
      (1)   Only serve beverages in DORA branded cups, which can be obtained
from Mt. Vernon Festivals, Inc.
      (2)   Distribute the DORA branded cups, without charge, to individuals 21
years of age and older who wish to purchase alcoholic beverages from the
Registered Business for the purpose of consuming such alcoholic beverages
within a designated DORA location, but only after the purchaser’s age is
verified by an employee of the Registered Business who is qualified to sell,
serve, and dispense alcoholic beverages in accordance with
Chapter 111 of this Code.
      (3)   At all times while participating in the DORA program, maintain all
insurance required for liquor licenses under
Chapter 111 of this Code and name the City as an additional insured on the
Registered Business’s dram shop liability and general commercial liability
insurance policies.
      (4)   Indemnify and hold harmless the City for all claims or damages
relating to the Registered Business’s participation in the DORA program;
      (5)   Strictly comply with this chapter, all DORA program rules and
regulations established by the City and all other applicable local, State, and
federal statutes, ordinances, regulations, and permit requirements, including
all requirements and conditions of the registered business’s State liquor
license.
   (C)   Public possession of open containers and consumption of alcoholic
beverages within DORA shall be limited to individuals consuming beverages in
the required DORA branded cups, provided that such beverages were purchased
from a Registered Business Premises. Open containers of alcohol may not be
carried into or out of the DORA boundaries. No outside alcohol shall be allowed
within the DORA boundaries.
   (D)   No DORA shall be available for possession of open containers of
alcoholic beverages or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages before 11:00
a.m. or past 11:00 p.m. each evening and shall remain closed for such purposes
until such time on the following day that authorized sales of alcoholic liquor
may begin pursuant to liquor licenses held by any Registered Business.
(Ord. 2024-36, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 111.24 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this Article shall immediately be effective and applicable
to all existing applicants for licenses, licensees, and licenses; and to all
licensed premises; and to any proceedings or procedures affecting same. Except
nothing hereunder shall revoke or alter the classifications of valid
outstanding licenses on the effective date of this Article or the rights
attendant to said classification; provided all licenses or renewal licenses
issued after the effective date of this Article shall be in accordance with the
classifications established hereunder and subject to all restrictions and
regulations of such classification.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.24) (Ord. 2024-36, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 111.25 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase in this Article or any part thereof or application thereto to any
person, firm, corporation, licensee, or circumstance if for any reason held to
be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Article or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the City Council that this Article
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof not been included.
(Prior Code, Art. 6, § 6.25) (Ord. 2024-36, passed 10-21-2024)
CHAPTER 112: REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
112.01   Legislative findings, declaration and purpose
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   License required
   
112.04   License fee
   
112.05   Non-transferability of license
   
112.06   Prohibited sales/distribution
   
112.07   Warning signs
   
112.08   Identification required
   
112.09   Minimum age to purchase or accept tobacco products
   
112.10   Minimum age to sell tobacco products
   
112.11   Vending machines prohibited
   
112.12   Proximity to certain institutions
   
112.13   Tobacco samples and certain free distributions prohibited
   
112.14   Out-of-package sales prohibited
   
112.15   Vendor-assisted sales
   
112.16   Responsibility for agents and employees
   
112.17   Use or possession by minors prohibited
   
112.18   Inspection
   
112.19   Sales/distribution violation
   
112.20   Purchase/possession violations
   
112.21   Suspension and revocation of license
   
112.22   Non-retaliation
   
112.23   Severability
   
112.24   Enforcement
   
112.25   Conflict
   
112.26   Effective date
§ 112.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS, DECLARATION AND PURPOSE.
   The Mt. Vernon City Council finds cigarette smoking and other tobacco use by
minors a grave public health problem. Therefore, the purpose of this Article is
to implement a strict and enforceable system to prevent the illegal sale of
cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors.
   (A)   Findings:
      (1)   Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;
      (2)   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of
tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease, and various other medical
disorders;
      (3)   The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
      (4)   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have found that
among persons who have ever tried a cigarette, more than eighty (80) percent
reported having had their first cigarette before age eighteen (18); and
      (5)   The National Institute on Drug Abuse has found that cigarette
smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use.
   (B)   The enactment of this Article intends to further the health, welfare
and safety of the residents of the City of Mt. Vernon, Jefferson County,
Illinois, particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 1)
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   COMPLIANCE CHECK. An inspection conducted with the intention of assessing
retail sales of tobacco products to minors and enforcing age-of-sales laws.
Compliance checks are conducted by having designated persons under the age of
eighteen (18) years of age attempt to purchase tobacco products from vendors.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon for the retail sale of
tobacco products.
   LICENSEE. The holder of a valid license for the retail sale of tobacco
products.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age
   PERSON. Means:
      (1)   Any human being who, as owner of a business, delivers tobacco in
any form to a minor and accepts money in payment therefor;
      (2)   Any human being who, as an employee for an owner of a business,
delivers tobacco in any form to a minor and accepts money for the owner in
payment therefor, thus completes a sale by said owner to said minor;
      (3)   Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship or body politic
having legal rights and duties;
      (4)   Any human being who purchases for or makes a gift to a minor of
tobacco in any form.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An area to which the public is invited or in which the public
is permitted, including but not limited to any right-of-way, mall or shopping
center, park, playground, and any other property owned by the City, any school
district, or any park district.
   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS. Open displays of tobacco products and point-of-sale
tobacco promotional products that the public has access to without intervention
of a store employee.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic, self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 2)
§ 112.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to
give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, of
giving away or of delivering tobacco products within the City without having
first obtained a valid Tobacco Retailer’s License from the City of Mt. Vernon
for each location in which tobacco products are sold.
      (2)   All such licenses must be renewed annually. Such license shall be
in addition to any other license required by the Revised Code of Ordinances or
by the State of Illinois. The license shall state the name of the Licensee and
shall designate the premises subject of the License. The license year shall be
May 1 – April 30.
   (B)   The license required herein shall be issued by the City Clerk upon
such application and forms as may be required by said City Clerk, upon
compliance with the provisions of this Article. However, the City Clerk shall
not issue a license to any person who shall have committed a violation of this
Article and shall have failed to pay the fine or any costs owing under §
112.21 herein in full prior to application for a license.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 3)
§ 112.04 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for a one-year Tobacco Retailer’s License is twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each tobacco retail location. The license fee will be waived
during the first licensing year and during each subsequent year if licensee is
free of any violation of this Article during the previous licensing year.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 4)
§ 112.05 NON-TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.
   A Tobacco Retail License is non-transferable to another person. In addition
a new license is required for a tobacco retailer who changes location.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 5)
§ 112.06 PROHIBITED SALES/DISTRIBUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 6)
§ 112.07 WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs informing the public of the age-of-sale restrictions shall be
posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products. Each
sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
“THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW”
   (B)   The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background,
and said letters must be at least one (1) inch high.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 7)
§ 112.08 IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   No licensee or other person shall sell or permit to be sold or give
cigarettes or other tobacco products to an individual appearing younger than
the age of twenty-seven (27) without requesting and examining photographic
identification establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen (18) years of age
or greater. A reasonable belief that by a licensee or other person that the
person purchasing or accepting cigarettes or other tobacco products is eighteen
(18) years or older is not a defense to any action under this Article unless
said licensee or other person shall have demanded and received some form of
positive identification that such person is eighteen (18) years or older.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 8)
§ 112.09 MINIMUM AGE TO PURCHASE OR ACCEPT TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
purchase or accept tobacco products or to misrepresent his/her age or use any
false or altered identification with the intention of purchasing or accepting
tobacco products.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 9)
§ 112.10 MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit
any person under sixteen (16) years of age to sell tobacco products on any
vendor’s premises.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 10)
§ 112.11 VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED.
   Tobacco vending machines or any other devices for the sale or distribution
of tobacco products are prohibited.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 11)
§ 112.12 PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away,
offer as a gift or deliver tobacco products within one hundred (100) feet of
any school, child care facility or other building used for educational or
recreational purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 12)
§ 112.13 TOBACCO SAMPLES AND CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person, business, or tobacco
retailer to distribute, give away, deliver tobacco products free of charge, or
deliver any coupon or rebate for tobacco products, to any person on any right-
of-way, park, playground, parking lot or other property owned by the City, any
school district, any park district, or any public library.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 13)
§ 112.14 OUT-OF-PACKAGE SALES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to sell cigarettes out of the manufacturer’s package with
required health warnings. It is unlawful to sell cigarettes individually or in
packages of fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes per package.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 14)
§ 112.15 VENDOR-ASSISTED SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person, business, or tobacco retailer
to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco product by means of
self-service displays or any other means other than vendor-assisted sales.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 15)
§ 112.16 RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any
provisions of this Article by any officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 16)
§ 112.17 USE OR POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
use or possess any tobacco products, except that it shall not be a violation of
this section for a minor to use or possess any tobacco product where such use
or possession takes place in an established place of worship or tribal meeting
place; provided, however, where such use or possession takes place in an
established place of worship or tribal meeting place, such use or possession
shall not be a violation only where use is in the performance of a religious
service or tribal ceremony and the religious group or tribe is legally
established and recognized by the State of Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 17)
§ 112.18 INSPECTION.
   The Chief of Police and such other persons as designated by the City Manager
are hereby authorized and empowered, to conduct annual, random, unannounced
inspections of all places wherein such tobacco products are licensed to be
sold, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and of the
City in relation to the same, are being complied with at such place.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 18)
§ 112.19 SALES/DISTRIBUTION VIOLATION.
   Any person who shall violate or shall cause the violation of any provision
of this Article other than the purchasing and possession sections of this
Article (§§
112.09 and
112.17 respectively) shall be subject to a fine in the amount of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) paid to the City within 72 hours of the violation which fine
shall be paid to the Mt. Vernon Police Department. If the fine is not paid
within 72 hours of the violation, then the violation shall be subject to the
penalties as provided within
Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, except that the fine shall be not
less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per each violation. In addition,
a Licensee shall be subject to the provisions of §
112.21 herein providing for the suspension or revocation of license.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 19)
§ 112.20 PURCHASE/POSSESSION VIOLATIONS.
   Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years that violates the purchasing
and use or possession sections (§§
112.09 and
112.17 respectively) of this Article shall be subject to a fine in the amount
of seventy five dollars ($75.00), if paid to the City within 72 hours of the
violation; which fine shall be paid at the Mt. Vernon Police Department. If the
fine is not paid within 72 hours of the violation, then the violation shall be
subject to the penalties as provided within
Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, except that the fine shall be not
less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per each violation.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 20)
§ 112.21 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In addition to any fine imposed by this Article, a Tobacco Retailer’s
License shall be subject to suspension or revocation as hereinafter provided.
No license shall be suspended or revoked until after notice and an opportunity
to be heard has been afforded to the Licensee, unless the Licensee waives such
right. The City Manager or his designee is hereby authorized to initiate
enforcement against any Licensee who violates any provision of this Article, is
authorized to receive complaints of violations from any citizen or from any law
enforcing officer, is authorized to conduct hearings upon any complaint or
allegation that the provisions to this Article have been violated by a Licensee
and is authorized to impose additional fines as provided herein and to suspend
or revoke the license issued under §
112.03 of this Article.
   (B)   In the event the hearing officer imposes a fine in addition to or in
lieu of a suspension or revocation of a license, the fine shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the first offense during a twelve month period and one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation during any twelve
month period; in the event any fine is imposed by the hearing officer and said
fine is not paid within ten days from date of imposition, then the license
shall be revoked, after notice and hearing as provided herein. No Licensee
whose license has been revoked nor any premises subject of a license which has
been revoked shall be eligible to receive and hold a license for a period of 24
months after revocation of the license.
   (C)   All hearings before the City Manager or his designee shall be subject
to the following procedures:
      (1)   The licensee shall be entitled to a three (3) day written notice of
the hearing.
      (2)   Witnesses shall be sworn, but in all other respects hearings shall
be informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply.
      (3)   A complete record of all evidence, testimony, and comments before
the hearing officer shall be taken by a certified court reporter or certified
shorthand reporter.
      (4)   Review of the proceedings before the hearing officer shall be
limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings. No new or
additional evidence shall be admitted or considered.
      (5)   Initial costs and hourly fees for the certified court or shorthand
reporter’s attendance at the formal hearings before the hearing officer shall
be paid by the City of Mt. Vernon; said costs and hourly fees shall be assessed
against the Licensee if a fine, suspension or revocation is issued or imposed.
      (6)   All costs of preparing and transcribing an official record on
administrative review shall be borne by the licensee requesting a review of the
official proceedings and shall be paid prior to the preparation of the official
record.
   (D)   The Licensee shall pay any costs imposed herein to the City within
thirty (30) days of notification of the costs. Failure to pay said costs within
thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this Article and is cause
for revocation of the license. In addition, such costs shall be an obligation
due and owing to the City and may be collected and enforced in any manner
permitted by law. In the event a civil action is filed in any court of
competent jurisdiction, the Licensee shall pay the reasonable attorney’s fees
and court costs incurred by the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 21)
§ 112.22 NON-RETALIATION.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of
this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 22)
§ 112.23 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held to be invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the provisions of this article which can be
given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the
provisions are declared to be severable.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 23)
§ 112.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   That the provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the City
Manager, by such other persons as designated by the City Manager and by the
police department.
   (B)   Enforcement in the form of compliance checks shall take place on at
least three (3) occasions of each license year.
   (C)   In addition to the specific provisions for enforcement as provided
herein; each provision of the Ordinance may be enforced as an ordinance
violation or as an injunction action in the Circuit Court of Jefferson County.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 24)
§ 112.25 CONFLICT.
   That all ordinances and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with the
provisions of this Article are, to the extent of such conflict, expressly
repealed.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 25)
§ 112.26 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   That this Article shall be in full force and effect beginning August 1,
2008.
(Prior Code, Art. 30, § 26)
CHAPTER 113: POOL, PINBALL, BOWLING ALLEYS, COIN OPERATED DEVICES
(EXCEPT VIDEO GAMING)
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Application
   
113.04   Terms of license
   
113.05   Display of license
   
113.06   Inspection
   
113.07   Gambling prohibited
   
113.08   Additional regulations
   
113.09   Liability of operator or proprietor for acts of agent
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   COIN OPERATED DEVICE. Any amusement device or machine (excluding video
gaming terminals licensed under Chapter 114 of this title) operated by means of
the insertion of a coin, token or similar object for the purpose of amusement
or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged; provided said term
shall not include a merry-go-round, a rocking horse or other similar rides
designed and operated for use only by minors. No device which awards credits
and contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable of removing and recording the
removal of credits when the award of credits is dependent upon chance shall be
permitted nor licensed as a “coin-operated amusement device,” as such devices
are prohibited by § 35 of the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/35).
   DEVICE. Each pool, billiard or similar table, each pinball machine, each
alley of a bowling alley, each gallery of a shooting gallery, and each coin-
operated amusement device. DEVICE shall not include video gaming terminals
licensed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and Chapter 114 of
this title. No device which awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or
switch capable of removing and recording the removal of credits when the award
of credits is dependent upon chance shall be permitted nor licensed as a
“device”, as such devices are prohibited by § 35 of the Illinois Video Gaming
Act (230 ILCS 40/35).
   OPERATOR. Any person, owner, firm, corporation partnership, association or
club which sets up for his or its own operation or for operation by another or
leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another, any device
herein defined whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing,
be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of receipt of or a division of
the income derived from such a device or otherwise.
   POOL HALL or BUSINESS WHERE A PRINCIPAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY IS POOL OR
BILLIARD TABLES. Shall mean:
      (1)   any premises where there is situated more than six (6) pool or
billiard tables or similar tables; or
      (2)   any premises where there is situated more than one (1) but less
than seven (7) pool or billiard tables or similar tables and where pool or
billiard or similar tables are a principal business activity upon the premises;
pool or billiard or similar tables shall be considered a principal business
activity if:
         (a)   said pool, billiard or similar tables represent more than one-
third of the total number of devices licensed under this Chapter of the Revised
Code upon the premises, or
         (b)   the floor space occupied by the pool, billiard and other similar
tables and the space within three feet of each table exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the total floor space of the room where the tables are situated; or
         (c)   the premises derives a significant or substantial portion of its
gross revenue from pool, billiard or other similar tables; significant or
substantial being twenty percent (20%) or more.
   PROPRIETOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club
which, as owner, lessee, or otherwise has under his, or its, control any
establishment, place, or premises in or at which such device is placed or kept
for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No operator or proprietor, or other person shall place, have, operate,
maintain or keep any pool, billiard or similar table or any pin-ball machine or
any bowling alley or any shooting gallery or any coin-operated amusement device
upon any premises within the City of Mt. Vernon without a license first having
been obtained for each table, machine, alley, gallery, and coin-operated
amusement device (hereinafter called “device license”).
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for device license(s) shall be made to the City Clerk
and shall be in writing and under oath signed by the operator or proprietor as
above-described.
   (B)   The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of
the applicant; the address of each premises where a device will be placed; the
name, address, and telephone number of each the proprietor of each premises;
and the name, address, and telephone number of each operator for each table,
machine, gallery, or coin-operated amusement device; and the name, description,
State of Illinois license tag tax number, and serial number of each device
proposed to be licensed.
   (C)   The primary responsibility to submit an application and obtain a
license shall be that of the operator for the licensed devise, but if said
operator shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Section then the
proprietor shall submit the application and obtain the license(s).
   (D)   No license shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to
the City including but not limited to any licensing fees under this Section or
any Article of the Revised Code, any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised
Code, any tax imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer
or garbage services or to any person in default on any loan agreement or
contract with the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.04 TERMS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The license fee for each licensed device placed at or upon any
premises licensed under Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Vernon shall be Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) per annum for each
device; the license fee for each licensed device at any other premises shall be
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per annum for each device.
   (B)   The license fee shall be non-refundable and shall be non-proratable,
and no license shall be transferable to any other device, except as
specifically herein provided. Each licensed device shall have a separate
license (which shall consist of a numbered sticker issued by the City Clerk).
   (C)   If a licensee desires to place additional devices or if a licensee
desires to substitute an unlicensed device for a previously licensed device
then a new application for license shall be filed; a licensing fee for each
additional device shall be assessed but no fee shall be assessed for
substituted devices.
   (D)   In addition, if any licensee moves a licensed device from one premises
to another, the licensee shall, prior to the relocation, advise the City Clerk
in writing of the relocation of the licensed device and shall provide such
other information as may be required by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The device license for each licensed device shall be exhibited in a
conspicuous place on the licensed device and the licensed device shall at all
times be kept and placed in plain view of any person who may frequent or be
upon any premises where such device is kept, placed or used.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.06 INSPECTION.
   Each premises where a licensed device is placed and each licensed device
shall be subject to inspection by agents of the City of Mt. Vernon, including
but not limited to law enforcement officials at all times; consent to said
inspection is a condition of and requirement of the license issued hereunder
and of the placement of a licensed device within a premises, and said consent
shall be deemed to be irrevocable permission for such inspection. Refusal of
any operator, proprietor or any employee or agent of same to allow or permit
inspection shall be deemed grounds for revocation of all licenses for any
devices situated upon the premises subject of the refusal and denial of any
license for any device to be placed upon said premises for a period of twelve
(12) months from the date of the refusal.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.07 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No operator, proprietor, employee or other agent of same or other
person shall allow or permit any gambling upon any premises where any device is
placed, except video gaming terminals licensed and permitted under the Illinois
Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/) and Chapter 114 of this Article.
   (B)   No person, nor any entity in which same has any interest, who has been
convicted (including a no contest or similar plea) of any gambling offense as
prescribed by any criminal code, statute, ordinance, or regulation of the
United States or of any State or of any political subdivision of either shall
be eligible to hold any device license issued hereunder for a period of one (1)
year from date of the conviction for a single offense, three (3) years from
date of conviction for a second offense, and permanently in the event of a
conviction for a third offense.
   (C)   If any gambling offense involving a device resulting in a conviction
of any person (including a no contest or similar plea) shall occur at any
premises, all licenses for any devices placed upon the premises may be revoked
and if said license or licenses are revoked, no license shall be granted to any
person for a period of one (1) year from date of revocation for the placement
of any device upon the premises if said premises shall continue to be owned,
leased or subject to the control of the owner of the premises as of the date of
the gambling offense or subject to the control of any person related thereto;
RELATED means being employed by, owning stock in, being a partner in, having
any interest directly or indirectly in or being related by blood or marriage in
the following relationships: spouse, parent, step-parent, grandparent, step-
grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild, step-grandchild, brother, step-
brother, sister, step-sister, uncle or aunt.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.08 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No owner, proprietor, employee or other agent of same or other person
shall permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct upon any premises where any
device is placed.
   (B)   (1)   No “pool hall” or “business where a principal business activity
is pool or billiard tables” shall allow any minor under 16-years of age to
enter upon the premises, to remain upon the premises, to engage in any game or
to use any such device. Any premises also licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinance shall not permit any person under
18-years of age to enter upon the premises, to remain upon the premises or to
engage in any game or to use any such device, except as expressly and
specifically authorized by said
Chapter 111.
      (2)   Each pool hall or business where a principal business activity is
pool or billiard tables shall have an unobstructed view of the interior of the
room from the front exterior or from the front sidewalk or street adjacent to
the premises where such device is located. No pool hall or business where a
principal business activity is pool or billiard tables shall be open to
business on Sunday except between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. nor
shall same be open to business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on
any day; provided that premises licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be subject to the hours of
operation as provided within said
Chapter 111.
   (C)   No business or premises (excluding a pool hall or business where a
principal business activity is pool or billiard tables) whose primary business
is coin-operated devices shall be open to business on Sunday except between the
hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., nor shall same be open to business between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday
or from 12:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.09 LIABILITY OF OPERATOR OR PROPRIETOR FOR ACTS OF AGENT.
   Every act of or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any provision of this Section by any officer, director, manager, or other agent
or employee of any operator or proprietor as herein defined shall be deemed to
be the act of the operator or proprietor and the operator or proprietor shall
be punishable and shall be ineligible to hold a license in the same manner as
if the act or admission had been done or admitted by the operator or proprietor
personally.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any operator or proprietor or any other person found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this Section shall each be fined not less
than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each device not displaying a proper
license; and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each
day on which such violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violations of this
Section, the City Clerk may revoke any license for any violation of this
Section after affording the licensee due notice and opportunity to be heard in
his own defense.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.10)
CHAPTER 114: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Application
   
114.04   Terms of license
   
114.05   Display of license
   
114.06   Inspection
   
114.07   Gambling prohibited
   
114.08   Additional regulations
   
114.09   Liability of operator or owner for acts of agent
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A Licensed Establishment, Licensed Fraternal Establishment,
Licensed Veteran’s Establishment, Licensed Truck Stop Establishment, or
Licensed Large Truck Stop Establishment as defined within the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, being 230 ILCS 40\.
   LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   A facility located within 3 road miles from a freeway interchange,
as measured in accordance with the Department of Transportation’s rules
regarding the criteria for the installation of business signs:
         (a)   that is at least a 3-acre facility with a convenience store,
         (b)   with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor
vehicles,
         (c)   that sells at retail more than 50,000 gallons of diesel or
biodiesel fuel per month, and
         (d)   with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
      (2)   (a)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES has the same meaning as defined in
§ 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
         (b)   The requirement of item (1)(c) of this paragraph may be met by
showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least 50,000
gallons per month
   LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Means a facility:
         (a)   that is at least a 3-acre facility with a convenience store,
         (b)   with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor
vehicles,
         (c)   that sells at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel or
biodiesel fuel per month, and
         (d)   with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES has the same meaning as defined in § 18b-
101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/18b-101. The requirement of
item (1)(c) of this paragraph may be met by showing that estimated future sales
or past sales average at least 50,000 gallons per month.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS. A video gaming terminal as defined within the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/).
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall place, have, operate, maintain, or keep any video
gaming terminal upon any premises within the City of Mt. Vernon without first
obtaining a license for each video gaming terminal (hereinafter called “Video
Gaming Terminal License”).
   (B)   No video gaming terminal license shall issue except to an
Establishment as defined above.
   (C)   No Establishment, except a Licensed Large Truck Stop Establishment,
shall be issued more than six video gaming terminal licenses; a Licensed Large
Truck Stop Establishment may be issued not more than ten video gaming terminal
licenses.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for Video Gaming Terminal License(s) shall be made to
the City Clerk and shall be in writing and under oath, signed by an authorized
agent of the Establishment where the video gaming terminal(s) is to be placed.
   (B)   The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of
the applicant (Establishment); and shall state the name, description, State of
Illinois License Number, and serial number of each video gaming terminal
proposed to be licensed. The application shall also include a fully completed
and executed Written Use Agreement as described within the Video Gaming Act. In
addition, the application may require any information that may be necessary to
determine compliance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act, being 625 ILCS 5/18b-
101, or with this Section.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to
the City, including, but not limited to any licensing fees under this Section
or any Article under the Revised Code, or any other charge or fee imposed by
the Revised Code, any tax imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for
water, sewer, or garbage services, or to any person in default on any loan
agreement or contract with the City, or in default on any amount owed to the
City.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.04 TERMS OF LICENSE.
   A license fee for each licensed video gaming terminal placed at or upon any
Establishment shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per annum for each video
gaming terminal. The license fee shall be non-refundable and shall be non-pro-
ratable; and no license shall be transferred to any other video gaming
terminal, except as specifically herein provided. Each licensed video gaming
terminal shall have a separate license (which shall consist of the numbered
sticker issued by the City Clerk). If an Establishment desires to place
additional video gaming terminals or if a licensee desires to substitute a
licensed video gaming terminal for a previously licensed video gaming terminal,
then a new application for license shall be filed. A licensing fee for each
additional video gaming terminal shall be assessed, but no fee shall be
assessed for substituting terminals.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.05 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The Video Gaming Terminal License for each licensed video gaming terminal
shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the licensed video gaming terminal
and the licensed video gaming terminal shall at all times be kept and placed in
plain view of any person who may frequent or be upon the premises where such
video gaming terminal is kept, placed, or used.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.06 INSPECTION.
   Each premises where a licensed video gaming terminal is placed and each
licensed video gaming terminal shall be subject to inspection by an agent of
the City, including, but not limited to law enforcement officials at all times;
consent to inspection is a condition of, and requirement of the license issued
hereunder and of the placement of a licensed video gaming terminal within a
premises, and said consent shall be deemed to be irrevocable permission for
such inspection. Refusal of any Establishment or any employee, or agent of any
Establishment to allow or permit inspection shall be grounds for revocation of
all licenses for video gaming terminals situated upon the premises subject of
the refusal and shall be grounds for denial of any license or license renewal
for any video gaming terminal to be placed upon said premises for a period of
twelve (12) months from date of revocation.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.07 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No Establishment nor employee or agent of same nor other person shall
allow or permit any gambling upon any premises where any video gaming terminal
is placed except for a video gaming terminal properly licensed and lawfully
operated in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act, being 230 ILCS 40\,
and with the Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (B)   No person, nor any entity in which such person has any interest, who
has been convicted (including a no contest or similar plea) of any gambling
offense as prescribed by any criminal code, statute, ordinance, or regulation
of the United States or of any State or of any political subdivision of either
shall be eligible to hold any Video Gaming Terminal License issued hereunder
for a period of one (1) year from date of the conviction for a single offense,
three (3) years from date of conviction for a second offense, and permanently
in the event of a conviction for a third offense.
   (C)   (1)   If any gambling offense resulting in a conviction of any person
(including a no contest or similar plea) shall occur at any Establishment, all
licenses for any video gaming terminal devices placed upon the Establishment
may be revoked and if said license or licenses are revoked, no license shall be
granted to any person for a period of one (1) year from date of revocation for
the placement of any video gaming terminal device upon the Establishment if
said Establishment shall continue to be owned, leased or subject to the control
of the same interested party or parties as of the date of the gambling offense
or subject to the ownership, interest, or control of any person related
thereto.
      (2)   RELATED means being employed by, owning stock in, being a partner
in, having any interest directly or indirectly in or being related by blood or
marriage in the following relationships: spouse, parent, step-parent,
grandparent, step-grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild, step-grandchild,
brother, step-brother, sister, step-sister, uncle or aunt.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.08 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No Establishment where a video gaming terminal is situated or placed
shall allow any person under 21-years of age to play or use any video gaming
terminal. No person under the age of 21 shall play or use a video gaming
terminal.
   (B)   Each video gaming terminal must be located in an area restricted to
persons over 21 years of age the entrance to which is within the view of at
least one employee who is over 21 years of age, of the Establishment in which
the terminal is located.
   (C)   No Establishment having any video gaming terminal license shall be
situated within 100 feet of a school (measured from property line to property
line) or of a place of worship (measured from building line of the place of
worship to the property line of the Establishment); provided that this
restriction shall not apply if the school or church locates within the
restricted area after the Establishment has been licensed.
   (D)   No Establishment, except a Licensed Truck Stop Establishment or a
Licensed Large Truck Stop Establishment shall be licensed hereunder unless said
Establishment shall possess a valid liquor license issued by the City of Mt.
Vernon pursuant to Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, and said
liquor license must be in effect at the time of application and at all times
thereafter during which a video gaming terminal is made available to the public
to play at the location.
   (E)   No video gaming terminal licensed under this Section may be played or
used except during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of
alcoholic beverages at the Establishment as set forth within §
111.14 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, except that
this restriction shall not apply to a Licensed Truck Stop Establishment or a
Licensed Large Truck Stop Establishment that does not hold a liquor license. A
licensed Truck Stop Establishment or a Licensed Large Truck Stop Establishment
that does not hold a liquor license may operate a video gaming terminal on a
continuous basis.
   (F)   No Establishment having any video gaming terminal licenses shall be
situated within one-hundred (100) feet of another Establishment having a video
gaming terminal license, measured from property line to property line. Not more
than one Establishment shall be issued license(s) for video gaming terminals
for any structure or for any lot as defined within Chapter 161 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances. The location restrictions within this subparagraph shall
not apply to a premises having a valid license for the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor issued prior to June 18, 2012 so as to prevent issuance of a
license for that premises so long as the liquor license for the premises in
question is renewed each subsequent year and continues in effect during all
periods from such date; nor shall the location restriction within this
subparagraph with regard to each structure or lot apply to an Establishment
being part of a planned shopping center upon real estate having the zoning
classification B-PL, Planned Business District; however the distance
restriction within this subparagraph shall be applicable.
   (G)   No video gaming terminal may be placed in any Establishment nor shall
any Establishment be licensed unless the Establishment has entered into a
Written Use Agreement with the terminal operator of the video gaming terminal
for placement of the terminal within the Establishment; a copy of the Written
Use Agreement shall be filed with the City Clerk at the time an application for
license is filed, and if any amendments or revisions are made to said
Agreement, the amended or revised Agreement shall be filed with the City Clerk
within ten days of said amendment or revision.
   (H)   No Establishment licensed hereunder shall place or have situated upon
its premises, nor shall any person own, operate, or possess any device that
awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable of removing and
recording the removal of credits when the award of credits is dependent upon
chance.
   (I)   No Establishment, nor video gaming terminal shall be placed or
operated except in strict compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (including Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board) and
with the provisions of this Section.
   (J)   No Establishment nor employee or other agent of same nor other person
shall permit any disturbance or disorderly conduct or illegal act upon any
Establishment where any video gaming terminal is placed.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.09 LIABILITY OF OPERATOR OR OWNER FOR ACTS OF AGENT.
   Every act of or admission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any provision of this Section by any officer, director, manager, employee, or
other agent of any Establishment shall be deemed to be the act of the
Establishment (Licensee), and the Establishment and each owner, or person
having interest therein and the operator or manager thereof shall be punishable
and shall be ineligible to hold a license in the same manner as if the act or
admission had been done or admitted by the owner or interest party or operator
or manager or Establishment personally.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any Establishment or other person found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than $750.00 for each video
gaming terminal for which no valid license has been obtained or maintained and/
or $750.00 for each other violation of this Ordinance; and a separate offense
shall be deemed to be committed on each day on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violations of this
Section, the City Clerk may revoke any license for any violation of this
Section after affording the licensee (Establishment) due notice and opportunity
to be heard in its own defense.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.16)
CHAPTER 115: RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   License required
   
115.04   Classification of licenses; fee
   
115.05   Persons ineligible to receive license
   
115.06   Application
   
115.07   Manager; fidelity bond
   
115.08   Issuance of license and display
   
115.09   Operation and conduct
   
115.10   Record keeping of gross receipts; expenses; net proceeds
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Section is to regulate and control the conduct of
raffles and poker runs within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(a))
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools, and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-
supported schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is both to promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of the government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for
by the government.
   KEY LOCATION FOR A POKER RUN. The location where the poker run concludes and
the prize or prizes are awarded. KEY LOCATION FOR A RAFFLE means the location
where the winning chances are determined.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. An agency of the State of Illinois or of a unit of
local government in Illinois that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty
to maintain public order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
   LICENSEE. An organization which has been issued a license to operate a
raffle or poker run under this Section.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross income receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker
runs, less sums expended for prizes, local license fees, permitted third party
service fees, and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of
operating a raffle or poker run.
   NON-PROFIT or NOT-FOR-PROFIT. Organized, operated, and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis, with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   POKER RUN.
      (1)   An event organized by an organization licensed under this Section
in which participants travel to multiple predetermined locations, including a
key location, drawing a playing card or equivalent item at each location, in
order to assemble a facsimile of a poker hand or other numeric score.
      (2)   POKER RUN includes dice runs, marble runs, or other events where
the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item
at each location.
   RAFFLE.
      (1)   A form of lottery, as defined in Article 28 of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, (720 ILCS 5/28) conducted by an organization licensed
under this Section in which:
         (a)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other means one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
         (b)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by
some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the
winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited
sporting contest.
      (2)   Provided, however, that RAFFLE does not include any game excluded
from the definition of RAFFLE within the Illinois Raffles and Poker Run Act
(230 ILCS 15/).
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of a religious worship.
   VALUE OF NON-CASH PRIZES. The retail value of such prizes.
   VETERANS ORGANIZATION. An organization or association comprised of members
of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows,
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to confer a public benefit.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(b))
§ 115.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle or sell chances
for a raffle or conduct a poker run having its key location or any
predetermined poker run location within the City without first having obtained
a license pursuant to this Section.
   (B)   A license to conduct a raffle shall authorize a licensee to sell
raffle chances throughout the State of Illinois, including beyond the corporate
limits of the City. Internet sale and purchase of a raffle chance is permitted,
but online sale of a raffle chance may be made only to a person who places the
purchase order from a location within the State of Illinois. A license to
conduct a poker run shall authorize a poker run to be conducted only at
location(s) within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon which are
designated in the license application; the license granted for the key location
for a poker run shall cover the entire poker run including locations other than
the key location, provided the application and license include the name and
address of each predetermined location.
   (C)   (1)   Licenses for raffles or poker runs shall be issued only to bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans,
or other bona fide not-for-profit organizations which operate without profit to
their members, which have been in existence continuously for a period of five
years immediately before making application for a license and which have during
the entire five-year period been engaged in carrying out their objectives and
which maintain an office in the City, or to a non-profit fund raising
organization that the Mayor determines is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster or to any law enforcement agencies and
statewide associations that represent law enforcement officials.
      (2)   The Mayor may waive the 5-year requirement under this subsection
for a bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational,
veterans, or other bona fide not-for-profit organization that applies for a
license to conduct a raffle or poker run if the organization is a local
organization that is affiliated with and chartered by a national or State
organization that meeting the 5-year requirement.
   (D)   A License shall permit an Applicant to issue or sell raffle chances or
conduct a poker run only for the dates stated in the license application.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(c))
§ 115.04 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEE.
   (A)   General Raffle License. A General Raffle License shall permit the
conduct of one raffle. Multiple drawings may be held to award the prizes but
all drawings must occur on the same day and at the same location. Not more than
four General Raffles Licenses shall issue to an applicant during each calendar
year.
   (B)   Hardship Assistance Raffle License. A Hardship Assistance Raffle
License allows a not-for-profit fund raising organization or group, organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial hardship assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial
hardship as a result of an injury, disability, accident or disaster, to conduct
one raffle for that purpose.
   (C)   Annual Raffle License. An Annual Raffle License shall permit the
conduct of an unlimited number of raffles. Annual Raffle Licenses shall issue
on or after May 1 each year and shall expire on the following April 30.
   (D)   Poker Run License. A Poker Run License shall permit the conduct on one
poker run. Not more than four Poker Run Licenses shall issue to an applicant
during each calendar year. The fee for a license shall be $20.00 payable to the
City Clerk at the time of application. The license fee for an Annual Raffle
License shall not be prorated as to term or fee. Application fees are not
refundable, even in the event that the application is rejected by the City, or
in the event the raffle or poker run is cancelled.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(d)) (Ord. 2024-34, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 115.05 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE LICENSE.
   The following groups or individuals are ineligible to receive a raffle or
poker run license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
   (C)   Any person who in default of any payment to the City or any person who
has been convicted of or assessed a penalty for any violation of §
110.04 or who has had any license issued under the Revised Code of Ordinances
revoked during a five year period prior to application;
   (D)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person described in subsections (A), (B),
(C) or (D) of this Subsection has proprietary, equitable, or credit interest,
or in which such person is active and employed;
   (F)   Any organization in which a person described in subsection (A), (B),
(C) or (D) of this Subsection is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not; and
   (G)   Any organization in which a person described in subsections (A), (B),
(C) or (D) of this Subsection is to participate in the management or operation
of a raffle.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(e))
§ 115.06 APPLICATION.
   Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run shall file an
application with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. The
application shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of individual completing the
application;
   (B)   The name, address, and type of organization applying for the license;
   (C)   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   (D)   The name, address, telephone number, last four digits of social
security number and date of birth of the organization’s presiding officer,
secretary, raffle manager(s) and any other members responsible for the conduct
and operation of the raffle(s) or poker run;
   (E)   The key location or locations at which winning chances in a raffle
will be determined and the key location and each predetermined location for a
poker run;
   (F)   The aggregate value of all prizes to be awarded for each raffle or
poker run;
   (G)   The value of each prize to be awarded for each raffle or poker run;
   (H)   The price or prices charged for each raffle or poker run chance issued
or sold;
   (I)   The maximum number of raffle or poker run chances to be issued for
each raffle or poker run;
   (J)   The dates raffle chances will be issued or sold or the date or dates
the poker run will be conducted;
   (K)   The date(s), time(s), and location at which winning chances for
raffles will be determined and the date, time, and the key location at which
prizes will be awarded for each poker run;
   (L)   For an Annual Raffle License, the number of raffles to be held during
a license period (May 1 – April 30);
   (M)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
applicant or organization, signed by its presiding officer and secretary; and
   (N)   A certificate signed by the presiding offer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(f))
§ 115.07 MANAGER; FIDELITY BOND.
   All management, operation, and conduct of all raffles and poker runs shall
be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the licensee.
The manager shall give a fidelity bond equal in amount to the aggregate value
of all prizes to be awarded for each raffle or poker run, which bond shall be
in favor of the licensee, conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of
his duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the City Clerk not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The
above bond requirement may be waived by the vote of the requisite number of
members of the licensee (i.e. the organization receiving the license) or, if
the licensee does not have members, then by the affirmative vote of the members
of the governing board of the licensee. The occurrence of said unanimous vote
shall be by affidavit of the organization’s presiding officer, filed with the
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(g))
§ 115.08 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   An application for license, along with the Fidelity Bond or Affidavit
of Bond Waiver, shall be submitted to the City Clerk’s office. The City Clerk
shall promptly review the license application for completeness and for
compliance with this chapter, and the Clerk shall submit the application and
the Clerk’s findings to the Mayor. The Mayor shall, within 30 days from the
date of application approve or reject the application. If an application is
approved, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license to applicant.
   (B)   A license shall show the following, with respect to each raffle or
poker run:
      (1)   Name and address of Licensee and the License Classification;
      (2)   The period of time during which raffle chances may be sold or
issued, and the date(s) and location at which winning chances will be
determined; and
      (3)   The date(s) and key location and each predetermined location where
the poker run will be conducted and prizes awarded.
   (C)   The license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location of
the determination of the winning chances for raffles and at the key location
for poker runs.
   (D)   Each General Raffle License, Hardship Raffle License, and Poker Run
License shall be valid for one raffle or poker run. An Annual Raffle License
shall be valid until April 30 following the date of its issuance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(h))
§ 115.09 OPERATION AND CONDUCT.
   The operation and conduct of raffles and poker runs are subject to the
following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the licensee.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of
the licensee may manage or participate in the management of the raffle or poker
run. Licensee may contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of
and under the supervision of the Licensee, provide bona fide services to the
Licensee in connection with the operation of a raffle or poker run and Licensee
may pay reasonable compensation for such services; said services may include
the following:
      (1)   advertising, marketing, and promotion,
      (2)   legal,
      (3)   procurement of goods, prizes, wears, and merchandise for the
purpose of operating the raffle or poker run,
      (4)   rent, if the premises upon which the raffle or poker run will be
held is rented,
      (5)   accounting, auditing and bookkeeping,
      (6)   website hosting,
      (7)   mailing and delivery,
      (8)   banking and payment processing, and
      (9)   other services relating to the operation of the raffle or poker
run.
   (C)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle, provided the rent is not determined as a
percentage of receipts or profits from the raffle or poker run.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued throughout the State of Illinois,
including beyond the corporate limits of the City. Winning chances may be
determined only at the location(s) specified on the application and license.
   (F)   A poker run shall be conducted only at the locations specified within
the application, and prizes may only be awarded at the key location specified
within the application and license.
   (G)   Each raffle chance shall have printed thereon the cost of the chance,
the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle, and the
maximum number of raffle chances to be issued except as provided below:
      (1)   When raffle chances are sold, conveyed, issued, or otherwise
transferred only at the time and location at which winning chances will be
determined and only to the persons then in attendance;
      (2)   When the raffle chance is also a ticket to an event and a portion
of the cost of the ticket is designated for a dinner, golf or other item of
value to be consumed or used by the purchaser at the event.
   (H)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the operation
or conduct of raffles or a poker run, except with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or
guardian, unless same is otherwise prohibited by law.
   (I)   A raffle drawing or poker run must be held on the date, at the time,
and at the location(s) listed on the license. If a raffle drawing or poker run
is unable to be held due to an extreme emergency or a natural disaster, the
licensee must seek written approval of the Mayor before the drawing or poker
run can be held on a different date. If a drawing or poker run is cancelled due
to inadequate sale of chances or tickets or due to some reason other than an
extreme emergency or a natural disaster, the licensee must notify all
purchasers and participants, refund all monies, and return all prizes within 30
days. Such cancellation must be reported in writing to the City Clerk with a
full report showing compliance with this Subsection.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(i))
§ 115.10 RECORD KEEPING OF GROSS RECEIPTS; EXPENSES; NET PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances or poker run
events shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for
each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs or poker runs
shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo
gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization
should have separate records for its raffles and poker runs. The person who
accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of
raffles or poker runs should not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles or poker runs shall
report monthly to its membership, or if the organization has no membership,
then to its governing board, and to the City Clerk its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds from raffles or poker runs, and the distribution of net
proceeds itemized as required by this Subsection.
   (D)   Records required by this Subsection shall be preserved for three
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to the
operation of raffles or poker runs for public inspection and City inspection at
reasonable times and places.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(j))
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Section shall
constitute a violation, and any person, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $500.00 nor more than $5,000.00. Each day the violation
continues, shall be considered a separate offence. In addition, the Mayor is
authorized to revoke the license of any licensee that fails to comply with the
requirements of this Section and is authorized to deny an application for
license of any person who shall have had any license issued under any Article
of the Revised Code of Ordinances revoked or of any person who has been
convicted or assessed a penalty for any violation of this Section within five
years prior to date of application. In addition, any person who shall be in
violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to injunctive
relief.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.17(k))
CHAPTER 116: REGULATIONS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND
MASSAGE SERVICES
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Massage establishment license required
   
116.03   Application and fee
   
116.04   Application information for license for massage establishment
   
116.05   Massage establishment license
   
116.06   Revocation or suspension of massage establishment license
   
116.07   Necessary facilities for massage establishments
   
116.08   Operation requirements for massage establishments
   
116.09   Inspection
   
116.10   Employment
   
116.11   Transfer of license
   
116.12   Display of license or permit
   
116.13   Permit for masseur or masseuse
   
116.14   Application for masseur or masseuse permit
   
116.15   Issuance of permit for masseur or masseuse
   
116.16   Revocation of permit for masseur or masseuse
   
116.17   Exceptions as to license
   
116.18   Advertising
   
116.19   Out call massage and registration
   
116.20   Prohibited massages and massage services
   
116.21   Severability
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. The City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois or his authorized representative.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons other than masseurs or masseuses who render
any service for the licensee and who receives compensation directly from the
licensee but has no physical contact with customers or clients.
   LICENSEE. The operator of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE. Any method or pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of external soft parts of
the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptic oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having its place of business where
any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or
permits to be engaged or carried on, any of the activities mentioned in the
definition of MASSAGE hereof.
   MASSAGE SERVICES. The providing of a massage or massages by any person,
firm, association, or corporation.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation under 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of massage as above defined.
   PERSON. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The sexual or genital area of any person shall
include the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or
the vulva or breasts of a female.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14A)
§ 116.02 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, to conduct or carry on, or
to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, upon any premises in the
City of Mt. Vernon, the operation of a massage establishment as herein defined
without first having obtained a massage establishment license from the City
Clerk, after the approval of the Administrative Official. No masseur or
masseuse require to obtain a permit under this Ordinance shall give a massage
or provide any massage service upon any premises in the City of Mt. Vernon
except at a massage establishment licensed hereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14B)
§ 116.03 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   (A)   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application in duplicate, under oath, with the City
Clerk upon a form provided by the City Clerk, and pay a non-refundable filing
fee of $100.00. The City Clerk shall, within five days thereafter, refer copies
of such application and all additional information to the Inspection Bureau and
the Administrative Official, The Inspection Bureau shall within 30 days inspect
the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment, and make
recommendations to the Administrative Official concerning compliance with the
Codes of the City of Mt. Vernon. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the
Inspection Bureau, the Administrative Official shall notify the applicant as to
whether his application has been granted, denied, or held for further
investigation.
   (B)   The period of such additional investigation shall not exceed an
additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. The
Administrative Official shall advise the applicant in writing as to whether the
application has been granted or denied. If the application is denied or held
for further investigation, the Administrative Official shall advise the
applicant in writing of the reason for such refusal.
   (C)   The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any
information relevant to the investigation of the application, or the refusal or
failure of applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath regarding said application, or the refusal of applicant to submit to
or cooperate with any inspection required by this Section, shall be grounds for
denial of the application.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14C)
§ 116.04 APPLICATION INFORMATION FOR LICENSE FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered and the proposed
place and facilities therefor.
   (B)   In addition thereto, any applicant for a license, and each partner or
limited partner of an applicant, if a partnership applicant, and each officer
and director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder of a corporate
applicant holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporate applicant, shall
furnish the following information.
      (1)   Written proof that each individual is at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   All residential addresses for the past three years.
      (3)   The business, occupation, or employment of each individual for the
three years immediately preceding the date of application.
      (4)   The previous experience of the individual in massage or similar
business.
      (5)   Whether the individual has had any license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended in the City of Mt. Vernon or in the State of Illinois or
any other state or City for a massage establishment, the reason therefor, and
the business activity or occupation of the individual subsequent to such
suspension, revocation, or denial.
      (6)   Any conviction, forfeiture of bond, or plea or nolo contendere upon
any criminal violation or City ordinance violation (except minor traffic
violations), within a five year period.
      (7)   If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of any partnership
is a corporation, then the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly
as shown in the Articles of Incorporation, together with the state of
incorporation, and proof of authority to do business in the State of Illinois.
      (8)   If the applicant is licensed as a massage therapist, a copy of the
current license issued by the State of Illinois, Department of Professional
Regulation.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14D)
§ 116.05 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Inspection Bureau and with
the information contained in the application, together with all additional
information provided therein, the Administrative Official shall direct the
issuance of a license by the City Clerk to the applicant to maintain, operate,
or conduct a massage establishment, unless the Administrative Official shall
find:
      (1)   That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, would not comply with the applicable laws of the State
of Illinois and the City of Mt. Vernon, including but not limited to the
building, health, planning, housing, fire prevention, and zoning codes of the
City of Mt. Vernon; or
      (2)   That the applicant or any other person who shall be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of the massage establishment
has been convicted of:
         (a)   a felony,
         (b)   an offense involving sexual misconduct with children,
         (c)   any provision of Article 11 of Illinois Criminal Code (720 ILCS
5/11-0.1 et seq.); or
      (3)   That the operation of the massage establishment as proposed by the
applicant, if permitted, would violate the provisions of this ordinance.
      (4)   The applicant or any person described within §
116.04 has had a massage establishment license or masseur or masseuse permit
revoked within the immediately preceding 5-years by the City, the State of
Illinois or any other government entity.
   (B)   The license provided herein shall be for an initial term ending April
30 next, following the issuance of the license, unless sooner suspended or
revoked. Such license must be renewed annually, and any renewal shall be for a
term of one year from May 1 to April 30.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14E)
§ 116.06 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Administrative Official after a hearing, for a good cause. The
Administrative Official shall give to the licensee at least ten (10) days
written notice of the charges and an opportunity for a public hearing before
the Administrative Official, at which time the licensee may present evidence
bearing upon the question.
      (2)   Cause for revocation or suspension shall include the violation of
the provisions of this ordinance or of any criminal statute of the State of
Illinois by the applicant, or by any employee of the licensee or any masseuse
or masseur employed by the licensee; provided that the violation of this
ordinance or any criminal law of the State of Illinois shall not be a cause for
revocation or suspension unless the licensee shall have had actual or
constructive knowledge of such violations in the exercise of due diligence.
   (B)   It shall also be cause for revocation or suspension that the applicant
has made a false statement on any application for permit under this ordinance,
or in the event that the licensee shall refuse to permit any authorized police
officer or authorized member of the Inspection Bureau or of the Fire Department
of the City of Mt. Vernon, to inspect the premises or the operations thereof at
reasonable times.
   (C)   Upon a license being revoked, the person to whom the license was
issued shall be prohibited from receiving a license or permit under this
Ordinance for a period of 5-years from date of revocation.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14F)
§ 116.07 NECESSARY FACILITIES FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No massage establishment shall receive a permit or be operated, established,
or maintained, unless the establishment shall comply with each of the following
minimum regulations:
   (A)   All massage tables, bath tubs, shower stalls, bath areas and floors
shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
   (B)   Separate bathing, dressing, locker, toilet, and massage room
facilities shall be provided for female and male patrons, so that female and
male patrons may be served simultaneously in the event that patrons of both
sexes are permitted.
   (C)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
   (D)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
or more employees or patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same
time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. Lavatories or wash basins
shall be provided with both hot and cold running water and shall be installed
in either the toilet room or vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
   (E)   Closed cabinets shall be provided for use in the storage of clean
linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered
containers or cabinets which shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14G)
§ 116.08 OPERATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated under sanitary conditions.
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (C)   All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall wear clean,
non-transparent outer garments covering the sexual and genital areas, and such
outer garments shall be restricted in use to the massage establishment.
   (D)   A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the
premises, with individual lockers for each employee, masseuse and masseur.
   (E)   Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-
closing.
   (F)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
   (G)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with towels,
cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur, or
masseuse.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
place his or her hand upon, or to touch with any part of his or her body, or to
fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any person.
   (I)   No masseur or masseuse, employee or licensee, shall perform, offer, or
agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of the patron’s
genital area.
   (J)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths and steam rooms and
any other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
   (K)   Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (L)   No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin
eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois shall
certify in writing that such person may be safely massaged, describing the
conditions under which such massage may be performed.
   (M)   Each masseur or masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using the proper soap or disinfectant before administering any massage
to any patron.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14H)
§ 116.09 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Inspection Bureau and the Fire Department shall, from time to
time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage
establishment granted a license under the provisions of this ordinance for the
purpose of determining that the provisions of this ordinance are complied,
with. Such inspection shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection
officer access to the premises or to hinder such inspection officer in any
manner.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14I)
§ 116.10 EMPLOYMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, proprietor, manager or other
person in charge of any massage establishment, to employ any person who is not
at least 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14J)
§ 116.11 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license for the operation of a massage establishment shall be
transferable except with the written consent of the Administrative Official;
provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee, the
massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time
to permit an orderly transfer of the license to the personal representative of
the licensee or to a transferee of the license.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14K)
§ 116.12 DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   The massage establishment and each masseur or masseuse shall display a valid
current license or permit in a conspicuous place within the massage
establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the
establishment.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14L)
§ 116.13 PERMIT FOR MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   (A)   Any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined
shall file an application for a permit as a masseur or masseuse, which
application shall be filed with the City Clerk upon the form provided by the
Clerk, and shall pay a non-refundable filing fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for the original application and ten dollars ($10.00) for each renewal
application.
   (B)   Persons who shall be licensed as a physical therapist by the Illinois
Department of Professional Regulation under 225 ILCS 90/1 et seq. and persons
who shall be licensed as a massage therapist by the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulations under 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq. shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance requiring a permit for masseur or masseuse.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14M)
§ 116.14 APPLICATION FOR MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE PERMIT.
   The application for a permit for a masseur or a masseuse shall contain the
following:
   (A)   Name and residence.
   (B)   Social Security Number.
   (C)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
   (D)   Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for 3 years
immediately preceding the date of application.
   (E)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo
contendere to, or suffered a forfeiture of bond on a charge of committing any
violation of the City Ordinances or State Statute (except minor traffic
violations). In the event any answer is in the affirmative, then the applicant
shall state the place and court in which such conviction, plea, or forfeiture
was had, the specific charge, and the sentence imposed as a result thereof.
   (F)   Whether the applicant has within the immediately preceding 5-years had
a permit for a masseur or masseuse or license for a massage establishment
revoked by the City, by the State of Illinois or other governmental entity;
such revocation shall make the applicant ineligible to receive a permit.
   (G)   The applicant shall further undergo a physical examination and present
the written results thereof for contagious and communicable diseases which
shall include a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for gonorrhea, a
test or tests which will demonstrate freedom from tuberculosis, and each test
shall have been made by a licensed physician and all laboratory tests shall be
in laboratories approved by the City of Mt. Vernon. The applicant shall then
present a certificate with the results of each such examination signed by a
physician licensed in the State of Illinois stating that the person examined is
either free from any contagious or communicable disease or is incapable of
communicating any of such diseases to others. Each applicant shall undergo the
physical examination provided herein and present to the City Clerk the
certificate required herein prior to the commencement of employment and at
least once each 12 months thereafter.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14N)
§ 116.15 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT FOR MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   (A)   The Administrative Official shall direct the issuance by the City
Clerk of a permit for a masseur or masseuse within 21 days following the
application and the providing of all information required by this ordinance,
unless the Administrative Official finds that the applicant for a permit has
been convicted of a felony, an offense involving sexual misconduct with
children, or any violation of Article 11 of the Illinois Criminal Code (750
ILCS 5/11-0.1 et seq.), or unless he finds that the applicant has failed to
provide all the information and certificates required by this ordinance or
fails to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Each permit for a masseur or masseuse, pursuant to this ordinance,
shall terminate on April 30 following its issuance, and any renewal shall be
for a one year term commencing May 1 and ending April 30 thereafter.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14O)
§ 116.16 REVOCATION OF PERMIT FOR MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   (A)   (1)   A permit for masseur or masseuse may be revoked or suspended
where it appears that the masseur or masseuse has been convicted of any offense
which would be cause for denial or a permit upon an original application, has
made a false statement on an application for a permit, or has committed an act
in violation of this ordinance.
      (2)   The Administrative Official shall give the permit holder a written
notice specifying the grounds for suspension or revocation. The permit holder
may, within ten (10) days from the date of such revocation or suspension, file
a written request for public hearing, which hearing shall be held within ten
(10) days after the filing of request for same, and at which time the permit
holder may present evidence bearing upon the question.
      (3)   The Administrative Official shall then issue a written order as to
whether the permit shall be revoked or suspended within five (5) days after the
date of hearing.
   (B)   Upon a permit being revoked the person to whom the permit was issued
shall be prohibited from receiving a license or permit under this Ordinance for
a period of 5-years from date of revocation.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14P)
§ 116.17 EXCEPTIONS AS TO LICENSE.
   No massage establishment license nor masseur or masseuse permit shall be
required for hospitals, nursing homes, sanitarium, or persons holding an
unrevoked certificate to practice medicine under the laws of the State of
Illinois, or to persons working under the personal direction of any such
persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this ordinance apply to
barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their profession and holding a
valid unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State of
Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14Q)
§ 116.18 ADVERTISING.
   No massage establishment, no masseur or masseuse, nor any other person,
shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or
distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any services are
available other than those services permitted by this ordinance, or which would
reasonably suggest that employees, masseurs, or masseuses are dressed in any
manner other than that permitted by this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14R)
§ 116.19 OUT CALL MASSAGE AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Any person who provides any massage or masseuse services at any hotel
or motel must first register his or her name and his or her State license
number with the owner, manager, or person in charge of such hotel or motel.
   (B)   No out call massage service may be operated other than by a massage
therapist licensed by the State of Illinois, Department of Professional
Regulation, and each out call massage or massage service is subject to the
provisions this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14S)
§ 116.20 PROHIBITED MASSAGES AND MASSAGE SERVICES.
   No person (including but without limitation any person licensed hereunder or
any massage therapist) shall:
   (A)   provide a massage or massage services unless all masseurs and
masseuses and all employees shall wear a clean non-transparent outer garment
covering their sexual and genital areas.
   (B)   provide a massage or massage services unless the sexual or genital
areas of patrons are covered with towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the
presence of an employee, masseur or masseuse.
   (C)   provide a massage or massage services in such a manner or in such a
way as to place his or her hand upon, or to touch with any part of his or her
body, or to fondle in any manner, or to massage, the sexual or genital area of
any person.
   (D)   perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which shall require the
touching of a patron’s genital area.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14T)
§ 116.21 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, or part of this
ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by any final
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14V)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Each person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 10 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, and a separate offense
shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day that a violation shall
continue. In addition, each person who shall violate the provision of this
Ordinance shall be subject to suit for an injunction.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.14U)
CHAPTER 117: REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
117.01   Purpose and intent
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Classification of businesses regulated
   
117.04   Location of sexually oriented businesses
   
117.05   Non-conforming use for sexually oriented business
   
117.06   License required
   
117.07   Application for sexually oriented business license
   
117.08   Application for a sexually oriented business employee license
   
117.09   Additional application requirements
   
117.10   Issuance of a sexually oriented business license
   
117.11   Issuance of a sexually oriented business employee license
   
117.12   Fees
   
117.13   Inspection
   
117.14   Expiration of license
   
117.15   Suspension
   
117.16   Revocation
   
117.17   Licensing procedure and licensing decisions
   
117.18   Transfer of license
   
117.19   Alcoholic beverages
   
117.20   Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
   
117.21   Signage
   
117.22   Off-street parking; lighting
   
117.23   Additional regulations for adult motels
   
117.24   Additional regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos in viewing rooms
   
117.25   Additional regulations for adult theaters
   
117.26   Additional regulations concerning all sexually oriented businesses
   
117.27   Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business
   
117.28   Hour of operation
   
117.29   Notices
   
117.30   Calculation of time
   
117.31   Nuisance declared
   
117.32   Severability
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this
Chapter 117 to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City, thereby reducing
or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented
businesses. The provisions of this
Chapter 117 have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
Chapter 117 to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither
is it the intent nor effect of the Section to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene materials.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.1)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases defined herein shall have the meanings hereinafter
ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the
context.
   ADULT CABARET. Any commercial establishment, except an adult theater, semi-
nude model studio, or sexual encounter center, including but not limited to a
nightclub, bar, restaurant, or gentlemen’s club, which regularly features any
one or more of the following:
      (1)   persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity;
      (2)   live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon
exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which offers
private accommodations to the public, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which
advertises the availability of such sexually oriented type of material by means
of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television, and which:
      (1)   offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
hours; or
      (2)   allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a
time period of less than ten hours.
   ADULT STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
         (a)   books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the depicting
or describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
or
         (b)   instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
         (c)   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon matters exhibiting or describing “specified sexual activity” or
“specified anatomical areas” and which are shown within a viewing room as
hereinafter defined on still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or
similar machines or computers or other image producing machines.
      (2)   A principal business purpose exists if the establishment has a
significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or
substantial section of its sales or display or floor space to the sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the items described
above.
      (3)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and still be categorized as an adult store. Such other business purposes
will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized
as an adult store so long as one of its principal business purposes are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which has a room(s) for viewing or viewing areas, each of which
are 150 square feet or greater in size and which for any form of consideration
regularly features any one of the following:
      (1)   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration;
      (2)   persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity or live
performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
“specific sexual activities” or “specific anatomical areas”.
   BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICIAL. Building Official (also known as the Chief
Building Inspector) established under Chapter 150 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
   DANCER or PERFORMER. An employee who dances or otherwise performs in an
adult cabaret or adult theater.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the exhibition or description of Specified Sexual Activities or “specified
Anatomical area,” the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description “specified anatomical
areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYMENT. Describes and pertains to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a business, on a full time, part time,
or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. A person who performs a service
shall be considered an EMPLOYEE, regardless of whether said person receives a
fee, tips, or other form of consideration or no payment or consideration of any
kind. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of a sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
Section;
      (3)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
      (4)   A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually
oriented business is located.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon or his designee;
if the City Manager is unavailable, and in absence of any other designation by
the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager shall be the hearing officer.
   KNOWLEDGE or WITH KNOWLEDGE. A person knows or acts knowingly or with
knowledge of the nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct, which
constitutes the violation, when he is consciously aware that his conduct is of
such nature or that such circumstances exist. KNOWLEDGE of a material fact
includes awareness of the substantial probability that such fact exists. A
person also knows or acts knowingly or with knowledge of the result of his
conduct, which constitutes the violation, when he is consciously aware that
such result is practically certain to be caused by his conduct.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license has been issued.
   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or anal cleavage with less than a fully
opaque and non-transparent covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque and non-transparent covering of any part of the nipple and
areola, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
   OPERATE or CAUSE TO OPERATE or OPERATOR. To cause to function or to put or
keep in a state of doing business. OPERATOR means any person on the premises of
a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational
control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
or has an ownership interest in the business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PREMISES. The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and the structure and buildings thereon,
including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds,
private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto,
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in
the application for a business license pursuant to §
117.07 of this Ordinance.
   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths or similar public land open to the
public within the City of Mt. Vernon which is under the control, operation, or
management of the City or other governmental, charitable, or not-for-profit
authority.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any location frequented by the public or where the public is
present or likely to be present or any location where a person may reasonably
be expected to be observed by members of the public or any location that is
readily visible to the public or any location where the public has a right to
go or is invited.
   REGULARLY FEATURES. A consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that
the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the
films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the
establishment.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, regular place
of worship or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. The R-1, Low Density Residential; R-2, Medium
Density Residential; R-M2, Medium Density and Mobile Home; R-3, High Density
Residential; and R-MH, Planned Mobile Home Districts described within Chapter
161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. RESIDENTIAL USE means any dwelling or
structure used or occupied for living quarters of any person or property upon
which there is situated a residential structure, dwelling unit or other living
quarters.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergarten,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds,
but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.
   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY.
      (1)   A state of dress in which non-transparent and opaque clothing
covers from view no more than the human buttocks, anus, anal cleft and
cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, vulva and the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point and the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (2)   This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breasts, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other
wearing apparel, provided the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in
part.
   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO.
      (1)   Any place where a person who regularly appears in a state of semi-
nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be viewed or
observed or sketched or drawn or painted or sculptured or photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons.
      (2)   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a modeling class operated:
         (a)   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation; or
         (b)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
         (c)   In a structure:
            1.   which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person available for viewing;
and
            2.   where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
            3.   where no more than one model is on the premises at any one
time.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.
      (1)   A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
         (a)   physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
         (b)   activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of semi-nudity.
      (2)   The requirement of a raised stage within §
117.26(C) is not applicable to sexual encounter centers, but each and every
other provisions of §
117.26 shall apply. A principal business purpose exists if the services offered
are intended to generate business income.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult theater, sexual encounter center, escort agency, or semi-nude model
studio.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and
opaquely covered;
      (2)   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
      (2)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means and
includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
   VIEWING ROOM. A room, booth, or area having less than 150 square feet of
floor space where a patron of a sexually oriented business is positioned or
would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other
video reproduction.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.2)
§ 117.03 CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED.
   Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult store.
   (B)   Adult cabaret.
   (C)   Adult motel.
   (D)   Adult theater.
   (E)   Escort agency.
   (F)   Semi-nude model studio.
   (G)   Sexual encounter center.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.3)
§ 117.04 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted
only in the Light Industrial District (I-1) as described within
Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   The sexually oriented business shall not be operated within 400 feet
of:
      (1)   a religious institution;
      (2)   a school;
      (3)   a public park;
      (4)   the boundary of any residential district;
      (5)   any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized for
residential use, whether zoned residential or not;
   (C)   A sexually oriented business shall not be operated in the same
building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business classified pursuant to §
117.03 herein or containing any business or premises licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or containing any business or
premises licensed under
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. In addition, a sexually oriented
business shall not be operated within 800 feet of another sexually oriented
business classified pursuant to §
117.03 herein or within 800 feet of any business or premises licensed under
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or within 800 feet of any
business or premises licensed under §
110.02 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The sexually oriented business shall
be situated within a single structure upon the premises or, if situated within
more than one building each of said buildings shall be connected one to the
other by an enclosed walkway, hall, or other similar manner (which shall be
deemed to be part of the interior of the licensed premises) so that no patron
or employee nor any other person is required to exit a building to the exterior
of the sexually oriented business to enter another building.
   (D)   For the purposes of this subsection measurements shall be made in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where
a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the
premises of a business or use described within subparagraph (B).
   (E)   For purposes of this subsection the distance between any two
businesses described within subparagraph (C) above shall be measured in a
straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
   (F)   The distance requirements and provisions of this subsection shall not
be subject to variance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.4)
§ 117.05 NON-CONFORMING USE FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully established, lawfully located
and lawfully operating on the date of passage of this
Chapter 117 that is in violation of §
117.04 is a non-conforming use. A non-conforming use will be permitted to
continue at its existing location for a period of one year, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty
days or more; however, such non-conforming sexually oriented business shall
during said one year period be required to comply with each provision of this
Chapter 117 except the location restriction and except any provision requiring
structural remodeling or alteration of the premises. Such non-conforming use
shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may
be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are
within 800 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business which was first established and continually
operating at the particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business is non-conforming.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully established, lawfully located
and lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented
business license, of a business or use described within §
117.04(B) within 400 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an
application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been
revoked. No business described within §
117.04(C) is permitted to locate within the distance restriction for sexually
oriented businesses described within §
117.04(C).
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, any establishment or any person
subject to the provisions of this
Chapter 117 shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this
Chapter 117 immediately upon its effective date, including without limitation
§§
117.13,
117.19,
117.23,
117.24,
117.25,
117.26,
117.27, and
117.28. Any establishment existing prior to the effective date of this
Chapter 117 shall apply for the license provided for by §
117.07 within thirty days of the effective date of
Chapter 117. Any person employed by an establishment prior to the effective
date of
Chapter 117 shall apply for the license provided for by §
117.08 within thirty days of the effective date of
Chapter 117. Any establishment existing prior to the effective date of
Chapter 117 with regard to a provision requiring alteration to its structure or
to its premises in order to comply with
Chapter 117 shall fully comply with said provision within one hundred eighty
days of the effective date of
Chapter 117 unless said establishment is a non-conforming use which will
terminate under this §
117.05.
   (D)   A sexually oriented business not lawfully established, not lawfully
located or not lawfully operating by reason of any ordinance, statute, or code
in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this
Chapter 117 shall immediately cease operation and shall cease conduct of
business as this
Chapter 117 shall not be construed so as to allow any illegal use or use
established in violation of law, including without limitation 65 ILCS 5/11-5-
1.5, or 55 ILCS 5/5-1097.5 or
Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, to continue as a non-conforming
use.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.5)
§ 117.06 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the City.
   (B)   No person who operates a sexually oriented business shall employ a
person to work and/or perform services on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented
business employee license issued to such employee by the City.
   (C)   No person shall obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if
such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee
license issued to such person by the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.6)
§ 117.07 APPLICATION FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business license, whether
original or renewal, must be made by each operator or operators of the sexually
oriented business on a form provided by the City. The application must be
submitted to the City Clerk and shall be marked by the City Clerk with the date
and time of receipt. The application shall be subject to approval or denial by
the Building and Zoning Official of the City. The application form shall
request and the applicant shall be required to provide information described
within subparagraph (B) herein. The application form, upon filing with the City
Clerk must be accompanied by the application fee and by each of the following
described diagrams or drawings:
      (1)   a drawing showing the internal and external configuration of the
premises, including all doors, entrances, exits, and the fixed structural
internal features of the premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions,
stages, performance areas, hallways, restrooms, dressing rooms, and other rooms
and showing each designated area where a patron(s) is not permitted access; and
also a diagram or drawing which includes the information needed to determine
off-street parking and lighting requirements set out within §
117.22. The drawings or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
      (2)   a current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within
thirty days prior to the application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented
businesses within 800 feet of the premises to be certified and any premises
licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code within 800 feet of the premises to be certified
and any premises licensed under
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code within 800 feet of the premises to be
certified; and the property lines of any established business or use described
within §
117.04(B) within 400 feet of the premises to be certified. For purposes of this
subparagraph (A)(2), a use shall be considered existing or established if it is
in existence at the time an application is filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application for a sexually oriented business license and the
applicant shall be required to provide the following information:
      (1)   The name and current mailing address of the applicant(s);
      (2)   Written proof of age in the form of a birth certificate or picture
identification issued by a governmental agency of person signing application;
      (3)   The single classification of license as found in §
117.03 for which the applicant is filing;
      (4)   The street address and legal description of the tract of land on
which the establishment is to be located;
      (5)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square
feet of floor space, films, videocassettes or other video reproductions which
depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas then the
applicant (adult store) shall comply with the additional application
requirements set forth in §
117.24.
      (6)   An affirmative statement that the applicant(s) within the preceding
12-months has not had any license issued under §
117.15 revoked.
   (C)   In the event that the sexually oriented business premises has not been
constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed sexually oriented
business at the time the application is filed with the City Clerk, the Building
Official shall base his approval or denial of the license upon the diagrams or
drawings submitted pursuant to Subsection (A) and (B). Subject to §
117.05, any sexually oriented business license issued prior to completion of
the construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the sexually
oriented business shall be subject to the condition that the sexually oriented
business shall not open for business until the licensed premises is in strict
compliance with the diagrams submitted with the application. Prior to the
sexually oriented business opening for business the licensee shall make a
request in writing to the City Clerk for an inspection and determination that
the premises is in compliance with the diagrams. An inspection and
determination by the Building Official and written notice of the determination
to licensee shall be completed within ten business days of the filing of the
written request with the City Clerk. Upon filing of the written request by
licensee with the City Clerk, the sexually oriented business may immediately
open for business but the license shall be subject to revocation if the
premises is not in strict compliance with the diagrams submitted by licensee
with his application.
   (D)   (1)   The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an
application with information received subsequent to the date that the
application is filed with the City.
      (2)   None of the items set forth within subparagraph (A) and (B) herein,
except the name and current address of the applicant(s) shall be required for a
renewal application if the applicant states in writing under oath that the
documents and information previously furnished to the City with the original
application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
   (E)   The approval or use of the diagrams or drawings required pursuant to
this §
117.07 shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to
constitute, any other City approval otherwise required pursuant to other
applicable City ordinances and/or State law.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.7)
§ 117.08 APPLICATION FOR A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   Applications for a sexually oriented business employee license to work
and/or perform services as an employee in a sexually oriented business, whether
original or renewal, must be personally submitted to the City Clerk by the
person to whom the employee license shall issue; the City Clerk shall mark each
application with the date and time of receipt. Each application for an employee
license shall be accompanied by the application fee. Application forms shall be
supplied by the City.
   (B)   Each applicant for an employee license shall be required to give the
following information on the application form:
      (1)   The applicant’s name.
      (2)   Written proof of age in the form of a birth certificate or picture
identification issued by a governmental agency.
      (3)   Current mailing address.
      (4)   An affirmative statement that the applicant within the preceding 12
months has not had any license issued under this
Chapter 117 revoked.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.8)
§ 117.09 ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every application for a license under this
Chapter 117 shall contain a statement under oath that the applicant has
personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the
information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct.
   (B)   The person to whom an employee license shall issue shall sign the
application for the license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a
sexually oriented business is an individual he shall sign the application as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate is other than an individual, the
person signing the application shall verify that he has the legal authority to
legally bind the applicant.
   (C)   Personal information provided upon an application shall be
confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public except to the extent
required by Illinois or Federal law.
   (D)   An applicant at the time of filing of an application may make written
demand that notice of decision on the application for a new license be given by
personal delivery, although in such case the applicant must provide the City
Clerk with the method (of the applicant’s choice) by which the City Clerk can
promptly contact the applicant and the applicant must present himself at the
Office of the City Clerk for personal delivery; if the applicant does not make
demand for personal delivery then the applicant is not required to provide a
method of contact nor required to present himself at the Office of the City
Clerk and the City Clerk may serve the decision on the applicant by personal
delivery or by certified mail.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.9)
§ 117.10 ISSUANCE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   If application is made for a sexually oriented business license the
Building and Zoning Official shall either approve or deny the issuance and the
City Clerk shall issue the license or issue a written denial to an applicant
within 20-days of the filing of application with the City Clerk. The Building
and Zoning Official shall approve a license and the City Clerk shall issue a
license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide the information requested on
the application form or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
      (3)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or an
employee license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois revoked within the
12-months preceding the date of the application;
      (4)   Subject to subsection (C) below, the premises to be used for the
sexually oriented business has been determined by the Building Department, Fire
Department or Zoning Department of the City as not being in compliance with
applicable Building, Zoning or Fire Codes;
      (5)   The license fee required has not been paid;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business does not
meet the location restrictions of §
117.04 or the premises is physically or structurally not in compliance with one
or more provisions of this
chapter 117.
      (7)   The applicant has refused or failed to permit inspection of the
premises.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its
face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, the street address of the sexually oriented business and the §
117.03 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
   (C)   Failure of an appropriate City Department or employee to timely
complete a review or inspection, failure of the Building Official to approve or
deny a license, or failure of the City Clerk to issue or deny a license shall
not be grounds for refusing to issue a license within 20-days (or within the
extended time period requested by the applicant) from the date the application
is filed with the City Clerk. In the event the City Clerk fails to issue or
deny a license within the time specified, the license will be deemed to have
been issued. However, the licensee and the licensed premises must still comply
with all provisions of this
Chapter 117 the same as if a license had been issued by the City Clerk, as the
failure of the City to render a decision on an application does not excuse
compliance by the licensee with any provision of this
Chapter 117, except the license requirement. The licensee is also subject to
all provisions of this
Chapter 117 relating to renewal of license, suspension of a license or
revocation of a license.
   (D)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification as set forth in §
117.03 and for only one designated premises.
   (E)   In the event that the Building Official determines that an applicant
is not eligible for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall
be given notice in writing by the City Clerk of the reasons for the denial
within 20-days of the filing of the completed application with the City Clerk,
provided that the applicant may request in writing at any time before the
notice is issued that such period be extended for an additional definite time
period in order to comply with the requirements of this
Chapter 117.
   (F)   A sexually oriented business license shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant. The decision whether to
renew a license shall be made within 20-days of the filing of the application
with the City Clerk (unless extended by request of the applicant). The request
for renewal shall be subject to the fee as set forth within §
117.12.
   (G)   Denial of a new or original license, denial of renewal of a license,
suspension of a license, or revocation of a license shall be subject to the
licensing and appeal procedures as provided within §
117.17.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.10)
§ 117.11 ISSUANCE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the City Clerk shall within one business hour issue an
employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to answer or has falsely answered a
question or has failed to provide information requested on the application
form; or
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years; or
      (3)   the applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or
employee license issued by the City of Mt. Vernon Illinois revoked within the
twelve months preceding the date of the application.
   (B)   Denial of a license shall be in writing and shall state the reason for
denial. In the event the City Clerk fails to render a written decision on an
application within one business hour, the license will be deemed to have been
issued. Failure of the City Clerk to render a decision on an application does
not excuse compliance by the licensee with any provision of this
Chapter 117, except the license requirement; the licensee is also subject of
all provisions of this
Chapter 117 relating to renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or
revocation of a license.
   (C)   A sexually oriented business employee license, if granted, shall state
on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted and the expiration
date. While engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually
oriented business premises an employee shall at all times possess the license
in such manner so that it is available for immediate inspection upon lawful
request. This subparagraph does not require the employee to have the license on
his or her person at all times.
   (D)   A sexually oriented business employee license shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant. The decision
whether to renew a license shall be made within one business hour of the
application being filed with the City Clerk. The renewal of the license shall
be subject to the fee as set forth in §
117.12.
   (E)   Denial of a new or original license, denial of renewal of a license,
suspension of a license or revocation of a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be subject to the licensing and appeal procedures as provided
within §
117.17.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.11)
§ 117.12 FEES.
   (A)   Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether
for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a $120.00 non-refundable application, inspection and license fee.
   (B)   Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual $12.00 non-refundable application and license fee.
   (C)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the City
Clerk.
   (D)   The license fee described above shall be prorated from the date of
application based on the number of months (or part thereof) remaining in the
licensing period prior to expiration on April 30.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.12)
§ 117.13 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each applicant, licensee, or operator of a sexually oriented business
shall permit representatives of the City, including but not limited to
Building, Inspection, Zoning, Police and Fire personnel, and representatives of
State agencies and entities to inspect the premises of and the activities upon
a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the
law, at any time it is occupied or open for business or any period that any
employee or the licensee is on or within the premises. If an application for
new license is pending and if the sexually oriented business is not open for
business inspection shall occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   (B)   Inspection of the premises under the authority of this subsection
shall be limited to visual assessment of the premises and of the activities
conducted in areas to which a patron is permitted access or a patron is allowed
access or is present or areas which are visible to a patron or to requests for
inspection of any license as required under this
Chapter 117 and to requests related to the identification of individuals who
reasonably appear to be in violation of any provision of this
Chapter 117. If an application for a new license is pending the inspection
shall be for the purpose of determining whether the premises meet the
applicable licensing requirements of §
117.10(A)(4) and (A)(6).
   (C)   No person who operates a sexually oriented business nor any agent or
employee of same nor any patron shall refuse to permit such lawful inspection
as set forth within paragraph (A) above, nor provide false information during
the course of an inspection.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall require any person entitled to make an inspection
under paragraph (A) above to request the permission of a licensee or of an
employee prior to an inspection of any area to which a patron is permitted or
allowed access or is present or which is visible to a patron when a sexually
oriented business is occupied or open for business as provided within paragraph
(A) above. In addition, nothing herein shall prohibit inspection of the
premises at other times or in another manner if otherwise permitted by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.13)
§ 117.14 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   A sexually oriented business license shall be an annual license
and shall expire on April 30 of each year and may be renewed only by making
application as provided in §
117.07. Application for renewal shall be made at least twenty days before the
expiration date.
      (2)   No application for renewal shall be made sooner than forty-five
days before expiration.
   (B)   (1)   Each sexually oriented business employee license shall be an
annual license and shall expire on April 30 of each year and may be renewed
only by making application as provided in §
117.08. Application for renewal shall be made prior to the expiration of the
license.
      (2)   No application for renewal shall be made sooner than thirty days
before expiration of the license.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.14)
§ 117.15 SUSPENSION.
   The City shall suspend a sexually oriented business license or employee
license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the licensee has knowingly:
   (A)   violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
Chapter 117;
   (B)   refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by §
117.13 or given false information during an inspection.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.15)
§ 117.16 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City shall revoke or shall deny renewal of a sexually oriented
business license or employee license if it determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that any one of the following has occurred:
      (1)   a licensee gave false or misleading information in the responses,
drawings, or the material submitted during the application process;
      (2)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted any act which
violates §
117.26(A), (B), (C), (D), (E),(F), (I), or (J);
      (3)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted the
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (4)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted the sale,
use, possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises;
      (5)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted prostitution
on the premises;
      (6)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted gambling on
the premises;
      (7)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on
the licensed premises;
      (8)   a licensee has with knowledge permitted a person under eighteen
(18) years of age to enter the establishment or to remain on the premises;
      (9)   a licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold,
assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business
to a non-licensee of the business;
      (10)   a licensee has with knowledge permitted another person to possess
and use or represent the licensee’s license as his own;
      (11)   a licensee has engaged in or with knowledge permitted a person or
persons to engage in “specified sexual activities” on the premises of the
sexually oriented business; provided that this subsection (A)(11) shall not
apply to the erotic movements or the erotic touching of one’s own genitals,
pubic area, buttocks, anus, or breasts, whether covered or uncovered, by a
dancer or performer during the course of a live performance.
      (12)   a licensee has with knowledge operated the sexually oriented
business or has been employed by a sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee’s license was suspended.
      (13)   a cause of suspension in §
117.15 occurs and the license has previously been suspended for any reason
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
      (14)   a licensee failed to construct or establish the premises of the
sexually oriented business in accordance with the requirements of §
117.07(C).
      (15)   a licensee reconstructs or alters a licensed premises after the
issuance of a license for the premises, such that the premises does not meet
the location restrictions of §
117.04 or such that the premises is physically or structurally not in
compliance with one or more provisions of this
Chapter 117.
      (16)   with regard to a “license deemed to have issued”, failure to meet
any requirement within §§
117.10 or
117.11, as applicable.
   (B)   When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one
year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license
or a sexually oriented business employee license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective. No period of any stay pending or during an appeal
shall be included within the one year revocation period.
   (C)   Revocation of a license deemed to have issued for a reason limited to
and related to the ineligibility of the applicant or of the premises for a
license as set forth within §§
117.10 or
117.11 shall not constitute a revocation for purposes of the disqualification
of a license applicant on grounds that the applicant has had a license revoked
within the 12-months preceding the date of an application for license. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent a licensee from suffering a detriment
arising from the inaction or inability of the City in making or obtaining a
prompt determination regarding issuance of a new license.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.16)
§ 117.17 LICENSING PROCEDURE AND LICENSING DECISIONS.
   (A)   Subject to §
117.09(D), if the City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon or his designee
determines that facts exist for denial of a new license or denial of a renewal
or suspension of a license or revocation of a license under this
Chapter 117, the City Clerk or his designee shall notify the applicant or
licensee (respondent) in writing of the denial or of the intent to suspend or
revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery or by
U.S. certified mail. The notification shall include a statement of the
respondent’s rights of appeal under this subsection. The notification shall be
personally served or mailed by certified mail to the mailing address on file
with the City Clerk for the respondent. Within ten business days of receipt of
such notice, the respondent may provide to the City Clerk or his designee a
written response that shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent
believes the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked. If no response
is received by the City Clerk then a final notice of denial, suspension, or
revocation shall be served upon respondent by personal service or certified
mail. If a response is received, within five business days of the receipt of
the response, the City Clerk or Hearing Officer shall notify respondent in
writing of a hearing date on the respondent’s denial, suspension or revocation
proceeding. Within ten business days of the receipt of respondent’s written
response the Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing at which hearing the
respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent’s arguments
and to be represented by counsel, to present evidence and witnesses on his own
behalf and to cross-examine witnesses; witnesses shall be sworn and the
proceeding recorded. The City Clerk shall also be represented by counsel and
shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the grounds
for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The Hearing Officer shall
issue and serve upon respondent by personal service or by U.S. certified mail a
written opinion within five business days after conclusion of the hearing. If
applicable, respondent shall receive a final notice of denial or suspension or
revocation which shall be included in the Hearing Officer’s Order; said final
notice shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal
under this subsection. If the Hearing Officer finds that no grounds exist for
denial of the license then the City Clerk or his designee shall issue the
license to the applicant, or if the City Clerk fails to issue said license
within two business days, the Hearing Officer shall issue the license. BUSINESS
DAY means any day that City Hall is open to the public for the transaction of
business.
   (B)   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final,
the applicant or licensee whose application for a license has been denied or
whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to seek
judicial review and to appeal or challenge such action to any court of
competent jurisdiction and proper venue. If a court action challenging the
Hearing Officer’s decision is initiated, the City shall timely and without
delay prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing.
   (C)   (1)   An applicant for a new sexually oriented business license, as
opposed to a renewal, may but is not required to participate in the appeal
(hearing) process set forth within paragraph (A) above. An applicant whose
application for a new license has been denied by the City Clerk and who
disagrees with the decision may at the applicant’s sole election:
         (a)   participate in the appeal process as set forth within paragraph
(C)(1) above or
         (b)   give written notice to the City Clerk after notice of denial of
the license, of the applicant’s “Intent to Open” the sexually oriented business
without a license on the tenth calendar day after the date of the Written
Notice of Intent to Open is filed in the Office of the City Clerk; upon filing,
said Notice shall be marked by the City Clerk with the date and time of filing.
      (2)   (a)   If the applicant elects to give Written Notice of Intent to
Open as provided above, then the City of Mt. Vernon must within the 10-day
period designated within the Notice of Intent to Open petition the Illinois
Second Judicial Circuit Court or any Court of competent jurisdiction and proper
venue and obtain injunctive relief or other appropriate relief. The Court in
which the petition for injunctive relief or other judicial relief is filed
shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements for issuance of a
sexually oriented business license under §
117.10 and determine the validity of any provision thereof that the applicant
does not meet and shall in accordance with Article XI, Part I of the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure, being 735 ILCS 5/11-101, or other applicable statute
grant such relief as the Court deems necessary and appropriate. If the City
fails to petition for injunctive relief or if the Court fails to issue the
injunctive relief or grant such other relief as requested denying the license
or enjoining the sexually oriented business from opening prior to expiration of
the 10-day period described within the Notice of Intent to Open, the license
shall be deemed to be issued, although the licensee and the licensed premises
must still comply with all provisions of this
Chapter 117 the same as if the license had been issued by the City Clerk, as a
failure or inability of the City to obtain injunctive relief or other judicial
relief does not excuse compliance by the licensee with any provision of this
Chapter 117, except the license requirement or such requirement as determined
by a Court not to be applicable or enforceable. The license and licensee shall,
except as provided within §
117.16(C) also be subject to all provisions of this
Chapter 117 relating to renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or
revocation of a license. If the City does not petition for injunctive relief or
other judicial relief within the 10-day period described within the Notice of
Intent to Open and if the license is deemed to be issued, the City may
nonetheless petition the Court for injunctive relief or other judicial relief
or initiate proceedings under this §
117.17 to suspend or revoke the license; provided, however, that a “license
deemed to be issued” shall be entitled to the same stay of proceedings to
preserve the status quo as provided for a license actually issued by the City
Clerk. In addition, if an applicant elects to seek an appeal to the City
Hearing Officer of a decision of the City Clerk denying a license, the
applicant shall still retain and be entitled to exercise its rights under this
subparagraph and give the “Written Notice of Intent to Open” after the Hearing
Officer issues a final notice of denial.
         (b)   1.   An applicant for a new sexually oriented business employee
license, as opposed to a renewal, may but is not required to participate in the
appeal (hearing) process set forth within paragraph (C)(1) above. An applicant
whose application for a new employee license has been denied by the City Clerk
and who disagrees with the decision may at the applicant’s sole election:
               a.   participate in the appeal process as set forth within
paragraph (C)(1) above or
               b.   give written notice to the City Clerk after notice of
denial of the license, of the applicant’s “Intent to Be Employed” by the
sexually oriented business without a license upon expiration of twenty-four
hours from the date and time the Written Notice of Intent to Be Employed is
filed in the Office of the City Clerk; upon filing, said Notice shall be marked
by the City Clerk with the date and time of filing.
            2.   If the applicant elects to give Written Notice of Intent to Be
Employed as provided above, then the City of Mt. Vernon must within the 24 hour
period designated within the Notice of Intent to Be Employed petition the
Illinois Second Judicial Circuit Court or any court of competent jurisdiction
and proper venue and obtain injunctive relief or other appropriate relief. The
Court in which the petition for injunctive relief or other judicial relief is
filed shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements for issuance
of a sexually oriented business employee license under §
117.11 and determine the validity of any provision thereof that the applicant
does not meet and shall in accordance with Article XI, Part I of the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure or other applicable statute grant such relief as the
court deems necessary and appropriate. If the City fails to petition for
injunctive relief or if the Court fails to issue the injunctive relief or grant
such other relief as requested denying the license or enjoining the applicant
from being employed prior to expiration of the 24-hour period described within
the Notice of Intent to Be Employed, the license shall be deemed to be issued,
although the licensee must still comply with all provisions of this
Chapter 117 the same as if the license had been issued by the City Clerk, as a
failure or inability of the City to obtain injunctive relief or other judicial
relief does not excuse compliance by the licensee with any provision of this
Chapter 117, except the license requirement. The license and licensee shall,
except as provided within §
117.16(C), also be subject to all provisions of this
Chapter 117 relating to renewal of a license, suspension of a license, or
revocation of a license. If the City does not petition the Court for injunctive
relief or other judicial relief within the period described within the Notice
of Intent to Be Employed and if the license is deemed to be issued, the City
may nonetheless petition for injunctive relief or other judicial relief or
initiate proceedings under §
117.17 to suspend or revoke the license; provided, however, that a “license
deemed to be issued” shall be entitled to the same stay of proceedings to
preserve the status quo as provided for a license actually issued by the City
Clerk. In addition, if an applicant elects to seek an appeal to the City
Hearing Officer of a decision of the City Clerk denying a license, the
applicant shall still retain and be entitled to exercise its rights under this
subparagraph and give the “Written Notice of Intent to Be Employed” after the
Hearing Officer issues a final notice of denial.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this subsection, in the event the
licensee appeals the denial of a renewal application or the suspension of a
license or revocation of a license, the status quo immediately prior to such
denial, suspension or revocation shall be maintained throughout the pendency of
the appeal including the hearing process within subparagraph (A) above up to
and including judicial review as provided within subparagraph (B) above. Upon a
judicial decision being entered, the stay to preserve the status quo provided
herein shall cease and the order or decision of the court shall determine
whether an additional stay is appropriate, required or permitted by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.17)
§ 117.18 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another person, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the premises designated in the application.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.18)
§ 117.19 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   The sale, use, possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on
the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. A business licensee
shall have an affirmative duty to deny entry to any person in possession of
alcoholic liquor and shall have an affirmative duty not to permit or allow any
person in possession of alcoholic liquor to remain on premises. Each sexually
oriented business shall insure that the attendant at each public entrance
pursuant to §
117.27(C) visually inspects each person and each bag, purse, pocket, package or
article in the possession of any person desiring entry into the sexually
oriented business and the business licensee shall have an affirmative duty to
monitor and patrol the entire licensed premises and to enforce against all
persons on the premises the prohibition against the sale, use, possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   (B)   No licensee, employee, agent, patron or any other person shall sell,
possess, use or consume alcoholic beverage upon the premises of a sexually
oriented business.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.19)
§ 117.20 EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No licensee of a sexually oriented business shall allow any semi-nude
employee or the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business
(except the parking, traffic, and pedestrian access activities of patrons) to
be visible from any place outside the structure in which the sexually oriented
business is situated. The licensee shall not permit any patron or patrons or
other person to stand, congregate, loiter, or to gather in groups upon the
exterior premises of the sexually oriented business or allow the vehicular
parking and traffic areas and the pedestrian access areas to be used for any
purpose except movement of traffic, parking of motor vehicles and access of
patrons and other persons to and from the sexually oriented business
establishment.
   (B)   No licensee of a sexually oriented business shall allow the exterior
portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, search
lights, spot lights, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations in any manner. No exterior portion of the establishment shall
be painted any color other than an achromatic color, although this subparagraph
does not require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a
sexually oriented business. EXTERIOR PORTION shall mean any part of the
physical structure of an establishment, including a wall, veneer, door, fence,
roof, roof covering, window, or similar item which is visible from the public
right-of-way or from any property adjoining the premises of the sexually
oriented business or from any location off of the premises of the sexually
oriented business. CHROMATIC means colorless, zero in saturation, or lacking in
hue; for purposes of this subsection, the definition of ACHROMATIC shall
include, without limitation, white, black, grays, tans, and light earth tones,
but any bold, vivid, neon, fluorescent, or extremely bright coloration that
attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition of achromatic.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, Code, or regulation to the
contrary, no operator of a sexually oriented business, no sexually oriented
business nor any other person shall erect, construct, or maintain any sign for
a sexually oriented business except one freestanding on-premises sign and one
wall-flush mount on-premises sign, each of which shall comply with the
provisions of this §
117.20 and §
117.21. The display surface of each sign shall:
      (1)   not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   be a flat plane, rectangular or square in shape;
      (3)   not contain any photographs, silhouette, drawing or pictorial
representation in any manner.
      (4)   each letter forming a word shall be of solid color and each letter
shall be of the same print type, size and color; the background behind such
lettering on the display surface shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (D)   No licensee shall advertise the presentation or occurrence of an act
or availability of any service prohibited by this
Chapter 117.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.20)
§ 117.21 SIGNAGE.
   (A)   The number of signs and the size of each sign shall be as provided
within
Chapter 161, §
161.245, Schedule of District of Sign Regulations relating to the I-1, Light
Industrial Zoning District. No sign shall be a flashing sign, moving sign or
constant motion sign. No off-premises sign shall be permitted for any sexually
oriented business as all signage for a sexually oriented business within the
zoning jurisdiction of the City shall be on the premises of the sexually
oriented business; in addition, the sexually oriented business premises shall
not be a location for an off-premises sign for any other sexually oriented
business.
   (B)   No provision relating to signage within this §
117.21 or §
117.20 shall be subject to variance.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.21)
§ 117.22 OFF-STREET PARKING; LIGHTING.
   (A)   Off-street parking for sexually oriented businesses shall be provided
as follows:
      (1)   Adult store: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area,
excluding viewing rooms and one space per viewing room.
      (2)   Adult cabaret: one space for each table or booth or three seats at
counter or bar.
      (3)   Adult motel: one space per guest sleeping room.
      (4)   Adult theater: one space for each six seats of designated capacity.
      (5)   Semi-nude studio, Sexual encounter center, Escort agency: one space
per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
   (B)   (1)   All off-street parking areas and entrances to the premises of a
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation (including grace periods) with a lighting system which provides an
average maintained horizontal illumination of 5 foot candles of light on the
surface of the parking areas and walkways. Illumination of the remaining
external surface areas of the sexually oriented business shall be an average
maintained horizontal illumination of not less than 2 foot candles of light or
greater than 5 foot candles of light.
      (2)   This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination to the parking areas and walkway areas serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of the patrons and employees
of the sexually oriented business and to reduce the incidents of vandalism and
criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram
of the premises submitted with the application for license.
   (C)   All lighting shall be shielded and arranged so that illumination is
directed toward the surface areas of the licensed premises and not onto
adjoining properties or into the skyward area above the licensed premises or
the skyward area of a property adjoining the licensed premises, so that light
trespass onto adjoining properties and light pollution (sky glow and/or glare)
will be minimized. No light fixture shall be mounted or placed higher than 25
feet from the ground surface. Illumination from the sexually oriented business
shall not exceed 1 foot candle 10 feet from the property boundary line on any
property adjoining the premises of the sexually oriented business.
   (D)   All parking areas and the exterior of the sexually oriented business
shall be inspected at least once each day and all trash, debris, or other items
discarded by patrons or other persons shall be removed from the premises or
placed into closed trash receptacles, which receptacles shall be emptied at
least weekly or when three-quarters full, whichever is most frequent. All
trash, waste and garbage shall be removed from the premises at least once each
week by a garbage or trash service or other lawful means.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.22)
§ 117.23 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
ordinance.
   (B)   No person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, shall
rent or sub-rent a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the
time the room is rented, rent or sub-rent the same sleeping room again.
   (C)   For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, the terms RENT or SUB-
RENT means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the provision of any other building or applicable
code, the sleeping room shall not have less than 150 square feet of floor
space.
   (E)   An adult motel shall not provide closed circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassette slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specific
anatomical areas” within any room or area, except within a sleeping room.
   (F)   The licensee of an adult motel shall insure that each sleeping room
and accessory room are clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the
licensee:
      (1)   maintains a regular cleaning schedule of at least one cleaning per
rental of the room, documented by appropriate logs;
      (2)   all garbage, trash, body fluids, and excrement discovered during
each inspection and cleaning are immediately removed and all areas where same
are present are cleaned with a disinfectant;
      (3)   all solid waste and debris generated within a room are removed from
the room each time that a room is cleaned and placed in closed trash
receptacles and all waste, debris and garbage generated by the adult motel is
removed from the premises of the adult motel at least once each week by a
garbage or trash service or other lawful means;
      (4)   not less often than once each week the entire room shall be cleaned
with a disinfectant, including at least the floors, all walls within 48-inches
of the floor, and all surface areas of any furniture, fixtures or appliances;
and
      (5)   all linen, including but not limited to towels, sheets and other
similar non-disposal personal hygiene items shall be changed and removed with
each rental of a sleeping room and shall be laundered with soap or other
disinfectant prior to re-use.
   (G)   Neither the business licensee nor any employee of an adult motel shall
be nude or semi-nude when upon the premises of the sexually oriented business
except within the sleeping room or other room occupied as the private personal
room of same when no patron is present or during the bona fide use by same of a
single sex restroom for its intended purpose. No patron shall be nude or semi-
nude when a business licensee or any employee of the adult motel is present. No
live entertainment shall be provided by a licensee within any room rented to or
occupied by a patron nor within any room or other area upon the premises of an
adult motel.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.23)
§ 117.24 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT
FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business, except an adult store shall exhibit on
the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a
film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   (B)   An adult store having one or more viewing rooms on the premises shall
comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, specifying
the location of each viewing room, and the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not
be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of
floor area with no dimension greater than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall
also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six (6”) inches. The City shall waive the foregoing diagram
for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The above-described diagram shall be sworn to be true and correct
by the applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station or a viewing room shall be made without the prior approval of the City.
      (4)   The licensee of the premises shall ensure that at least one
licensed employee is on duty for each manager’s station and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Each viewing room shall have one side completely open, with the open
side being of the same width and height as the directly opposite wall of the
viewing room. A viewing room shall have no other means or point of access
except the open side. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the
interior of the premise shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station.
      (6)   The licensee shall ensure that at all times the view area specified
in subsection (B)(5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions,
walls, merchandise, display racks, benches, chairs, or other materials or in
any manner.
      (7)   Each viewing room must be illuminated at all times in the manner
described within subparagraph (B)(8) below; no person shall enter or remain in
any viewing room which is not illuminated.
      (8)   Each viewing room and the entire premises of the sexually oriented
business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor
level. The lighting control or switch shall be inaccessible to any patron or
other person except the licensee or an employee of the sexually oriented
business.
      (9)   The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
      (10)   No licensee or employee present on the premises shall allow
openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or between a viewing room
and any restroom or other adjoining room or to exist in any wall of a viewing
room.
      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing rooms or other adjoining rooms.
      (12)   No door, curtain, or other covering or obstruction shall be
attached, situated, or installed on any viewing room which obstructs or may
obstruct the direct line of sight, in whole or in part, into the viewing room
or any part thereof from the manager’s station. No person (including a patron)
shall obstruct the direct line of sight into the viewing room with any curtain,
covering, or other article or item or in any manner.
      (13)   The licensee or an employee shall, during each business day, at
hourly intervals inspect the walls within each viewing rooms to determine if
any openings or holes exist.
      (14)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing rooms to
be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. The
licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing rooms to
be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable
material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be
used as the exterior surface within a viewing room within 48 inches of the
floor.
      (15)   The licensee shall cause all walls of a viewing room to be
constructed of material not readily susceptible to breach or any opening
without the aid of a drill, saw or similar device or tool.
      (16)   The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this Section.
      (17)   The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall
ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises.
      (18)   The licensee and each employee present on the premises shall
ensure that not more than one person is present in a viewing room at any time.
No person (including an employee) shall enter a viewing room that is occupied
by another person.
      (19)   A licensee or employee who discovers two or more patrons or other
persons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or attempting to make
an opening of any kind between viewing rooms shall immediately escort such
persons from the premises.
      (20)   (1)   A licensee or employee who discovers an opening of any kind
in a wall of a viewing room shall immediately upon discovery secure such room
and prevent entry into the room by any patron until such time as the wall has
been repaired to remove the opening.
         (2)   Repair of any opening in a viewing room shall be in a manner
that is as structurally substantial as the original construction.
      (21)   The licensee shall post a conspicuous sign at each entrance within
the interior of the sexually oriented business and within each viewing room,
which sign shall state all of the following:
         (a)   That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms.
         (b)   That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person.
         (c)   That the open side of a viewing is not permitted to be blocked
or obstructed by any covering or article.
         (d)   That any specified sexual activity on the premises is
prohibited.
         (e)   That the making of openings between viewing rooms or any wall of
a viewing room is prohibited.
         (f)   That violators will be required to leave the premises; repeat
violators will be permanently barred from the premises.
         (g)   That violations of Subparagraphs (B)(21)(b), (B)(21)(c), (B)(21)
(d), and (B)(21)(e) of this paragraph are unlawful.
      (22)   The licensee shall ensure that all seating surfaces in viewing
rooms are constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous easily cleanable
material.
      (23)   The licensee shall ensure that each viewing room is clean and
sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the licensee complies with the
following cleaning procedures:
         (a)   The licensee shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at
least one thorough cleaning per day, documented by appropriate logs.
         (b)   The licensee shall direct and require an employee to inspect at
hourly intervals each viewing room for garbage, trash, body fluids and
excrement and to immediately upon discovery remove and clean all areas with a
disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be collected from
the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal facility at least
once each week. Prior to collection, solid waste shall be stored in a manner
that prevents access by animals or members of the public and which will not
facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
         (c)   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of a viewing room
(except that portion four feet above the floor surface and the ceiling) shall
be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include floors, walls, seating,
monitors, video cameras, and windows and other surfaces.
      (24)   A person having a duty or required to perform an act under
subsection (B)(1) through (B)(23) above commits a violation if he knowingly
fails to perform the act or fails to fulfill that duty.
   (C)   No sexually oriented business, except an adult store, shall have a
viewing room as defined within §
117.02. No viewing room shall exhibit a live performance. No adult store shall
exhibit any film, videocassette, or other video reproduction, except within a
viewing room.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.24)
§ 117.25 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS.
   (A)   Each adult theater shall provide seating only in individual chairs
with arms or in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on
couches, benches or any other multiple person seating structures. The number of
seats shall equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the adult
theater.
   (B)   Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the
seating area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be
visible from the aisle at all times. Excluding any public entrance(s) from the
exterior of the sexually oriented business, each adult theater shall have its
door or entryway or point of access constructed of such material and in such
manner that not less than fifty percent of its door or entryway or point of
access permits unobstructed visibility into adjoining areas from outside the
door or entryway.
   (C)   Each adult theater shall have a sign posted at a conspicuous place at
or near each entranceway to the auditorium or similar area that lists the
maximum number of persons that may occupy the auditorium area, which number
shall not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
   (D)   Each adult theater shall have an attendant on duty within each theater
at all times that a theater is occupied by one or more patrons. No attendant,
licensee, nor any other employee nor any patron upon the premises of an adult
theater shall be nude or semi-nude, except as provided within §
117.26(C).
   (E)   (1)   Each theater shall be inspected at the conclusion of each film
or performance or every five hours, whichever occurs more often, and any area
of seating, aisle or floor where any semen, body fluid or other foreign
substance is discovered shall be cleaned with a disinfectant and all debris or
items discarded by patrons shall be removed from the theater and placed in a
closed trash receptacle; provided all chairs or seats, aisles and floors shall
in all events be disinfected at least one time daily.
      (2)   All debris and trash shall be removed from the premises at least
once each week by a garbage or trash service or other lawful means.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.25)
§ 117.26 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING ALL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly within any area where a patron is permitted
access or within any area visible to a patron within or upon a sexually
oriented business premises, appear nude or in a state of nudity regardless of
whether such nudity is expressive in nature. This subparagraph shall not be
construed to apply to a person engaged in the bona fide use of a single sex
restroom for its intended purpose or to an occupant(s), not otherwise visible
to the public, within a room of an adult motel rented by one or more of the
occupants when no licensee or employee of the sexually oriented business is
present.
   (B)   No person shall, knowingly in a sexually oriented business engage in
specified sexual activity, provided that this subparagraph (B) shall not apply
to nor prohibit the erotic movements or the erotic touching of one’s own
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or breasts by a dancer or performer
during the course of a live performance.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided within this
Chapter 117, no person shall knowingly within any area where a patron is
permitted access or within any area visible to a patron within or upon a
sexually oriented business premises appear semi-nude unless the person is an
employee who, while semi-nude:
         (a)   shall be at least 4 feet from any patron or customer; and
         (b)   shall be on a permanent, securely fastened raised stage at least
2 feet above the floor; and
         (c)   shall be within the interior of the structure of the sexually
oriented business.
      (2)   (a)   This provision requires that the outer edge of the entire
stage shall be at least 4 feet from any patron or patron seating; said 4 foot
distance shall be clearly designated by a rail, by floor markings or by the
seating and table arrangement; and, in addition, the licensee shall post
clearly visible signs upon the stage, visible from all areas of patron seating
near the stage, informing patrons of the 4 foot requirement.
         (b)   No patron shall knowingly enter upon any stage occupied by a
semi-nude employee nor enter within 4 feet of the edge of the stage occupied by
a semi-nude employee nor otherwise enter or remain at a distance within 4 feet
or less from any semi-nude employee within a sexually oriented business. If any
body part of either the semi-nude employee or the patron or customer is within
a distance of 4 feet, same shall be considered to be an entry into the 4 foot
prohibited area. This subparagraph shall not be construed to apply to a person
engaged in the bona fide use of a single sex restroom for its intended purpose
or to an occupant(s), not otherwise visible to the public, within a room of an
adult motel rented by one or more of the occupants when no licensee or employee
of the sexually oriented business is present.
   (D)   No employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, shall
receive any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, nor shall any patron
or customer pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business; except, however, that tips or
gratuities for dancers or performers while semi-nude may be paid or given if
placed in a designated receptacle(s) within the premises not located on the
dancing or performing stage and not located in violation of the distance
requirement stated within subparagraph (C) above.
   (E)   No employee, while semi-nude, shall knowingly touch in any manner a
patron or customer or the clothing of a patron or customer, nor shall any
patron or customer knowingly touch in any manner an employee or the clothing of
any employee while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
   (F)   No licensee or any employee upon the premises shall knowingly permit
or allow any person upon the licensed premises to engage in or participate in
any conduct which violates any provision of this §
117.26(A), (B), (C), (D), or (E).
   (G)   A sign stating the provisions of paragraph (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E)
above shall be posted near each entrance of the sexually oriented business in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to all patrons, employees, or other
persons upon entering the sexually oriented business.
   (H)   Except as provided within §
117.24(B)(8) and subsection (K) below, the interior premises of each sexually
oriented business, except the sleeping room of an adult motel, shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place in which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not
less than two (2) foot candles as measured at the floor level. The licensee and
any employee present on the premises shall insure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by
patrons or is open for business. The lighting control or switch shall be
inaccessible to any patron or other person except the licensee or an employee
of the sexually oriented business.
   (I)   No business licensee nor any employee present on the premises shall
knowingly permit any patron access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to §
117.07. Each such area where patrons are not permitted access shall be marked
by an appropriate sign denying access. No patron shall enter or attempt to
enter or remain in any area of the sexually oriented business which has been
designated by a sign as an area in which patrons are not permitted.
   (J)   Except for a viewing room within an adult store or a sleeping room and
its accessory room within an adult motel, no sexually oriented business shall
have a private room or an individual room or a personal room for use by any
patron; moreover, except within an adult motel, no area upon the same floor
level within a building of a sexually oriented business where patrons are
permitted access, excluding restrooms, shall be separated from other areas
where patrons are permitted access by any door, curtain, obstruction, or other
barrier which blocks entry or access or which blocks visibility into said area;
and no area within a structure of a sexually oriented business where patrons
are permitted access but which is situated upon another floor level or within
another building shall be separated by any locked door or other inaccessible
barrier which blocks entry or access into said area and any such area shall
have its door, entryway, or point of access constructed of such material and in
such manner that not less than fifty percent of its door or entryway or point
of access permits unobstructed visibility into adjoining areas from outside the
door or entryway. Except for a sleeping room in an adult motel, no door or
passageway or point of access or means of entry or access to any area within
any sexually oriented business where patrons are permitted access shall have
any lock or be capable of being barricaded or otherwise obstructed from other
areas where patrons are permitted access; provided the public entrances on the
exterior of a sexually oriented business may have a lock, although said public
entrances shall remain unlocked at any time that a patron is upon the premises.
Nothing herein shall prohibit a conference room, party room, or similar group
facility upon the premises of a cabaret for which patron access is restricted
by an attendant provided such room or facility meets all of the requirements of
this
Chapter 117.
   (K)   All restrooms in a sexually oriented business shall be equipped with
standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory facilities. Not less
often than daily, restrooms shall be inspected by the sexually oriented
business and cleaned with disinfectant, and any item discarded by a patron and
other wastes shall be removed and each trash receptacle emptied. The interior
of each restroom shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place within the restroom at an
illumination of not less than fifteen (15) foot candles as measured at the
floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and of any employee present
on the premises to insure that the illumination described herein is maintained
at all times that the sexually oriented business premises is occupied by
patrons or open for business; the lighting control or switch shall be
inaccessible to any patron or other person except the licensee or an employee
of the sexually oriented business. No live performance nor any printed matter
or video reproductions or similar materials characterized by or depicting or
describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical area”
shall be provided, allowed or present at any time in the restrooms of the
sexually oriented business. Separate male and female restrooms shall be
provided for and used by the patrons and employees of the sexually oriented
business. No female person shall use a restroom designated for a male person
and no male person shall use a restroom designated for a female person. No
restroom shall be used as a dressing room for any employee. The interior of
each restroom shall not be visible to any person except from within the
interior of the restroom.
   (L)   Separate male and female dressing rooms shall be provided for
exclusive use by employees of the sexually oriented business and no patron
shall be permitted or allowed access to said dressing rooms; nor shall the
interior of the dressing room be visible to any person except from within the
interior of the dressing room. No person, except the licensee or an employee of
the sexually oriented business shall enter into any dressing room or other room
provided for the exclusive benefit and use of an employee of a sexually
oriented business; provided that this subparagraph shall not apply to an
employee of another business solely on the sexually oriented business premises
to deliver goods or materials, foods and beverages, or to perform maintenance
or repairs to the premises, provided, however, that any such person shall
remain in such areas only for the purpose and to the extent and time necessary
to perform their job duties.
   (M)   The failure of a licensee to erect or maintain any sign or the failure
of the sign to be visible shall not excuse any patron or other person from
compliance with any provision of this
Chapter 117 nor shall same be a defense to any action against any patron or
other person under §
117.31.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.26)
§ 117.27 PROHIBITION AGAINST MINORS IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly allow a person under the age of 18 years to
be employed by a sexually oriented business nor shall any person knowingly
allow a person under the age of 18 years to enter upon or remain upon the
premises of a sexually oriented business nor shall a person knowingly allow a
person under the age of 18 years to purchase any good or service from any
sexually oriented business.
   (B)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed by a sexually
oriented business nor shall any person under the age of 18 years enter upon or
remain upon the premises of a sexually oriented business nor shall a person
under the age of 18 years of age make any purchase of goods or services from
any sexually oriented business.
   (C)   (1)   Each sexually oriented business shall insure that an employee is
stationed as an attendant at each public entrance to the interior of the
sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business’
regular business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under the age
of 18 years from entering the sexually oriented business. For purposes of
preventing the violation of this subsection, the sexually oriented business may
refuse to permit entry to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is 18 years or older.
      (2)   The licensee shall not permit entry of any person (except an
employee of the sexually oriented business) into the sexually oriented business
without first demanding and receiving from said person the presentation of some
form of positive identification containing proof age 18 years or older issued
by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. A reasonable
belief by the licensee or his agent or his employee that a person is 18 years
of age or over shall not be a defense to any action under this section unless
said licensee, agent or employee shall have demanded and received some form of
positive identification as above described that such person is 18 years of age
or over.
      (3)   No person shall give or furnish to any person under the age 18
years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the
age and identity of such person nor shall any person give or furnish to any
person under the age of 18 years evidence of age and identification of any
other person; nor shall any person under the age of 18 years present or offer
to any licensee, licensee’s agent or employee any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his own for the purposes of obtaining entry into an sexually oriented
business, nor shall any person under the age of 18 years have in his or her
possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of
age and identity.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.27)
§ 117.28 HOUR OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time except as follows:
      (1)   Monday-Saturday. Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on
each day.
      (2)   Sunday. All sexually oriented businesses shall be closed.
   (B)   Each licensee shall require and shall have all non-employees (which
specifically includes but is not limited to all patrons and customers) off of
the premises as defined within §
117.02 within ten minutes after the closing times provided herein and shall
require and have all employees, except cleaning and maintenance employees
described within subparagraph (D), off of the premises within twenty minutes
after the closing times provided herein, which 10-minutes and 20-minutes
respectively shall be considered a grace period to all times for closing and
for the named persons to leave the premises. Notwithstanding the grace period
herein all business activities shall cease at the closing hours specified
herein.
   (C)   Whenever time is referred to in this subsection, it shall be
understood and is hereby enacted that the same shall be consistent with the
official time of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, whether the same shall be
central standard time or central daylight savings time.
   (D)   No person, including but not limited to any employee, licensee or
patron, except the business licensee (i.e. licensed operator) or a paid
employee who is on duty for and actually engaged in cleaning or maintenance of
the premises shall remain in or at a licensed premises after the closing and
grace times specified herein above.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.28)
§ 117.29 NOTICES.
   (A)   (1)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the City Clerk
or any other City office, division, department or other agency under this
ordinance to any applicant or licensee may be given either by personal delivery
or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application filed with
the City Clerk, or within any written notice of address change that has been
received by the City Clerk.
      (2)   Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in
the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail to a
sexually oriented business is returned by the postal service, the City Clerk or
his designee shall within 24-hours cause it to be posted at the principal
entrance to the business, although only the mailing is required to be completed
within any other time period or deadline established by this
Chapter 117.
   (B)   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the City Clerk by any
person under this ordinance shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the City Clerk.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each applicant who is designated on the
license application and each licensee to furnish notice to the City Clerk in
writing of any change of mailing address.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.29)
§ 117.30 CALCULATION OF TIME.
   (A)   The time within which any act required by chapter is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the
last day is Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal or State of Illinois holiday, in
which case it shall be excluded.
   (B)   If the day immediately following each Saturday, Sunday or holiday is
also a Saturday, Sunday or holiday then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.30)
§ 117.31 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Any sexually oriented business established in violation of this
Chapter 117 or operated or maintained with repeated or multiple violations of
the provision of this
Chapter 117 shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance. For purposes of determining whether violations are “repeated”
or “multiple” violations, any and all violations of this
Chapter 117 occurring within a twelve month calendar period shall be
considered. The City may, in addition, to or in lieu of any other remedy set
forth herein commence an action to enjoin or remove or abate such nuisance in
such manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such
court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or
remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from
establishing, operating or maintaining a sexually oriented business contrary to
the provisions of this
Chapter 117.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.32)
§ 117.32 SEVERABILITY.
   This Chapter 117 and each subsection and provision of said this
Chapter 117 are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions
and notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent it is hereby
declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provision of said
Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be
invalid the remaining section, subsections or provisions and the application of
each section, subsection and provision to any person or circumstance other than
to those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby and it is
hereby declared that such section, subsections and provisions would have passed
independently of such section, subsection or provision so known to be invalid.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.33)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this
Chapter 117 or any person who violates any provision of this
Chapter 117 is subject to a suit for injunction in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (B)   In addition, if any person, including but not limited to any licensee,
employee, customer or patron, fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates a provision of this
Chapter 117, such person, upon conviction of such violation by a court of
competent jurisdiction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor
more than $200.00. Each violation or non-compliance shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. Each day of continued violation or non-
compliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
   (C)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this
Chapter 117 shall be cumulative and independently available to the City and the
City shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies to the fullest extent
allowed by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.15.31)
CHAPTER 118: FOOD AND BEVERAGES
Section
Mobile Food Vendors
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   General provisions
   
118.03   Location and hours of operation
   
118.04   Operating requirements
   
118.05   Mobile food vendor permit
   
118.06   Food truck rally permit
   
118.07   Enforcement
   
118.08   Appeals
 
   
118.99   Penalty
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
   EDIBLE FOOD PRODUCTS. Those products that are ready for immediate
consumption, including prepackaged food and food cooked, prepared or assembled
on-site. The term EDIBLE FOOD PRODUCTS does not include fresh produce unless
the produce has been packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen,
squeezed or otherwise prepared for consumption.
   FOOD TRUCK. A vehicle from which edible food products are cooked, prepared
or assembled with the intent to sell such items to the general public, provided
further that food trucks may also sell other edible food products and beverages
that have been prepared or assembled elsewhere.
   FOOD TRUCK RALLY. A coordinated and advertised gathering of more than one
mobile food service vehicle in one location on a date certain with the intent
to serve the public.
   FOOD TRUCK RALLY PERMIT. A permit issued by the City for a food truck rally.
   ICE CREAM TRUCK. A vehicle from which the operator sells only pre-packaged
frozen dairy or water-based food products and pre-packaged beverages (and no
other edible products). For purposes of this Ordinance, a non-motorized cart
from which such products are sold shall be considered an ICE CREAM TRUCK.
   LOCATION. Any single property parcel or any combination of contiguous
parcels that are owned or controlled by a single entity or affiliated entities.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE VEHICLE. A food truck or ice cream truck and includes
any portable unit that is attached to a motorized vehicle and intended for use
in the operation of a food truck or ice cream truck.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMIT. A permit issued by the City for the operation of
a mobile food service vehicle.
   OPERATE. To sell food, beverages, and other permitted items from a mobile
food service vehicle and includes all tenses of the word.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating or permitted to operate a mobile food service
vehicle.
   PERMIT ADMINISTRATOR. A person designated by the City Manager to oversee the
issuance, suspension and revocation of mobile food vendor permits and food
truck rally permits; or if no person is otherwise designated, PERMIT
ADMINISTRATOR shall mean the City Clerk.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a street, including devices moved by human power.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(A))
§ 118.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is a violation to operate a mobile food service vehicle at any
location except in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Mobile food service vehicle operators must comply with all federal,
state and local licensing and permitting regulations and all business tax,
sales tax and other tax requirements.
   (C)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations supplemental to the provisions herein for the purpose of carrying
out the administration and enforcement of such provisions.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(B))
§ 118.03 LOCATION AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Food trucks.
      (1)   Right-of-way/public property. Food trucks may not operate within
the public right-of-way except as specifically hereinafter provided or on any
City property except as may be specifically allowed in writing by the City; in
no event shall a food truck operate within any public right of way adjacent to
property used for residential purposes or upon right of way within any
Residential Zoning District. When allowed in the public right-of-way, a food
truck must be positioned so as to comply with the requirements of §
118.04(B) herein. Food trucks may not operate on property owned by a public
entity other than the City unless specifically allowed by such public entity.
No unattended food truck shall be left at any time in the right-of-way or
parked on any other public property overnight, except within an authorized
parking space. No tents, tables, chairs, or other displays (except permitted
signage) shall be placed at the vending area if the food truck is operating
within the public right-of-way. Food truck operations may not occupy more than
two parking spaces.
      (2)    Private property. Subject to the following conditions, a food
truck with a current Mobile Food Vendor Permit may operate on private property,
except for private property used for residential purposes or property having a
Residential Zoning Classification.
         (a)   Permission. Food trucks selling to the public from private
property must have the written permission of the property owner, which written
permission shall be made available to the City immediately upon request. No
food truck may operate on the same or adjoining property more than two days per
week.
         (b)   Unimproved properties. Regardless of any agreement with the
owner of the property, a food truck may not operate on an unimproved parcel.
For purposes of this section, a parcel is considered “unimproved” unless it
contains a building that may be occupied pursuant to applicable building codes.
         (c)   Maximum number of food trucks. No more than one food truck may
operate at any location unless a Food Truck Rally Permit has been issued.
         (d)   Placement on lot. Food truck operations, including any canopies,
signage, equipment, and seating areas, may not occupy more than two parking
spaces per food truck. Food trucks not parked within designated parking spaces
shall not block fire lanes, designated traffic lanes or ingress or egress to or
from a building or street.
      (3)   Hours of operation. Food trucks may operate each day beginning at
7:00 a.m. and ending at sunset unless otherwise restricted by the property
owner permission. The City may permit extended hours of operation for a food
truck rally.
   (B)   Ice cream trucks.
      (1)   Right-of-way/public property. Subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance, an ice cream truck with a current mobile food vendor permit may
operate from the right-of-way at any one location for no more than 15 minutes
before relocating to another location not less than 200 feet from the previous
location. When operating in the public right-of-way, an ice cream truck must be
positioned so as to comply with the requirements of §
118.04(B) herein. No ice cream truck shall operate on any other property owned
by the City or by another public entity except as may be specifically allowed
by the written permission of City or the other public entity. No unattended ice
cream truck shall be left at any time in the right-of-way or parked on any
other public property overnight, except within an authorized parking space. No
tents, tables, chairs, or other displays (including A-frame signage) shall be
placed at the vending area if the ice cream truck is operating within the
public right-of-way. Ice cream truck operations may not occupy more than two
parking spaces.
      (2)   Private property. Subject to the following conditions, an ice cream
truck with a current Mobile Food Vendor Permit may operate on private property
if not otherwise prohibited by law:
         (a)   Permission. Ice cream trucks operating on private property must
have the written permission of the property owner, which written permission
shall be made available to the City immediately upon request. No ice cream
truck may operate on the same or adjoining property more than two days per
week.
         (b)   Unimproved properties. Regardless of any agreement with the
owner of the property, an ice cream truck may not operate on an unimproved
parcel. For purposes of this section, a parcel is considered “unimproved”
unless it contains a building that may be occupied pursuant to applicable
building codes.
         (c)   Placement on lot. Ice cream trucks shall not block fire lanes,
designated traffic lanes or ingress and egress to and from a building or
street. An Ice cream truck operation, including any canopies, signage,
equipment, and seating areas, may not occupy more than two parking spaces.
      (3)   Hours of operation. Ice cream trucks may operate each day beginning
at 10:00 a.m. and ending at sunset.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(C))
§ 118.04 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Vehicle requirements.
      (1)    Design and construction. Mobile food service vehicles must be
specifically designed and constructed for the purpose of preparation and sale
of the specific type of food being sold and may not operate in any manner that
is not compatible with the purpose for which the vehicle has been designed and
constructed. Mobile food service vehicles must be kept in good mechanical and
structural condition.
      (2)   Licensing. Mobile food service vehicles must be licensed and
equipped in accordance with the rules and regulations of all local, state and
federal agencies having jurisdiction over such vehicles. The preparation and
sale of food from mobile food service vehicles must comply with all applicable
local, state and federal laws and regulations, including without limitation
health and food regulations.
   (B)   Right-of-way.
      (1)    Mobile food service vehicles shall only operate, stand, stop, or
park in areas where same is legally permitted and mobile food service vehicles
may not operate, stop, stand or park in any area of the right-of-way that is
intended for use by moving vehicular travel (i.e. roadway, travel lane), except
in the event of a street closure for a special event. Mobile food service
vehicles, including ice cream trucks, may not operate, stop, stand or park that
in any way violates the provisions of Chapter 156 of the Revised Code of
Ordinance (which regulates traffic, streets and parking), that impedes the flow
of traffic, that interferes with ingress or egress to or from any property or
that presents an unsafe condition for patrons, pedestrians or other vehicles.
The operator of a mobile food service vehicle shall not place the vehicle in
reverse in order to make or attempt a sale.
      (2)    Mobile food service vehicles, including ice cream trucks, shall
park facing the same direction as traffic at a distance of no more than 18
inches between the curb face or edge of pavement and with the service window of
the vehicle facing the curb or edge or pavement. Customers may be served from
the side of the mobile food service vehicle that is furthest from the area
customarily used for motor vehicle travel.
      (3)    When a mobile food service vehicle is allowed to operate in the
public right-of-way, no seating area shall be provided, except as permitted in
conjunction with a street closure for a special event.
      (4)    When a mobile food service vehicle is allowed to operate in the
public right-of-way, no cooking or heating device shall be permitted, except
within the mobile food service vehicle.
      (5)    When a mobile food service vehicle is allowed to operate in the
public right-of-way, no mobile food service vehicle shall be located or make
sales within 50 feet of an intersection.
   (C)   Additional location restrictions. No mobile food service vehicle may
operate in a location that:
      (1)   Is situated within 200 feet to a restaurant or other similar
business that prepares and sells food and/or beverages for consumption on the
premises, which distance shall be measured from the property line of the
business to the closest point of the mobile food service vehicle, provided said
restriction shall not apply to a food service vehicle operated by a restaurant
or similar business located on its own business premises;
      (2)   Is situated upon any public right of way adjacent to or within a
municipal or other public park or recreational area having situated therein a
food and/or beverage concession or similar facility;
      (3)   Impedes the ingress to or egress from another business or otherwise
causes undue interference with access to another business; or
      (4)   Blocks the lawfully placed signage of another business.
      (5)   Prevents access to another business by emergency vehicles.
   (D)   Pedestrians. If on or adjacent to a sidewalk, the components of a
mobile food service vehicle’s operations, including signage, seating areas and
patron queue (i.e. customer line) may not reduce the clear pedestrian path of
travel on the sidewalk to less than six feet. All awnings or canopies of the
vehicle shall be at least six feet, eight inches above the sidewalk.
   (E)   Distance between units. A mobile food service vehicle shall not
operate within 200 feet of any other mobile food service vehicle, except during
a food truck rally.
   (F)   Safety and fire prevention. All cooking, heating and electrical
equipment and all cooking practices must comply with applicable safety
regulations, including applicable fire and electrical codes and any other
safety requirements imposed by the City’s Fire Department. No cooking or
heating equipment may be used in an ice cream truck. All mobile food service
vehicles must be equipped with fire extinguishers that are inspected annually
and certified as meeting National Fire Protection Association standards. No
power cord, cable or equipment shall be extended across any public street,
sidewalk or other public property.
   (G)   Noise. No sounds may be produced by a mobile food service vehicle or
by the vendor which can be heard outside of the vehicle from 75 or more feet
from the vehicle’s location.
   (H)   Support methods. No mobile food service vehicle may use stakes, rods
or any other method of support that must be drilled, driven or otherwise fixed
into or onto asphalt, pavement, curbs, sidewalks or buildings.
   (I)   Spills. To prevent discharges into waterways, drainage systems or
public sewer systems, each food truck shall comply with all stormwater
regulations of the City and all regulations regarding prohibited discharges to
public sewers. In addition, each vehicle shall have a spill response plan to
contain and remediate any discharge from the vehicle.
   (J)   Waste collection. The area of a mobile food service vehicle operation
must be kept neat and orderly at all times. Operation of a mobile food service
vehicle in an area is deemed acceptance by the operator of the responsibility
for cleanliness of the area (not less than 50 feet from all parts of the
vehicle) surrounding the operations regardless of the occurrence or source of
any waste in the area. During each period of operation at a location, the
operator must provide proper trash receptacles for public use that are
sufficient and suitable to contain all trash generated by the mobile food
service vehicle. All trash receptacles must be emptied when full, and all waste
must be removed prior to departure of a mobile food service vehicle from a
location.
   (K)   Disposal of Fats, Oil, And Grease.
      (1)   Food truck operators must provide the addresses of the businesses
or facilities at which any fat, oil or grease generated during the operation of
the food truck or food trailer is disposed of, including the contact
information for the individual or business responsible for the operation of
each such business or facility.   
      (2)   Any change in the businesses or facilities used for the disposal of
such fat, oil and grease shall be reported to the City Clerk in writing by the
food truck vendor within three (3) business days of the first use of the new
business or facility. No oil may be disposed of on public property or in the
sewer system.
   (L)   Pedestrian service only. Mobile food service vehicles shall serve
pedestrians only. Drive-through or drive-in service is prohibited.
   (M)   Signage.
      (1)   Signage for each mobile food service vehicle shall be limited to
signs on the exterior or interior of the vehicle and one A-frame sign. All
signs on the exterior of the vehicle shall be secured and shall not project
more than six inches from the vehicle.
      (2)   One A-frame sign (unless otherwise prohibited within § 118.03) may
be placed outside the mobile food service vehicle, provided that the base of
the sign must be placed no further than two feet beyond the mobile food service
vehicle. The A-frame sign shall not exceed eight square feet per side with
maximum height of 48 inches and shall not obstruct or impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   (N)   Alcohol sales. Mobile food service vehicles and vendors are prohibited
from selling alcoholic beverages.
   (O)   Insurance.
      (1)   Mobile food service vehicles must maintain all motor vehicle
insurance coverage required by applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
      (2)   Mobile food service vehicles must liability insurance in a minimum
sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), issued by companies licensed to do
business in the State of Illinois. The insurance certificate evidencing the
coverage shall contain an agreement signed by the insurance company that, prior
to modification, cancellation or termination of the subject policy, written
notice shall be sent to the City by said insurance company.
   (P)   Exterior cooking equipment. No food preparation equipment situated
outside of the mobile food service vehicle is permitted.
   (Q)   Restroom Facility. A food truck operating at a location for a duration
of more than three hours must have a written agreement, available upon request
by the City, that permits the operator and/or employees to have access to a
flushable restroom no more than 200 feet of the vending location during all
hours of operation.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(D))
§ 118.05 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Required. The Permit Administrator shall oversee the issuance,
suspension and revocation of Mobile Food Vendor Permits. No mobile food service
vehicle may operate within the City without a Mobile Food Vendor Permit issued
by the City. A Mobile Food Vendor Permit authorizes the holder only to engage
in the vending of products from a mobile food service vehicle in compliance
with this Ordinance and as specified on the permit. The Mobile Food Vendor
Permit must be prominently displayed when the mobile food service vehicle is in
operation. This section shall not apply to contractual arrangements between a
mobile food service vehicle operator and any individual, group or entity for
pre-arranged catering at a specific location upon private property, provided
that the mobile food service vehicle is not open to or serving the general
public. A person authorized and participating in an event, as recommended by
the City Manager and as approved by the City Council, designated as a
community-oriented event shall not be deemed to be a mobile food vendor during
the event at the event site for purposes of this Ordinance; the Mt. Vernon Fall
Festival, Cedarhurst Craft Fair, Mt. Vernon Farmer’s Market, Fourth of July
Salute to Freedom, Festival’s Inc. Market Days, Paw Fest, Mt. Vernon
Homebrewer’s Festival, Midwestern Herb and Garden Show, Southern Illinois Home
and Outdoor Expo, Southern Illinois Steel Guitar Show, Midwest Light Aircraft
Expo, Jefferson County Historical Village Heritage Festival, Mt. Vernon Knife
Show, Ash Bash Music & Art Festival, United Way Food Truck Fest, Christmas
Craft Fair, and Exotic Pet Expo are each designated within this Ordinance by
the City Council as a community-oriented event; other events may be so
designated by Resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   In order to obtain a Mobile Food Vendor Permit, a mobile food
service vehicle operator must complete an application form provided by the City
Clerk. The application shall include the following information:
         (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vehicle.
         (b)   Name, address and telephone number of the operator of the
vehicle and a copy of said operator’s valid driver’s license.
         (c)   Color photographs of the exterior (front, side, and back) of the
vehicle in its final condition and with all markings under which it will
operate.
         (d)   A copy of the vehicle license and registration form reflecting
the vehicle identification number (V1N) of the vehicle and current
registration.
         (e)   A copy of a state or county health department license or permit
applicable to mobile food providers. A copy of any current state or county
health department license or permit from anther jurisdiction may be accepted by
the Permit Administrator, although such acceptance does not negate the
Applicant’s responsibility to comply with permit requirements of the Jefferson
County Health Department.
         (f)   A copy of the applicant’s certificate of registration under the
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act.
         (g)   A certificate of insurance coverage, including required motor
vehicle insurance coverage and liability insurance coverage.
         (h)   A signed acknowledgement that the operator has read this
Ordinance and will comply with all applicable requirements herein.
         (i)   Any additional information required by the permit administrator.
      (2)   Submittal of an application for a Mobile Food Vendor Permit for a
food truck must be accompanied by payment of an application fee in the amount
of $25.00 per day or $200.00 for a 30 day period and an application for a
Mobile Food Vendor Permit for an ice cream truck must be accompanied by payment
of an application fee in the amount of $25.00 per day or $300.00 per year,
provided that for any mobile food service vehicle for which the Permit
Administrator reasonably determines has been identified to be operating within
the City without a current Mobile Food Vendor Permit during any part of a 12
month period prior to date of application, the application fee shall be double
the stated amount.
      (3)   Each Mobile Food Vendor Permit holder shall have an ongoing duty to
provide the City with notice of any change to any of the information submitted
with its permit application, including current photographs of the mobile food
service vehicle in the event of any change in the appearance of or signage on
the vehicle.
   (C)   Issuance/denial. A Mobile Food Vendor Permit shall be issued upon
verification that an application has been completed in accordance with the
requirements of this Section, except that no such Permit will be issued to an
operator whose Permit is currently suspended or has been revoked within the
preceding 12 months, or to any person who intends to operate the same mobile
food service vehicle for which the operator’s Permit is currently suspended or
has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. If the Permit Administrator
denies the application, such denial shall be in writing and provided to the
applicant. The decision of the Permit Administrator to deny a Mobile Food
Vendor Permit may be appealed to the City Manager as set forth in this
Ordinance.
   (D)   Transferability. A Mobile Food Vendor Permit may not be transferred.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(E))
§ 118.06 FOOD TRUCK RALLY PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicability/approval. All food truck rallies on public or private
property require a Food Truck Rally Permit. The Permit Administrator shall
oversee the issuance of a Food Truck Rally Permit and the enforcement of food
truck rally regulations and Permit conditions.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)    In order to obtain a Food Truck Rally Permit, the entity or
organization hosting the food truck rally must complete an application form
provided by the City Clerk. The application shall include the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the entity
or organization hosting the food truck rally.
         (b)   Name and address of person in charge of the food truck rally and
a telephone number
that may be used to contact such person during the food truck rally.
         (c)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property
on which the food truck rally will be held, along with the property owner’s
written signed authorization.
         (d)   A site plan of the property on which the food truck rally will
be held, showing proposed location of each vendor; location of any portable
restroom facilities, if applicable; and location of any stages, tents, seating
areas and any other facilities, structures or equipment to be used in
conjunction with the food truck rally.
         (e)   Written description of the plans for the food truck rally,
including parking locations, traffic control plans and the anticipated hours of
operation.
         (f)   A list of all mobile food service vehicles and itinerant vendors
(defined and licensed within §
110.04 of the Revised Code of Ordinances) participating in the food truck rally
along with confirmation that each vehicle has obtained a Mobile Food Vendor
Permit or Itinerant Vendor License from the City. If a complete list is not
filed with the Application, a preliminary list must be submitted not less than
7 days before the rally and a final list must be submitted not less than one
day before the rally; issuance of a Permit is conditioned upon submission of
the final list, and failure to submit the list shall void the Truck Rally
Permit.
      (2)   Submittal of an application for a Food Truck Rally Permit must be
accompanied by payment of an application fee in the amount of $50.00.
      (3)    An application for a Food Truck Rally Permit shall be filed with
the City Clerk at least 30 days prior to the date on which the food truck rally
is to be held. At the discretion of the Permit Administrator, taking into
account the feasibility of processing and approving the application, an
application may be accepted by the Permit Administrator less than 30 days prior
to a food truck rally.
   (C)   Issuance/denial. An application for a Food Truck Rally Permit shall be
approved if the Permit Administrator determines that the application is
complete, that the food truck rally will comply with the standards set forth in
this Ordinance, and that appropriate measures will be in place to adequately
protect the public health, safety and welfare. If the Permit Administrator
denies an application for a food truck rally, such denial shall be in writing
and provided to the applicant. The decision of the Permit Administrator to deny
a Food Truck Rally Permit may be appealed to the City Manager as set forth in
this Ordinance.
   (D)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   All Food Truck Rally Permits shall be subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   All participating mobile food service vehicles must hold a valid
Mobile Food Vendor Permit and all participating itinerant vendors must hold an
Itinerant Vendor License.
         (b)   All lighting and electrical equipment brought to the site shall
be subject to applicable permitting and inspection requirements, including
payment of applicable fees.
         (c)   All tents, stages and other temporary facilities shall be
subject to safety inspections by the City before use.
         (d)   The location shall be cleared of all trash and debris at the end
of the event and cleared of all temporary structures and restored to its
previous condition within 48 hours after the end of the event.
         (e)   Traffic control and pedestrian safety in the vicinity of the
event shall be the responsibility of the permittee of the event. The City may
require that City forces be employed to assist with traffic control and
pedestrian safety. Costs anticipated by the City for these services shall be
estimated by the City and paid at least ten days in advance by the permittee as
a condition of the permit. Following the event, any overpayment shall be
refunded to the permittee, and any underpayment shall be billed to the
permittee.
      (2)   In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public, to mitigate the potential impacts of the food truck rally, and to
ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, the City may impose
additional conditions and restrictions on the issuance of a Food Truck Rally
Permit. Such conditions and restrictions may relate to, but are not limited to,
hours of operation, layout, parking and security, and insurance requirements.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(F))
§ 118.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Citation. Each of the following circumstances shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance for which a citation may be issued by a code
enforcement officer or by a police officer of the City:
      (1)   Operation of a mobile food service vehicle without a current, valid
Permit; each day and each separate location at which a mobile food service
vehicle is operated without a current, valid Permit shall be constitute a
separate violation.
      (2)   Holding a food truck rally without a Permit or failing to comply
with the conditions of approval for a Food Truck Rally Permit.
      (3)   Failure to comply with any other provision of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Responsibility for violations. A City code enforcement officer or
police officer may cite any of the individuals or entities listed below for any
violation of the provisions of this Ordinance:
         (1)   The operator of a mobile food service vehicle.
         (2)   An employee working at a mobile food service vehicle.
         (3)   The owner of the property on which a mobile food service vehicle
is operated.
         (4)   The entity or organization hosting a food truck rally, or the
person in charge of the food truck rally.
   (C)   Suspension or Revocation of Permit. A Mobile Food Vendor Permit may be
suspended or revoked by the Permit Administrator if:
      (1)   The applicant for the Permit knowingly provided false information
on the application.
      (2)   A violation of this Ordinance occurs in conjunction with the mobile
food service vehicle or vendor for which the Permit has been issued.
      (3)   The operator of a mobile food service vehicle fails to maintain a
current, valid vehicle registration, health department permit, certificate of
registration under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120\), a valid
driver’s license, or proof of required motor vehicle and/or liability insurance
coverage.
      (4)   A mobile food service vehicle is operated in an unlawful manner so
as to constitute a breach of the peace or otherwise threaten the health, safety
or general welfare of the public.
      (5)   The driver of mobile food service vehicle is convicted of a moving
traffic law violation occurring while operating a food service vehicle under a
license issued hereunder in the City.
   (D)   Reinstatement.
      (1)   Suspended permit. An operator may reinstate a suspended Mobile Food
Vendor Permit by taking such actions as may be necessary to correct a mobile
food service vehicle’s noncompliance and by paying a reinstatement fee of
$100.00 to offset the City’s cost of enforcement measures, inspections and
compliance verifications, which reinstatement fee does not include any Permit
fee that may be due.
      (2)   Revoked permit. An operator whose Mobile Food Vendor Permit has
been revoked may apply for a new Permit after 12 months from the date of
revocation, provided the operator has taken such actions as may be necessary to
correct a mobile food service vehicle’s noncompliance. The operator shall pay a
permit reinstatement fee of $100.00 to offset the City’s cost of enforcement
measures, inspections and compliance verifications; which reinstatement fee
does not include any Permit fee that may be due.
      (3)   No Permit will be issued to any person who intends to operate the
same mobile food service vehicle for which the operator’s Permit is currently
suspended or has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
   (E)   Notice. Notice of the suspension or revocation of a Mobile Food Vendor
Permit shall be issued to the operator in writing by the Permit Administrator.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(G))
§ 118.08 APPEALS.
   (A)   Filing. The denial, suspension or revocation of a Mobile Food Vendor
Permit or the denial of a Food Truck Rally Permit by the Permit Administrator
may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal, establishing the grounds
for the appeal, with the City Manager no later than ten business days following
receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation.
   (B)   City Manager’s review. When an appeal is filed with the City Manager
as set forth herein, the City Manager may request such additional information
from the operator and the Permit Administrator as may be deemed necessary. At
the City Manager’s discretion, the appeal may be decided based on the written
information and documentation submitted, or a hearing may be scheduled with the
operator and the Permit Administrator. The City Manager’s decision shall be
issued in writing, based on a written summation of the pertinent facts, and
shall be final. The City Manager may reverse the denial, suspension or
revocation of a Permit, or may reduce the waiting period required for
reinstatement of a revoked Permit if it is determined that the operator has
taken reasonable steps to mitigate the violations leading to the revocation and
to prevent future violations.
   (C)   Refunds. There shall be no refund of an application fee for a Mobile
Food Vendor Permit or Food Truck Rally Permit that has been denied. There shall
be no refund of a reinstatement fee for a suspended or revoked Permit unless
the City Manager determines on appeal that the Permit Administrator acted in
error in suspending or revoking the permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(H))
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any suspension or revocation of a license, any person who
violates or omits or refuses to comply with this Ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof be fined the sum of $500.00; a separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed on each day that a violation occurs. In addition,
any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance may be enjoined as provided by law upon the filing of a petition
therefor in the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois from engaging in
any activity or conduct as a food service vendor within the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 11, § 11.18(I))
CHAPTER 119: DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING
Section
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Permitted areas
   
119.03   Alcoholic liquor
   
119.04   Application/permit
   
119.05   Permit fee and term
   
119.06   Standards for downtown sidewalk dining
   
119.07   Additional regulations of sidewalk dining areas
   
119.08   Additional conditions of downtown sidewalk dining license
   
119.09   Revocation of permit
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   The Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit is intended to facilitate outdoor dining
in the downtown area to create an active streetscape, enhance the economic and
social vitality of the downtown area, and promote pedestrian and retail
activity; to allow for the use of public sidewalks for such outdoor dining; and
to expedite the approval of such facilities while ensuring that the public’s
use of the sidewalks will not be significantly impaired by such dining; and to
prevent any adverse impact to adjacent properties from such dining.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32A)
§ 119.02 PERMITTED AREAS.
   Sidewalk Dining shall be permitted only upon a property which is located
within the Downtown Area of the City, which is zoned B-1, Primary Business
District, and which has a restaurant business being operated thereon; for
purposes of this
Chapter 119, RESTAURANT means a public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public as a place where food and/or beverages
are prepared for consumption on-premises and then served on-premises.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32B)
§ 119.03 ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served, consumed, or possessed by any
person within a sidewalk dining area unless the sidewalk dining area is part of
the “licensed premises” of a Restaurant or a Restaurant With Lounge having a
“Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor Permit” issued under §
111.05(N) of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32C)
§ 119.04 APPLICATION/PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a Sidewalk Dining Area or to engage in
or allow sidewalk dining without first having obtained a permit therefor.
   (B)   An applicant for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit shall file an
application with the City Clerk on such forms and subject to such procedures as
the City Clerk and City Manager may establish for such purpose. The application
shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be in writing, under oath, and signed
by an authorized agent of the proposed Permittee.
   (C)   The application shall state the name, address, and telephone number of
the applicant and shall include a legal description and the address of the
premises proposed to be operated as a restaurant adjacent to the sidewalk
subject of the application.
   (D)   The application shall include a plan with dimensions showing the
layout for the sidewalk dining area which accurately depicts the existing
sidewalk conditions, including sidewalk width from the building face to curb,
location and dimensions of tree wells, location of lamp posts, traffic and
parking signs, signal poles, trash receptacles, benches, and other sidewalk
features or obstructions, as well as the design, location, size, and space of
the sidewalk dining area, chairs, tables, barriers, umbrellas, and other
facilities to be located within the sidewalk dining area. The application shall
also provide proof of insurance complying with the provisions of this
Chapter 119 and shall also include such additional information as the City
Manager may determine to be necessary to establish compliance with
Chapter 119.
   (E)   No permit shall be issued to any person in default of any payment to
the City, including but not limited to any licensing fee under any Article of
the Revised Code, or any other charge or fee imposed by the Revised Code, any
tax imposed by the City of Mt. Vernon, or any charge for water, sewer, or
garbage services, or to any person in default on any loan agreement, or
contract with the City, or in default on any amount owed to the City.
   (F)   The City Manager shall review the application to determine if the
proposed sidewalk dining area meets the requirements of this
Chapter 119. The City Manager may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application; upon receipt of written approval, the City Clerk shall issue the
Sidewalk Dining Permit. If the City Manager approves the application, then the
approved plan and permit shall be posted at the restaurant premises and be
clearly visible to customers and to the public. No material changes to an
approved plan may be made without prior written approval of the City Manager
upon application of the Permittee, although no additional permit fee will be
assessed for such change.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32D)
§ 119.05 PERMIT FEE AND TERM.
   The fee for a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit shall be $25.00 per year. The
fee shall be nonrefundable and shall be non-proratable. No permit shall be
assigned or transferred to any other person. The permit year shall be May 1 –
April 30. The permit shall state the name of the Permittee and shall
specifically designate the sidewalk dining area subject of the permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32E)
§ 119.06 STANDARDS FOR DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING.
   The following rules and regulations shall apply to all restaurants providing
sidewalk dining and to all sidewalk dining areas.
   (A)   Space and Clearance.
      (1)   Sidewalk dining is permitted only on sidewalks with a minimum width
of 10 feet from the property line to the curb face; provided that if a traffic
lane is adjacent to the sidewalk, sidewalk dining will be permitted only if the
sidewalk width is 15 feet or more. The area designated for the sidewalk dining
shall be considered an extension of the restaurant; therefore the location of
the sidewalk dining area must be immediately adjacent to and have direct access
to the restaurant. In the interest of public safety, sidewalk dining areas must
maintain a clear pedestrian path of at least 4 feet at all times; on sidewalks
with an adjacent traffic lane, the clear pedestrian path must be 10 feet wide.
This clear pedestrian path must be free of any obstructions such as trees,
parking meters, and utility poles to allow adequate pedestrian passage.
Sidewalk dining areas shall not interfere with any utilities or other
facilities such as telephone poles, fire hydrants, parking meters, mailboxes,
or signs located on the sidewalk and in the public right-of-way. Sidewalk
dining shall not interfere with snow removal within the clear pedestrian path;
snow removal within the sidewalk dining area shall be the responsibility of the
Permittee.
      (2)   Sidewalk dining areas may not impinge on required clear distances
for maneuvering around entrances or exits. The sidewalk dining area must be
accessible to disabled patrons and employees. When a sidewalk dining areas is
located at a street corner, vision clearance requirements shall be in
accordance with city ordinance; and in all events the vision of pedestrians and
of operators of motor vehicles shall not be obstructed. These regulations shall
also apply if a sidewalk dining area is adjacent to an alley or driveway.
   (B)   Furniture and Other Elements.
      (1)   Tables, chairs, umbrellas, awnings, and any other elements
associated with a sidewalk dining area must be of quality design, workmanship,
and materials to ensure the safety and convenience of patrons as well as to
enhance the visual and aesthetic character of the streetscape and adjacent
neighborhood. All sidewalk dining area elements will be reviewed as part of the
sidewalk dining permit process.
      (2)   Sidewalk dining areas tables and chairs must be placed only inside
the area designated for sidewalk dining. Table size should be kept to a minimum
to avoid crowding. Appropriate density of tables and chairs will be reviewed;
and same shall be subject to reasonable and appropriate conditions and
restrictions. Permanent structures are not permitted within sidewalk dining
areas. Elements cannot be attached permanently to sidewalks or other public
rights-of-way. The Permittee is responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk
or other public property if any damage is caused by Permittee’s use of the
sidewalk for sidewalk dining.
      (3)   Temporary physical barricades to separate sidewalk dining areas
from pedestrian traffic are allowed if they are constructed of finished quality
materials including wrought iron chains, rope stanchions, picket fencing,
planters, etc. Physical barriers clearly designating the sidewalk dining area
(i.e. licensed premises) are required if liquor is consumed at a sidewalk
dining area. No signs shall be placed on barricades. Paper products for the
consumption of food or beverages are not permitted.
   (C)   Overhead Structures.
      (1)   Umbrellas and other temporary overhead structures are subject to
approval during the sidewalk dining area permit process. No portion of any
umbrella shall be less than seven feet above the sidewalk. Umbrellas and
overhead structures cannot interfere with street trees, must be weather
resistant, and designed to be secure during windy conditions.
      (2)   Awnings, either permanent or temporary, are subject to approval
during the sidewalk dining area permit process. Awnings shall have no support
posts located within the public right-of-way, and no portion of an awning shall
be less than eight feet above the sidewalk.
   (D)   Signage. Menus are restricted to a maximum size of 9 x 12 inches. If
the sidewalk dining area is not subject of a Downtown Sidewalk Dining Liquor
Permit issued under §
111.05(N) of the Revised Code of Ordinances, a sign shall be posted in a
visible location within the sidewalk dining area that states: “It is unlawful
to possess or consume alcoholic beverages within the sidewalk dining area.”
   (E)   Lighting. Lighting for sidewalk dining area is subject to approval
during the sidewalk dining area permit process. Lighting must complement the
existing building and sidewalk dining area design and shall not cause a glare
to passing pedestrians or vehicles. Electrical wires are not permitted within
the sidewalk dining area. Acceptable tabletop lighting includes candles and
low-wattage battery-operated fixtures. Additional lighting may be attached to
the adjacent restaurant structure provided that written approval is obtained
from the City Manager and all applicable City requirements are met.
   (F)   Outdoor Heaters, Fans and Coolers. Outdoor heaters, fans and coolers
for sidewalk dining areas are subject to approval during the sidewalk dining
area permit process.
   (G)   Vending Machines, Carts. Vending machines, carts, or other objects for
sale are prohibited.
   (H)   Service and Use. All services provided to sidewalk dining area patrons
as well as all patron activity (waiting, sitting, dining, etc.) must occur only
within the designated sidewalk dining area and not encroach on pedestrian
traffic areas (i.e. the clear pedestrian path) at any time. Equipment necessary
for dispensing any other items is subject to review during the sidewalk dining
area permit process. The restaurant must provide supervision of the sidewalk
dining area at all times to ensure that dining operations and the conduct of
patrons are in compliance with this
Chapter 119.
   (I)   (1)   Each Permittee shall maintain the insurance coverage required
during the permit period. The certificate(s) of insurance shall be filed with
the City Clerk and presented to the City Manager prior to the issuance of a
permit. Failure of the Permitee to maintain any required insurance shall
subject the Permit to suspension or revocation.
      (2)   Insurance Requirements. Every Downtown Sidewalk Dining Permit
applicant (and Permittee) must furnish a certificate of insurance proving
commercial insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for bodily injury, death,
disability, and property damage liability. The policy of insurance shall
provide for 30 days’ prior written notice to the City if coverage is
substantially changed, cancelled, or not renewed. The City shall be named as an
additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability
arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk dining area.
Each permit holder shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless from any
loss that results directly or indirectly from the permit issuance or operation
of the sidewalk dining area. If alcoholic beverages are served at the sidewalk
dining area, the permit holder shall provide proof of liquor liability
insurance for the sidewalk dining area with limits not less than $1,000,000 or
as required by
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, whichever is greater.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32F)
§ 119.07 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS OF SIDEWALK DINING AREAS.
   (A)   The sidewalk dining area must be kept sanitary, neat, clean, and
litter free at all times; the sidewalk dining area shall be free from
accumulation of food, litter, snow, ice, and other potentially dangerous or
unsanitary conditions.
   (B)   No food preparation is permitted on the sidewalk dining area; all food
shall be prepared within the kitchen of the restaurant.
   (C)   Loud speakers are prohibited and amplified sound from inside the
restaurant shall not be audible within any sidewalk dining area nor upon any
adjoining sidewalk or public right-of-way or private property.
   (D)   Furniture and other property used in the sidewalk dining area by
Permittee shall not be stored in the public right-of-way and all such furniture
and property must be removed from the sidewalk dining area when the restaurant
is closed to the public for any period in excess of seven days.
   (E)   The Permittee shall not permit smoking within any sidewalk dining area
nor within 15 feet thereof; no person shall smoke within the sidewalk dining
area nor within 15 feet thereof. “No smoking” signs shall be posted within the
sidewalk dining area.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32G)
§ 119.08 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK DINING LICENSE.
   (A)   The use of the sidewalk dining area by Permittee shall be subject to
and conditioned upon the Permittee maintaining liability insurance as provided
above. Permission to establish and maintain the sidewalk dining area shall not
be construed to relieve the restaurant of liability for any negligence on the
restaurant’s part on account of or in connection with the sidewalk dining area.
By acceptance of the authorization granted by the permit to establish and
maintain a sidewalk dining area and by establishing and maintaining the
sidewalk dining area, the Permittee shall be deemed to have promised and agreed
to save harmless the City of Mt. Vernon from any and all liability (including
attorney’s fees) and litigation fees arising by reason of the establishment,
construction, placement, existence, use or maintenance of the sidewalk dining
area.
   (B)   The authorization granted by a permit approved under this
Chapter 119 to establish and maintain a sidewalk dining area is not intended to
constitute, and shall not be deemed to be a waiver of sovereign immunity by or
on behalf of the City of Mt. Vernon or any of its officers or employees.
   (C)   Neither the City of Mt. Vernon, nor any public utility company shall
be responsible for damage to property of Permittee placed into the sidewalk
dining area during repair, maintenance, or replacement of the sidewalk or
during repair, maintenance, or replacement of a right-of-way or any public
facility or utilities in the area of the sidewalk dining area. Permittee shall
upon reasonable notice from City remove any and all property of Permittee
designated by City whenever the City of Mt. Vernon desires to use the subject
sidewalk for any purpose whatsoever and when the City by written notification
requests from the Permittee to remove Permittee’s equipment. If Permittee shall
fail or neglect to remove the property of Permittee within the time specified,
the City shall have the right to remove the property at the expense of the
Permittee and City shall not be liable to the Permittee for any loss or damage
to any property of Permittee, including but not limited to any property within
the sidewalk dining area, caused by the removal.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32H)
§ 119.09 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Permit issued herein may be immediately suspended or revoked for cause,
including violations of any provision of this Ordinance, as provided within §
119.99 below. The permit issued herein may also be permanently revoked upon 30
days prior notice to Permittee if and when the City requires use of its public
right-of-way for any purpose inconsistent with the use of the right-of-way as
and for said sidewalk dining.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32I)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any Permittee or any person found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more
than $200.00 for each violation of this Ordinance; and a separate offense shall
be deemed to be committed on each date in which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violation of this
Ordinance, the City Manager may suspend or revoke any permit for any violation
of this Ordinance after affording the Permittee due notice and opportunity to
be heard in its own defense.
(Prior Code, Art. 32, § 32J)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   MISDEMEANORS
      
131.   CITY AND TRUANCY CURFEW
CHAPTER 130: MISDEMEANORS
Section
   
130.01   Disturbances
   
130.02   Unlawful assembly
   
130.03   Intoxication
   
130.04   Begging
   
130.05   Public nudity
   
130.06   Destruction of property
   
130.07   Fireworks/firearm discharges; bow/deer hunting
   
130.08   Fortune telling
   
130.09   Failure to register guest
   
130.10   False fire alarm
   
130.11   Peeping Tom; trespass
   
130.12   Prostitution or gambling house
   
130.13   Trespass on park or recreation area
   
130.14   Prostitution, gambling
   
130.15   Dog running at large, animal offenses
   
130.16   Interference with law enforcement dog
   
130.17   Parental responsibility
   
130.18   Drive through food orders
   
130.19   Littering
   
130.20   Loud sound (stereo) amplification
   
130.21   Refuse containers and collection
§ 130.01 DISTURBANCES.
   (A)   No person shall, within the City, by violent, tumultuous or
obstreperous conduct or by loud and unusual noises disturb the peace of the
City, nor shall any person within the City use profane, obscene or offensive
language calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or assault, strike, or
fight with another with or without his consent, or permit any such condition in
or upon any premises within the City owned, possessed, or controlled by him.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.1)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall disturb or disquiet any congregation or assembly
met for religious worship, by any means whatever.
      (2)   No person shall, within the City, disturb any school or any lawful
assembly of the public, or any funeral procession or assembly.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.2)
§ 130.02 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   No person or persons shall assemble together with an intent, or being
assembled, shall mutually agree to do any unlawful act with force or violence
against the peace or the person of any other.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.3)
§ 130.03 INTOXICATION.
   No person shall, within the City, permit or allow himself to become
intoxicated or under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drunk, in any
public place or on the private premises of any other, and any person who shall
be found in a state of intoxication or drunk, in any such place or on any
premises of another, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.4)
§ 130.04 BEGGING.
   No person shall, within the City, beg or solicit alms.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.5)
§ 130.05 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear nude or in a state
of nudity in a public place.
   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE means any location frequented by the public or where the
public is present or likely to be present or any location where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public or any location
that is readily visible to the public or any place to which the public has a
right to go or is invited.
   (C)   NUDE or STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.6)
§ 130.06 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or
negligently break, deface, injure, or destroy any property within the City of
Mt. Vernon, whether such property is owned by the State, County, Village, or
other governmental body, or owned by any private person, firm, or other
association. It shall further be unlawful for any person within the City to
throw or cast any stone or missile upon any public property or private property
of another or at any other person.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.7)
§ 130.07 FIREWORKS/FIREARM DISCHARGES; BOW/DEER HUNTING.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, or other
firework within the corporate limits of the City, nor permit the projectile of
same to enter the corporate limits of the City, except said prohibition shall
not apply to a public display of fireworks licensed as provided within
Chapter 91 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter permitted, no person shall discharge a firearm
within the corporate limits of the City, nor permit any projectile from any
firearm discharged outside the corporate limits to enter the corporate limits
of the City. FIREARM is hereby defined to include, but is not limited to,
shotguns, rifles, black powder guns, pistols, all long, recurve, or compound
bows, cross bows, sling shots, wrist rockets, air guns, pellet guns, b.b. guns,
and hand guns, regardless of method of propulsion. The prohibition against
discharge of a firearm as provided herein shall not apply to any:
      (1)   law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty,
      (2)   use of a firearm as permitted by Illinois law to resist or prevent
an offense which reasonably exposes a person to great bodily harm or death, or
      (3)   hunting of deer with a bow in accordance with Subsection (C).
   (C)   A person may discharge a long, re-curve, or compound bow within the
corporate limits of the City during the course of harvesting deer if the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   The person must possess a valid deer archery permit issued by the
State of Illinois and must comply with all of the conditions of the permit and
all applicable laws and regulations of the Illinois Department of Natural
Resources relating to archery deer hunting.
      (2)   The person must have the signed written landowner’s permission from
the owner and party in possession or control of the real estate upon which the
hunting shall occur and the bow discharged.
      (3)   The person must submit an application to the City Clerk to obtain a
bow hunting license; the submission must include a valid Illinois archery
permit and the landowner’s written permission. Upon receipt of the application,
the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City Manager for approval,
including specifically, approval by the City Manager of the specific designated
area for which the City license shall be applicable. Factors which the City
Manager may consider include, but are not limited to, the location, size, and
use of the designated area and of property adjacent thereto, the frequency and
size of the deer population within the designated area, the proximity of the
designated area to pedestrian or vehicle traffic, the proximity of the
designated area to residential properties, schools, parks, and other similar
properties, the typography of the designated area and adjoining areas, and any
objections of persons who own, possess, or occupy property adjacent to the
designated area. No designated hunting area shall be approved by the City
Manager if discharge of a bow within the area presents a great likelihood that
an arrow will leave the designated area or if any discharge presents an obvious
threat or a danger to any person or property upon the designated area or
adjacent thereto. A license shall be issued by the City Clerk only after
approval of the City Manager and only for the designated area approved by the
City Manager. Each license shall be for one calendar day only and not more than
ten licenses shall be issued for use on each calendar day.
      (4)   The person while in possession of any bow must carry the City
license on his or her person and must place a copy of the license in a visible
location on the dashboard of any vehicle being used.
      (5)   The person shall hunt only from an elevated stand having a minimum
platform height of six feet. No person shall knowingly direct an arrow across
the boundary of or off of the designated area.
      (6)   The person shall harvest only a deer with no antlers, unless said
person shall have received a special license from the City that specifically,
on its face, states that a deer with antlers may be harvested. Licenses for the
harvest of not more than ten deer with antlers per calendar year may be
approved by the City Manager and issued by the City Clerk, provided that no
such special license shall be issued to any person unless that person shall
have first harvested three female deer within the corporate limits of the City
during said calendar year, and in no event shall any person receive more than
one special license per calendar year to harvest a deer with antlers.
      (7)   The person upon a successful harvest shall be solely responsible
for removal of the entire deer from the designated area and from any real
estate adjacent thereto. No person shall enter upon any real estate, including
real estate adjacent to the designated area, without first receiving permission
from the owner or person in possession or control of the real estate.
      (8)   Within ten days of expiration of the license, the holder thereof
shall report to the City Clerk whether a deer was harvested and if so, the sex
of the deer.
   (D)   Any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with this
Ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be fined the sum of $500.00; a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day that a violation
occurs except that with regard to discharge of a firearm a violation shall be
deemed to have been committed upon each separate discharge of a firearm. In
addition, any person who violates or omits, or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance may be enjoined as provided by law upon the filing
of a petition therefor in the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois from
engaging in any activity or conduct in violation of this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.8)
§ 130.08 FORTUNE TELLING.
   No person shall, in this City, pursue the calling of a fortune teller, or
practice fortune telling or the pursuit of same.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.9)
§ 130.09 FAILURE TO REGISTER GUEST.
   Each hotel, boarding house, or motel within the City which shall accommodate
transient guests shall keep a register therein to register their names and
addresses and every person in charge of such hotel, boarding house, or motel
shall keep such register at all times available for inspection by any police
officer or other peace officer.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.10)
§ 130.10 FALSE FIRE ALARM.
   No person shall willfully make a false alarm of fire, within the City, by
outcry, mechanical alarm, or other device.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.11)
§ 130.11 PEEPING TOM; TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person shall, within the City, enter into or upon any lot or parcel
of ground which has situated thereon any building or structure or is occupied
for residential purposes, and while on such lot or parcel of ground look into
any door, window, or aperture in such building or structure without the consent
of the owner or occupant thereof.
   (B)   No persons shall, within the City, intrude or enter upon enclosed
premises of another, or willfully or needlessly walk, ride, or drive across any
lawn, grass plot, flower garden, or other property of another without the
consent of the owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.12)
§ 130.12 PROSTITUTION OR GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall, within the City, keep a common gaming house or
procure or permit within any building or premises used or occupied by him, any
persons to play or game for money or other valuable thing, nor shall he keep or
suffer to be kept any table or other apparatus for the purpose of playing a
game or sport for money or other valuable thing.
      (2)   No person shall be present within or be connected with any gaming
room or shall play for any money or other valuable thing at any game with
cards, dice, or any other article or instrument, or shall bet on any game that
others may be playing. No person shall, within the City, have in his or her
possession any table, thing, or device for the purpose of gaming.
   (B)   Every table instrument or device used for the purpose of gaming within
the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance and immediately upon discovery
thereof by any member of the Police Department of the City, it shall be seized
and destroyed.
   (C)   Video gaming terminals currently licensed and lawfully operated
pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40\) and pursuant to §§
114.01 through
114.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon shall not be
subject to the foregoing provisions.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.14)
§ 130.13 TRESPASS ON PARK OR RECREATION AREA.
   No person shall drive or stop any vehicle upon any public park or public
recreation area except upon roads officially designated for vehicular traffic,
upon areas designated as parking areas, and upon such areas as may on occasion
be specifically designated by the City Manager as temporary areas. Vehicle is
hereby defined to mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported except devices moved solely by human power,
except self-propelled wheelchairs, and except authorized emergency or
maintenance vehicles.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.15)
§ 130.14 PROSTITUTION, GAMBLING.
   No person shall, within the City, commit any act of prostitution,
fornication, or adultery with any other person. No person shall, within the
City, keep or maintain any bawdy house or house of prostitution, nor shall any
person knowingly rent, lease, or permit any building or premises owned or
controlled by such person to be used as a bawdy house or house of prostitution.
No person shall, within the City, be or become an inmate or frequent or
patronize any such bawdy house or house of prostitution. No person shall,
within the City, entice, influence, or persuade any other person to enter,
reside in or frequent any bawdy house or house of prostitution. No person
shall, within the City, keep or maintain any disorderly house wherein any
gambling, prostitution, fornication, or other violation of the statutes of the
State of Illinois or ordinances of this City shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.16)
§ 130.15 DOG RUNNING AT LARGE, ANIMAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of
performing official duties, shall within the City permit any dog, cat, or other
animal owned, kept, in the care of, in the possession of, or controlled by such
person to be or run upon any street, sidewalk, or any other public place or
public property or upon the private property of another person or the private
property of such person not enclosed with a secure fence or enclosure. An
animal shall not be deemed to be running at large if restrained by a leash,
cord, chain, not exceeding ten feet in length or confined within a secure
animal carrier or confined within a motor vehicle.
   (B)   No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of
performing official duties, shall within the City allow or permit any dog, cat,
or other animal owned, kept, in the care of, in the possession of, or
controlled by such person to go upon the private premises of any other person
without the consent of said other person, whether said animal is restrained or
not.
   (C)   In the event any dog, cat or other animal is apprehended while running
at large within the City and detained or confined within the facilities of the
Jefferson County Animal Shelter or other City authorized facility, then the
owner, keeper or other person claiming and removing the animal from the
facilities shall pay a ten dollar ($10.00) reclamation fee, in addition to any
other fees or charges imposed by the facility or other authority.
   (D)   No person, except a law enforcement officer during the course of
performing official duties, shall within the City permit or allow any dog, cat,
or other animal owned, kept, in the care of, in possession of, or controlled by
such person to annoy, endanger, chase, molest, menace, attack, harass,
threaten, bite, or injure any person or other animal; any such dog, cat, or
other animal which shall annoy, endanger, chase, molest, menace attack, harass,
threaten, bite, or injure any person or other animal is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and shall be taken up and impounded. Any person who shall be the
owner, keeper, caretaker, or in control of such animal and who shall know or be
notified that such animal has bitten or injured any person so as to cause an
abrasion of the skin shall, immediately and without delay, deliver such animal
to the rabies control officer for impoundment so that such animal may be
securely confined for not less than two weeks. If any such animal described
above cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it shall be slain by any police
officer or rabies control officer of the City, and if any such animal having
been slain shall have bitten or caused an abrasion to any person, the carcass
of such animal shall be delivered to the rabies control officer.
   (E)   No person shall within the City allow or permit any dog, cat, or other
animal owned, kept, in the care of, in possession of, or controlled by such
person to damage, soil, or defecate upon any street, sidewalk, park, public
property or any other public place nor upon the private property of another
person. Any person having the custody, possession, or control of any dog, cat,
or other animal shall remove immediately any feces left by such animal upon any
public property or public place or upon any such private property and dispose
of same in a sanitary manner. As to any property owned or possessed by a person
who owns, keeps, cares for, or controls any dog, cat, or other animal, such
animal’s feces and waste upon such property shall be disposed of as frequently
as necessary to prevent an odor, unsanitary condition or other nuisance.
   (F)   No person shall, within the City, overload, overwork, beat, torture,
or commit any cruel act upon any animal nor shall any person abandon any animal
within the City.
   (G) No person shall, within the City, neglect any dog, cat, or other animal
owned, kept, in the care of, or in control by such person. Neglect is hereby
defined to be any act involving failure to provide for animal health or safety,
including, but not limited to failure to provide adequate food, water, shelter,
exercise, ventilation, or necessary veterinary care to an animal, or to
adequately confine an animal in a manner appropriate to its species, breed,
age, and condition; neglect shall also include leaving an animal unattended in
a motor vehicle or other confinement without adequate ventilation or under
circumstances where said animal is exposed to excessive heat or other harmful
conditions.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.17)
§ 130.16 INTERFERENCE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT DOG.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to taunt, torment, tease, beat, strike,
or administer or subject any desensitizing drugs, chemicals, or substance to
any dog used by a law enforcement officer in the performance of his functions
or duties, or when off duty; or to interfere or meddle with any such dog used
by a law enforcement department or agency or any handler thereof in the
performance of the functions or duties of said department or agency. However, a
police officer or veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency situations
when delay would cause the dog undue suffering and pain.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.18)
§ 130.17 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise
requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian, or given custody or a minor
by a Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act, being 705
ILCS 405\.
      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18 years of
age.
   (B)   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with
such parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and
said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
ordinance, upon the occurrence of the events described in (B)(1), (B)(2) and
(B)(3) below:
      (1)   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property,
or shall have incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
      (2)   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the
Police Department of the City of Mt. Vernon following said adjudication or non-
judicial sanction, and
      (3)   If at any time within one (1) year following receipt of the notice
set forth in (B)(2) above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation
of any ordinances, law of statute as described in (B)(1) above, or shall have
incurred non-judicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an
admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law of statute as described
in (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.19)
§ 130.18 DRIVE THROUGH FOOD ORDERS.
   (A)   No person shall place an order for any food, good, or service from any
business within the City of Mt. Vernon with the intent not to accept and make
payment for said food, good, or service.
   (B)   Leaving or attempting to leave a place of business after placing an
order without accepting the order and making payment therefor shall constitute
prima facie evidence of an intent to place an order with the intent not to
accept and pay for said order.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.21)
§ 130.19 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall place, throw, deposit, drop, discard, or otherwise
litter any paper, can, glass, wrapper, garbage, debris, waste, or any other
item upon any sidewalk, roadway, alley, street, yard, public property, or
private property within the City of Mt. Vernon, except in public or private
litter receptacles; same shall constitute the offense of littering.
   (B)   Complaint for the offense of littering may be made by Traffic Citation
Complaint if said offense is committed by a person in or from a motor vehicle.
Otherwise, complaint shall be made in the same manner as other non-traffic
ordinance violations.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.22)
§ 130.20 LOUD SOUND (STEREO) AMPLIFICATION.
   (A)   No owner, operator or person in control of any motor vehicle upon any
street or upon any public or private property within the City of Mt. Vernon,
except the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, shall operate or permit
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside of the
vehicle from 75 or more feet, unless that system is being operated to request
assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to
the following fines:
      (1)   For the first violation of this Section within any twelve-month
period a fine of $100.00;
      (2)   For the second violation of this Section within any twelve-month
period a fine of $250.00; and
      (3)   For the third violation and each subsequent violation of this
Section within any twelve month period, a fine of $500.00.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.23)
§ 130.21 REFUSE CONTAINERS AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   No person in control or possession of a residential property shall
permit the accumulation of residential refuse or household waste upon such
property. Residential refuse and household waste, except bulk waste as
hereinafter defined, shall only be stored in approved containers as hereinafter
defined and shall be set out each week for pickup by the City refuse collection
contractor or other contractor. An approved container shall be:
      (1)   the roller cart provided by the City refuse collection contractor
or
      (2)   a reusable, water tight container made of plastic, metal, or
fiberglass with a capacity not to exceed 30 gallons, a loaded weight of not
more than 35 pounds, and with a tight fitting lid, and with handles of adequate
strength for lifting.
   (B)   Each residence or dwelling shall have sufficient approved containers
to hold all of the residential refuse and household waste generated and
accumulating upon a premises between collections. Container covers shall be
tightly placed upon each container so as to keep the container closed whenever
there is refuse or waste in the container. No refuse or waste, excluding bulk
waste, shall be set out for collection except within an approved container.
   (C)   Each approved container, except when set out for pickup, if not stored
within a building, shall be placed and kept at all times on private property
adjacent to the residence or other building at a location which is not between
the front of the residence or building and an adjoining street. Containers
during storage shall be placed upon the private property at a location which is
least visible from a public street or sidewalk.
   (D)   No container shall be set out for pickup sooner than 24 hours prior to
6:00 a.m. on the date of the scheduled pickup and no container shall remain set
out for a period of 24 hours after 6:00 a.m. on the date of scheduled pickup. A
permitted bulk item (i.e. bulk waste) may be set out 48 hours prior to 6:00
a.m. on the date of the scheduled pickup. BULK WASTE is hereby defined to be a
large appliance, item of furniture, or waste material from a residential source
other than construction debris or hazardous waste with a weight or volume
greater than allowed for approved containers.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.24)
CHAPTER 131: CITY AND TRUANCY CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Curfew restrictions
   
131.03   Truancy restrictions
   
131.04   Establishment restrictions
   
131.05   Enforcement
   
131.06   Severability
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Ordinance unless the context requires otherwise the
following words or phrases shall mean:
   CITY CURFEW HOURS. The period of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and 12:01 a.m.
until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
   COURT. The Second Judicial Circuit, Jefferson County, Illinois.
   CUSTODIAN. Means:
      (1)   a person who under court order is the custodian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   a public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor;
or
      (3)   a person acting in the role of a parent by reason of a private
agreement, arrangement, custom, or habit.
   EMERGENCY. An unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to fire,
natural disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business to which the public is
invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN. Means:
      (1)   a parent; or
      (2)   a person who under court order is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (3)   a public or private agency with which the court has placed a minor.
   MINOR. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
public ways, sidewalks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. A person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized
by a parent, guardian or custodian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   TRUANCY CURFEW HOURS. The period of the day when the school the minor would
normally attend is in session, on days when the school the minor would normally
attend is in session.
   TRUANT OFFICER. Any officer, appointee, employee or other agent of any
school district or any federal, state, or local governmental entity or any
agency thereof performing the duties of a truant officer under the Illinois
Compulsory Attendance statute (105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.)
   TRUANCY REVIEW BOARD. An agency or entity established by any school district
or federal, state, or local governmental entity or any counseling or social
agency or any combination thereof recognized by the City and/or the court as an
agency which provides service to improve education performance and/or
attendance.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(1))
§ 131.02 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the City of Mt. Vernon during City
curfew hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or custodian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of
Mt. Vernon during City curfew hours.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under Section (A) or (B) or §
131.04 (hereinafter) that the minor was:
      (1)   accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, custodian, or
responsible adult;
      (2)   on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian, or
responsible adult; without any detour or stop;
      (3)   in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel with the consent
or authorization of a parent, guardian or custodian;
      (4)   engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
without any detour or stop;
      (5)   involved in an emergency;
      (6)   on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;
      (7)   engaged in, going to or returning home from an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults, sponsored by
the City of Mt. Vernon, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution; or
      (9)   emancipated pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(2))
§ 131.03 TRUANCY RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or
to compulsory continuation education by statute or court order to be present in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Mt.
Vernon during truancy curfew hours.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, custodian or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of
Mt. Vernon during the truancy curfew hours.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under (A) or (B) or §
131.04 (hereinafter) that the minor was:
      (1)   accompanied by a parent, guardian, or responsible adult if engaged
in an activity which would constitute an excused absence from the school from
which the minor would normally attend;
      (2)   involved in an emergency;
      (3)   going to or returning from a medical appointment without any detour
or stop;
      (4)   engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour or stop;
      (5)   in possession of valid proof that the minor is a student who has
permission to leave the school campus.
      (6)   A bona fide participant in an alternative education or home
schooling program.
      (7)   Engaged in or subject to an authorized or excused absence from the
school which the minor attends, including but not limited to lunch periods.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(3))
§ 131.04 ESTABLISHMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an establishment
to allow a minor to be present or to remain upon the premises of the
establishment in violation of §§
131.02 or
131.03 above during curfew or truancy hours. It is a defense to prosecution
under this subparagraph if the owner, operator or employee of the establishment
immediately upon discovery of a minor reasonably believed to be in violation of
§§
131.02 or
131.03 notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises
of the establishment during curfew or truancy hours and refused to leave the
establishment after being advised to do so by the owner, operator or employee.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(4))
§ 131.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Every member of the Police Department or other person enforcing or
attempting to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance shall inquire into the
minor’s reasons for being in a public place or on the premises of an
establishment during curfew or truancy curfew hours prior to detention of the
minor or issuance of a citation. A minor shall be detained or a citation shall
be issued only if the police officer or other enforcing officer reasonably
believes that the minor has violated the provisions of this Ordinance and that
no defenses to prosecution apply.
   (B)   Every member of the Police Department while on duty, is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of this
Ordinance (regardless of whether a citation is immediately issued) until the
parent, custodian or guardian of the minor shall take him or her into custody,
but such officer shall immediately upon taking custody of the minor reasonably
attempt to communicate with the parent, custodian or guardian of the minor
unless subparagraph (E) herein is applicable. A parent, custodian or guardian
must take custody of the minor within one (1) hour of the time notice or be
subject to a charge of $25.00 per hour as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Whenever a Police Officer or Truant Officer witnesses or has knowledge
based on reasonable grounds of a violation of the Ordinance by any person, such
person may be issued a citation. A citation or complaint may be made to a
Police Officer or Truant Officer by any person.
   (D)   (1)   A citation issued hereunder this shall be in writing and shall:
         (a)   state the name of the person being cited and the person’s
address if known:
         (b)   set forth the specific section of this Ordinance that was
violated, the date of the violation and a brief description of the violation;
         (c)   be signed by the issuing Police Officer, Truant Officer or
complaining party.
      (2)   In each instance where a citation is issued to a minor for
violation of this Ordinance a minor’s parent, custodian or guardian shall be
provided a copy of the citation notifying the parent, custodian or guardian of
the charge made against the minor.
   (E)   (1)   A minor cited for a citation under this Ordinance must attend a
court hearing or Truancy Review Board hearing on the citation and must be
accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor.
      (2)   If any such person fails to attend any court hearing with the
minor, and unless the interest of justice would otherwise be served, the court
may continue the hearing and shall issue a Notice or a Rule to Show Cause to
the person directing that said person to appear at the continued hearing with
the minor.
      (3)   Failure of the person to thereafter appear shall subject said
person to sanctions for contempt of court as determined by the court.
   (F)   Every member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby
authorized to temporarily detain any minor violating the provisions of §
131.03 of this Ordinance, regardless of whether a citation is issued, and to
deliver and surrender the minor to the lawful authorities of the school that
the minor would normally attend.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(5))
§ 131.06 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Ordinance including any exception, part, phrase or
term or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the
Ordinance which can be given affect without the invalid provision or
application and in this in the provisions of this Ordinance are declared
severable.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(8))
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall
upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00; and
a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed upon each day on
which such violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   In lieu of or in addition to a fine, a minor may be ordered to
attend counseling or to perform ten (10) hours of court approved community
service during times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance and/or
the minor’s parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal
care or custody of the minor may be ordered to attend a parenting class or
series of parenting classes or other counseling approved by the court or
recommended by the Truancy Review Board or to attend any program directly
related to improving school attendance and/or performance.
      (3)   In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant (A)(1) or (A)(2) above,
the minor’s parents, guardian, custodian or other adult person having legal
care or custody of the minor may be ordered to pay all amounts imposed as civil
liability under paragraph (B) hereinafter.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(6))
   (B)   Civil Liability. If a minor is detained for a period of time in excess
of one (1) hour which requires the supervision of the minor by personnel of the
Mt. Vernon Police Department, the parent, guardian, custodian or other adult
person having the legal care or custody of the minor shall be jointly and
severally liable for the costs therefor. The parent, guardian, custodian or
other adult person having the legal care or custody of a minor who has
committed any offense of the Ordinance shall be assessed and billed for the
costs; the costs shall be recoverable in any action enforcing any provision of
this Ordinance or in a separate civil action. In addition, the failure to pay
the costs shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and subject the
violator to the penalties described within paragraph (A) above. In the event
any action is filed the liable party shall be responsible for all court cost
and any reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in collecting.
(Prior Code, Art. 12, § 12.20(7))
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   HOUSING CODE
      
152.   HOUSING CODE FOR NON-OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLINGS
      
153.   ELECTRICAL CODE
      
154.   PLUMBING CODE
      
155.   PLAN COMMISSION
      
156.   MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
      
157.   MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT
      
158.   TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
      
159.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
160.   SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY
      
161.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
   
150.01   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.02   Establishment of office of Building Official
   
150.03   Qualifications of Building Official
   
150.04   Conflicts of interest
   
150.05   Duties of Building Official
   
150.06   Cooperation of other officials
   
150.07   Right of entry - violation
   
150.08   Definitions
   
150.09   Right of entry-administrative inspection warrant
   
150.10   Fees
   
150.11   Dangerous and dilapidated buildings
   
150.12   Unsafe equipment
   
150.13   Accessibility of buildings to physically handicapped and elderly
persons
   
150.14   Parking lots - storm water detention
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference by the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and
penalties, that certain Building Code known as International Building Code,
2021 Edition, International Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition, International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2021 Edition, International
Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, International Fuel Gas Code 2021 Edition and
International Energy Conservation Code, 2021 Edition, each of which are issued
by the International Code Council, Inc.; except which portions of such Codes as
are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of which not less than one copy
of each has been and is now filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of Mt. Vernon, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein; and from the date on which this Ordinance shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in construction of all
buildings and structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon.
   (B)   The following provision of the 2021 International Building Code is
hereby amended as follows: Chapter 9, Section 903.2.8.1 shall be deleted and
repealed in its entirety and will have no effect.
   (C)   The following provisions of the 2021 International Residential Code
for One and Two-Family Dwellings are hereby amended as follows:
      (1)   Chapter 3, Section R301.2 shall be amended as provided in Appendix
I. See, Appendix I - Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, attached to Ord.
No. 2024-37 and fully incorporated herein.
      (2)   Chapter 3, Sections R313.1 - R313.2.1 shall be deleted and repealed
in their entirety and will have no effect.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.1) (Ord. 2024-37, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 150.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The office of Building Official is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the Building Official.
   (B)   The Chief Building Inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager
and shall receive a salary within ranges determined by the City Council from
time to time and fixed by the City Manager based upon performance and merit.
   (C)   During the temporary absence or disability of the Building Official,
the appointment authority shall designate an Acting Building Official.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.2)
§ 150.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   To be eligible to appointment as Building Official, the candidate for the
position shall have had experience as an Architect, Structural Engineer,
Building Inspector, or Superintendent of Building Construction or have such
other qualifications as determined by the City Council. The candidate shall be
physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.3)
§ 150.04 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Neither the Building Official nor any other inspector or person making
inspections or issuing permits under any Code enacted herein shall have any
interest whatsoever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any
material, process, or device entering into or used in or in connection with
building construction, alterations, removal and demolition. Nor shall the
Building Official, any inspector nor any person making inspections or issuing
permits engage in the occupation or business of electrical work or contracting
or be interested directly or indirectly in any firm or corporation engaged in
such business during his or her term of office.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.3A)
§ 150.05 DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   (1)   The Building Official shall devote such time as may be necessary
to the performance of his duties. The City Clerk shall receive applications
required by this Code, issue permits and furnish required certificates, but no
permit or certificate shall be issued without the written approval of the
Building Official. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued
and shall make necessary inspections to see that provisions of law are complied
with and that construction is prosecuted safely.
      (2)   He shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code. He shall,
when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires,
make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the Building
Code, and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law,
to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards
during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and
structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
   (B)   (1)   Inspections required under the provisions of the building code
shall be made by the Building Official or his duly appointed assistant. The
Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection
services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability.
      (2)   No certificates called by any provisions of the building code shall
be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a
responsible office of such service.
   (C)   The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made,
of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file
copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as
any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence.
   (D)   All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from
the office of the Building Official without his written consent.
   (E)   The Building Official shall make written reports to his immediate
superior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of
permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
   (F)   No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the
applicant shall have complied with the Illinois Architectural Practice Act of
1989 (225 ILCS 305/) and shall have presented proof of such compliance to such
Building Official.
   (G)   No permit shall be issued as required by the Building Code until the
applicant shall have complied with the Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act
(225 ILCS 225/) and Code of the Department of Public Health of the State of
Illinois. Proof thereof shall be provided to the Building Official, together
with certified results of percolation tests and a sketch showing the size and
type of septic tank and distribution box, and field tile system as required by
such Act.
   (H)   The Building Official shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment, and shall perform
all duties of the Electrical Inspector defined within Chapter 153 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon and exercise all authority
granted thereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.4)
§ 150.06 COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.
   The Building Official may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the municipality.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.5)
§ 150.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY - VIOLATION.
   The Building Official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon
proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. The Building Official shall have the power to
order all work stopped on the construction, alteration, or repair of buildings
in the City when such work is being done in violation of any provision of this
Code. Such work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order without
the written permission of the Building Official.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.6)
§ 150.08 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Building Code, it shall
be held to mean the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (b)   Wherever the term CORPORATE COUNSEL is used in the Building Code, it
shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.7)
§ 150.09 RIGHT OF ENTRY-ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTION WARRANT.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce or to determine
compliance with any provision of this Article or of any building, electrical,
fire, housing, plumbing, or other health and safety provision of the Revised
Code of Ordinances or of any Code adopted thereby, or whenever the Building
Official, any Building Code Inspector, or other designated Inspector has
reasonable cause to believe there exists in or upon any building, structure, or
premises a condition or violation which makes such building, structure,
premises, or any part thereof (which are also collectively referred to herein
as “premises”) a nuisance, unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the Building
Official or Inspector shall have the right, as hereinafter defined, to enter
any such building, structure, premises, or any part thereof at all reasonable
times to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon said Building
Official or Inspector. However, except as hereinafter stated or as otherwise
permitted by law, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied by a
person with apparent authority to allow entry, the Official or Inspector shall
first identify himself and request entry, and upon request present proper
credentials; or if such building, structure, or premises is not occupied by a
person with apparent authority to allow entry, the Official or Inspector shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate an owner, occupant, or other such
person having apparent authority to allow entry of such building, structure, or
premises and shall request entry. If entry is refused or if no owner, occupant,
or such other person with apparent authority can be found, the Building
Official or Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy as provided by law to
secure entry. A PERSON WITH APPARENT AUTHORITY means a person who reasonably
appears to be 18 years or older and who reasonably appears to be either the
owner or any other person to whom the owner has granted care, possession,
custody, or control over the property, such as (but not limited to) a lessee,
manager, caretaker, or lawful occupant.
   (B)   In the event any person shall fail to give consent or shall interfere
with the right of entry of any Building Official or Inspector, the City may
apply for an Administrative Inspection Warrant. An application for an
Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be based upon a reasonable belief by an
Inspector that an inspection is required to enforce a health, safety, or public
welfare Ordinance, Code, or Regulation:
      (1)   said inspection may be justified as to a specific building,
structure, or premises on the belief that there is located within or upon the
particular building, structure, or premises to be inspected one or more
violations of statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations that the Inspector is
authorized to enforce, or
      (2)   said inspection may be justified as part of a general inspection
program authorized by the Revised Code of Ordinances, such as fire, building,
or housing inspections to enforce or to determine compliance.
   (C)   An application for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall identify
the office and authority of the Inspector designated to make the inspection,
shall identify the premises to be inspected, shall set forth the purpose and
justification of the inspection, and shall state that the owner or other person
with apparent authority to allow entry of the place to be searched has refused
entrance after request for entry was made or shall state that the consent of an
owner or other person with apparent authority of the area to be searched cannot
reasonably be obtained or that consent is not required by law. The application
for an Administrative Inspection Warrant shall also identify the applicable
health, safety, or public welfare Ordinance, Code, or Regulation subject of the
inspection or enforcement. An application for an Administrative Inspection
Warrant shall be under oath. The application for Administrative Inspection
Warrant shall be submitted to a Judge of the Second Judicial Circuit, but need
not be filed with the Clerk of said Court until a warrant has been executed or
has been returned “non-executed.” Notice of the submission of an Application
for Administrative Inspection Warrant is not required to be given to any
person. The Judge shall issue the Warrant if the requirements of this Section
have been met, including specifically that the justification as required by law
has been found. An Administrative Inspection Warrant shall constitute authority
to inspect, which authority to inspect shall include the authority to use any
reasonable force necessary to enter upon the premises and shall include the
authority to photograph the premises subject of the Warrant. The Inspector
shall also have the authority to remove any item that presents an immediate and
obvious threat to health or safety if such removal (i.e. abatement action) is
otherwise permitted by law.
   (D)   Upon issuance of an Administrative Inspection Warrant, said warrant
shall state the date and time of issuance, the justification and purpose of the
inspection, the date or dates on which the inspection may occur, the
identification of the premises to be inspected, and shall bear the signature of
the Judge of the Second Judicial Circuit issuing the warrant. Upon presentation
of an Administrative Inspection Warrant to any owner or occupant or other
person with apparent authority of a structure or premises authorized to be
inspected pursuant to said Administrative Inspection Warrant, said owner or
occupant or other person with apparent authority shall permit immediate entry
into said structure or onto said premises. In the event no owner or occupant or
other person with apparent authority is present upon the premises to be
inspected at the time of execution of the Warrant, the Inspector may enter upon
the premises, and no person shall interfere with the inspection, and the
premises may be inspected and a copy of the Warrant shall be left upon the
premises in a conspicuous place and thereafter a copy of the Warrant shall,
within a reasonable time as determined by the circumstances, be served
personally or be served by regular mail to the last known address of the owner
or other person with apparent authority and to the known adult occupants of the
premises, unless same shall be excused by the Court.
   (E)   A police officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the
Administrative Inspection Warrant; such police officer shall assist the
Inspector authorized to execute the Warrant, which assistance may include using
any reasonable force necessary to enter upon the premises or enter within any
building or structure or necessary to protect the Inspector from harm or threat
of harm.
   (F)   Not later than ten days after execution of an Inspection Warrant, the
Inspector or his designee shall file a Return with the Clerk of the Court
setting forth the date and time of the inspection and the Inspector or his
designee shall (unless excused by the Court) serve the Return upon the owner or
other person with apparent authority and upon the known adult occupants of the
premises subject of the inspection by personal service or by regular mail to
the last known address. If any item is seized or removed from any premises, the
Return shall identify the item seized or removed, shall state the reason for
the removal and shall include a photograph of the item seized or removed.
   (G)   No Administrative Inspection Warrant shall be required to enter upon
and inspect areas of any premises, structure, or building as follows:
      (1)   Areas of commercial space (i.e. non-residential) where the public
is invited into.
      (2)   Areas where the owner, occupant, or possessor has no reasonable
expectation of privacy within the area and as to the items to be inspected.
      (3)   Areas of a business subject to extensive regulation (e.g. alcohol,
weapons) where the inspection will impose only a minimal threat to justifiable
expectations of privacy and the inspection is a necessary part of a regulatory
scheme designed to further an urgent governmental interest.
      (4)   Areas for which an emergency situation reasonably appears present
requiring immediate entry to determine, prevent, or address an immediate threat
to health or safety.
      (5)   Areas that are not occupied and that are open (unsecured and
accessible) requiring entry to determine if any immediately hazardous condition
exists.
      (6)   Areas for which consent to inspect has been given by a person who
appears to have apparent authority to consent.
   (H)   Inspections without a Warrant shall be limited as to time, place, and
scope as determined by the justification for the inspection without a Warrant.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.8)
§ 150.10 FEES.
   (A)   No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued until the
fee described in this ordinance shall have been paid, nor shall an amendment to
a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in
estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid.
   (B)   For a permit for the erection, alteration, or repair of any building
or the construction of a parking lot, the fee shall be at the rate of $7.50 for
the first $1,000.00 of estimated construction cost, $2.50 per $1,000.00 for all
amounts up to $500,000.00, and $1.50 per $1,000.00 for all amounts above
$500,000.00, in each case based upon the estimated cost as estimated by the
Building Inspector, not to exceed the actual cost of the applicant.
   (C)   For a permit for wrecking or demolishing any building, the sum of
$5.00 for a one story building and $10.00 for any other building or structure.
For a permit for moving a structure, the sum of $10.00 if the building or
structure is to be removed from the City, and in the event of moving from one
point to another point within the City, the combined building and moving fee
shall be charged at the rate of two-thirds of the amount which the building fee
would be, based upon the estimated cost to construct a similar building. There
shall also be a $50.00 license fee for the moving of the building or structure.
   (D)   In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the cost of work performed
under a permit may be estimated and adjustment of the fee made and the portion
of the fee for uncompleted work returned to the permit holder, provided that no
refund of a prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due
to revocation of a permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made;
provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed
by due authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made no work
shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has
been issued.
   (E)   The term ESTIMATED COST as used in this section, means the reasonable
value of all services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other
appliance devices entering into and necessary to the prosecution and completion
of the work ready for occupancy; provided that the cost of excavation or
grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely for
embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or
structure, is not deemed a part of such estimated cost.
   (F)   The fees for the permit above described shall not be charged to or
collected from an applicant under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The work is being done for the use of a government entity, or for
the use of a not-for-profit organization whose purposes are religious,
educational, or charitable; or for the qualified improvements or qualified
property within the Mt. Vernon Enterprise Zone;
      (2)   The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that
said fees have not been and will not be included in any payment to any
contractor or other person.
      (3)   Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits
and otherwise fully comply with the ordinances of the City, unless exempted
therefrom by any law of the State of Illinois or of the United States.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.9)
§ 150.11 DANGEROUS AND DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Any dangerous building in the City is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
dangerous building in the City; and it shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, or person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to
remain in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be
occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
   (B)   The term DANGEROUS BUILDING as used in this Ordinance is hereby
defined to mean and include:
      (1)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure that is
dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or
which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the health
of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures;
      (2)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause,
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
      (3)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, by
reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause
is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of
any part of such a structure;
      (4)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which,
because of its condition or because of lack of doors, windows, walls, or other
defects is available to and frequented by minors, trespassers, malefactors,
disorderly persons, or other persons who are not lawful occupants of such
structure;
      (5)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure, which, by
reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause
does not meet State or Local Building Codes, Electrical Codes, Plumbing Codes,
Fire Codes, or other health and safety codes.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever the Building Official or any person designated by him,
upon inspection of any building or structure in the City shall determine that
such building or structure in the City is a dangerous building, he shall
thereupon post a Notice upon the building condemning the building and shall
cause written Notice to be served upon the owner thereof and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail to the last-known address or
by personal service. The date of service of Notice by mail shall be the date on
which the Notice is mailed. The Notice shall indicate that the building has
been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition
must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by
demolishing it; and that the condition must be remedied immediately and without
delay.
      (2)   No person shall remove, alter, or deface any Notice required to be
posted pursuant to this Ordinance. If the Notice given hereunder has not
complied with within ten (10) days from the date when the Notice is served, the
City may proceed to remedy the condition or demolish the dangerous building;
except specifically otherwise provided herein, the City may demolish, repair,
or cause the demolition or repair of a dangerous and dilapidated building as
provided within 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the City Manager may
declare a specific structure to be a nuisance constituting an eminent danger to
health, safety, and life and authorize by summary action demolition of such
structure. The City shall recover its expenses arising from such summary
demolition as provided herein.
   (E)   (1)   If a structure constitutes a dangerous and dilapidated building
as defined within Paragraph (B)(4) above, the Building Official may upon the
written request of the owner permit the temporary boarding up of said structure
subject to the following provisions:
         (a)   No structure shall be boarded up for a period in excess of
ninety (90) days from date of service of the Notice. Within said 90-day period,
the owner shall repair the structure and bring said structure into full
compliance with City Ordinances and Building Codes or the owner shall demolish
the structure.
         (b)   All exterior openings in a building structure larger than one
square inch in size must be covered with a minimum of one-half inch thick
exterior grade plywood, masonite, or equivalent strength sheet-like material
that is rated and labeled for use in direct contact with weather. Fastening
devices may be nails or screws not less than one and one-half inch in length
and shall not be spaced more than six inches apart around the perimeter of each
sheet of material.
         (c)   The boarding up of a building shall not be a defense to a
demolition proceeding, nor may the Court order a dangerous or dilapidated
building boarded up. The boarding up of a building shall be an admission by the
owner or occupant that the building or structure is a dangerous or dilapidated
building.
      (2)   Upon the Building Official determining that it is necessary to
immediately remedy a dangerous condition arising from a dangerous and
dilapidated building as defined in Paragraph (B)(4) above, the Building
Official with or without notice may cause a structure to be boarded up through
any available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons;
and all associated direct costs thereof shall be assessed against the owner of
the structure and shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is situated and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (F)   (1)   Any building or structure which has or may be damaged by fire,
decay, or other cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall
be torn down and removed. Upon determination by the Fire Chief or Building
Official that a building or structure has been damaged to the extent of fifty
percent (50%) of its value, a Notice shall be served upon the owner of the
premises by personal service or by registered or certified mail to his last-
known address. Such Notice shall notify the owner that the building has been
damaged by fire, decay, or other cause to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of
its value and that the building must be demolished within 10 days from date of
this Notice and that the building must be immediately vacated and not occupied.
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or to permit such building to be
occupied after service of Notice. This Subsection shall not be a limitation
upon any other provision of the Section herein.
      (2)   If the Notice given herein has not been complied with within 10
days from the date when the Notice is served, the City may proceed to demolish
the building in the same manner as provided for the demolition of a dangerous
building.
   (G)   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this
Ordinance, the Chief of the Fire Department, or any other municipal officer
whose duty it is to investigate fires, may make the investigation authorized by
statute found in the Fire Investigation Act, 425 ILCS 25/0.01 et seq. If such
officer shall find that any building or structure is so occupied or situated as
to endanger persons or property, or by reason of faulty construction, age, lack
of repair, or for any cause is especially liable to fire, or is liable to cause
injury by collapsing or otherwise, he shall order the dangerous situation
removed or remedied, and shall so notify the owner or occupant of the premises.
Service of such notice may be in person or by registered or certified mail to
the last-known address, and any person so notified may appeal from the decision
of such officer in the manner provided by law.
   (H)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
Ordinance, or permitting any dangerous building, or any building or structure,
to remain in a dangerous condition, or to remain after it has been damaged to
the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be fined as provided in
this Ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.10)
§ 150.12 UNSAFE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The term UNSAFE EQUIPMENT as used in this Ordinance is hereby defined
to mean any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical
wiring or device, flammable liquid containers, or other equipment which is in
such disrepair or condition that it is a hazard to the life, health, property,
or safety of the public or the occupants of any premises or structure.
   (B)   Any unsafe equipment in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
It shall be unlawful to maintain and permit the existence of any unsafe
equipment in the City; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or
person in custody of any unsafe equipment on the premises upon which it is
situated to permit the same to remain in an unsafe condition.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever the Building Official, or any person designated by him,
upon inspection of any equipment in the City shall be determined that such
equipment constitutes unsafe equipment, he shall thereupon cause written Notice
to be served upon the owner and the occupant thereof by registered or certified
mail to the last-known address or by personal service. Such Notice shall state
that the equipment has been declared to be unsafe equipment and that such
unsafe equipment must be removed or repaired and that the removal or repair
must be completed immediately and without delay. In addition, the unsafe
equipment shall be placarded and designated as unsafe equipment.
      (2)   If a person receiving such Notice of unsafe equipment has not
complied therewith within ten (10) days from the time that the Notice is served
upon such person, then the City Manager, or someone designated by him, may
proceed to remedy the condition or remove the unsafe equipment or repair the
unsafe equipment. The owner or possessor of the equipment or other responsible
person shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs, including a
reasonable attorney’s fee, incurred by the City in removing or repairing the
unsafe equipment or remedying the unsafe condition. In addition, any person,
firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Ordinance by permitting
any unsafe equipment to remain in an unsafe condition shall be fined as
provided in this Ordinance for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each date during or on which the violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.11)
§ 150.13 ACCESSIBILITY OF BUILDINGS TO PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED AND ELDERLY
PERSONS.
   (A)   Definitions. A PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON is hereby defined to be a
person who:
      (1)   has non-ambulatory disabilities or impairments that, regardless of
cause or manifestation, for all practical purposes confine the individual to a
wheelchair; or
      (2)   has semi-ambulatory disabilities or impairments that cause the
individual to walk with difficulty or insecurity, including those persons using
braces or crutches, amputees, arthritics, spastics, and those with pulmonary
and cardiac ills; or
      (3)   has sight disabilities of total blindness or impairments affecting
sight to an extent that the individual functioning in public areas is insecure
or exposed to danger; or
      (4)   has hearing disabilities or deafness or hearing disabilities that
might make a person insecure in public areas because that person is unable to
communicate or hear warning signals; or
      (5)   has disabilities of in coordination or peripheral nerve injury; or
      (6)   has aging or those manifestations of the aging process that
significantly reduce mobility, flexibility, coordination, and perceptiveness,
but are not otherwise accounted for in subparagraphs (A)(1)-(A)(5) hereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this Section shall apply to all buildings hereafter
erected for any of the following uses or occupancies:
      (1)   Buildings for amusement devices providing shelter.
      (2)   Armories.
      (3)   Art Centers.
      (4)   Auditoriums.
      (5)   Churches.
      (6)   Administrative buildings of the City.
      (7)   Club Houses.
      (8)   Court Houses.
      (9)   Dance Halls.
      (10)   Department Stores.
      (11)   Gymnasiums which normally admit spectators.
      (12)   Financial institutions.
      (13)   Public areas within funeral homes.
      (14)   Lodge Halls.
      (15)   Manufacturing buildings.
      (16)   Markets.
      (17)   Museums.
      (18)   Office buildings.
      (19)   Oil Company service stations.
      (20)   Public convenience stations or toilets.
      (21)   Recreation Buildings.
      (22)   Restaurants.
      (23)   Retail and Service Stores.
      (24)   Schools.
      (25)   Seminaries.
      (26)   Service Clubs.
      (27)   Skating Rinks.
      (28)   Sports Arenas.
      (29)   Transportation Passenger Terminals.
      (30)   Theaters.
      (31)   All other buildings with facilities that purport to serve the
public.
   (C)   The provisions of this Section shall further be applicable to all
buildings undergoing major remodeling where substantial repairs or substantial
alterations are made in the appearance, design or layout of an existing
structure.
   (D)   All buildings to which this ordinance shall apply and for which the
first floor is not on ground level shall be required to construct a ramp
thereto, making that building accessible to the physically disability, which
ramp shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   The ramp shall not have a slope greater than 1 foot rise in 12
feet, or 8.33%.
      (2)   (a)   The ramp shall have smooth surfaced handrails that are 32
inches in height, measured from the surface of the ramp, and that extend 12
inches beyond the top and bottom of the ramp.
         (b)   The ramp shall be at least 42 inches wide and when two handrails
are provided, the distance between the handrails shall be not less than 36
inches.
      (3)   The ramp shall have a non-slip surface.
      (4)   All ramps shall have a level platform at the top, with the
following minimum dimensions:
         (a)   If a door swings out onto the platform or toward the ramp, the
platform shall be a minimum of 5 feet deep and 5 feet wide.
         (b)   All ramps shall have level platform at not less than 30 foot
intervals for, the purposes of rest and safety, and shall have level platforms
whenever the ramp turns.
   (E)   Whenever parking shall be provided for a building or structure which
is subject to the terms of this Section, automobile parking areas shall have
spaces set aside that are accessible to and as near the building entrance as
possible, and identified for use for the physically disabled, which spaces
shall allow a net and clear 12 feet for parking, ingress and egress, and shall
further be subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   A parking space open on one side shall allow room for persons in
wheel chairs or individuals on braces or crutches to get in and out of an
automobile on a level surface suitable for wheeling or walking.
      (2)   Such parking spaces shall be provided so that individuals in wheel
chairs or using crutches and braces are not, whenever reasonably possible,
compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
      (3)   Such parking space shall be reserved for use by the physically
disabled by the posting of an official sign. The City Manager is hereby
authorized to reserve spaces for physically disabled parking on public streets
and public property and to post official signs indicating such reserved
physically disabled parking; and private property owners are hereby authorized
to reserve spaces for physially disabled parking on private lots and private
property and to post official signs indicating such reserved physically
disabled parking.
      (4)   Such parking spaces shall be reserved for use by vehicles bearing
registration plates or a special decal or device issued to a physically
disabled person pursuant to § 3-616 (625 ILCS 5/3-616) or § 11-1301.2 (625 ILCS
5/11-1301.2) or to a disabled Veteran pursuant to § 3-609 (625 ILCS 5/3-609) of
“The Illinois Vehicle Code” or bearing a physically disabled parking visor clip
issued by the City of Mt. Vernon pursuant to §
73.02(I) of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (5)   Entrances, Doors and Doorways.
         (a)   At least one primary entrance to each building shall be usable
by individuals in wheel chairs.
         (b)   Doors shall have clear opening of not less than 32 inches when
open and shall be constructed in such a manner as to be operable by an
individual in a wheel chair.
         (c)   The floor on the inside and outside of each doorway shall be
level for a distance of 5 feet from the door in the direction that the door
swing and shall extend one foot beyond each side of the door.
         (d)   Sharp inclines and abrupt changes in level at doorsills are
prohibited.
         (e)   If there are two consecutive doors to a single entrance, the
distance between doors should be a minimum of 54 inches plus the width of the
door.
         (f)   Revolving doors may be used, but shall not be considered to
provide any exit width. Where installed, each revolving door in a building
shall be accompanied by at least one adjacent conforming exit door. Such
conforming doors shall remain unlocked from both sides at all times when
building is in normal use.
   (F)   Walks and Floors.
      (1)   Walks shall have a level platform at any entrance or exit, which is
at least five feet by five feet, if a door swings out onto the platform or
toward the walk.
      (2)   Walks shall have a level platform at least three feet deep and five
feet wide, if the door does not swing out to the platform or toward the walk.
      (3)   Blending of all crosswalks and drives – whenever sidewalks cross
other sidewalks, driveways, or parking lots, they shall blend to a common
level.
      (4)   Curb cut-outs shall be provided for major streets and thoroughfares
to blend sidewalk level to street level at corners and other intersections of
streets and alleyways. (Curb cut-outs or level grading at alleyways or similar
traffic intersections.)
      (5)   In the interest of mobility and safety, extra effort and
consideration shall be given to procurement and installation of non-slippery
floor surfaces and/or floor finishes.
   (G)   Toilet Rooms. Where toilet facilities are required for public use or
for use by employees, at least one toilet room for men and one for women shall
be constructed as follows:
      (1)   Toilet rooms shall have sufficient space to allow traffic of
individuals in wheel chairs.
      (2)   Toilet stalls shall have a minimum of five feet by four feet
unobstructed space extending from the front edge of the water closet (or, if
necessary due to limited space or consideration to weight, walls to dimension
of four feet wide by five feet, minimum).
      (3)   Doors to the toilet room or stall shall be considered an
obstruction when they open into the area outlined in subparagraph (G)(2)
hereof. The doors must be 32 inches wide when open.
      (4)   A handrail shall be provided to assist in transfer to and from the
water closet.
      (5)   Toilet rooms shall have at least one lavatory facility, including a
mirror and shelf usable by individuals in wheel chairs.
      (6)   Toilet rooms shall have at least one towel facility or dispenser
mounted no higher than 40 inches from the floor.
      (7)   Water closets shall have seats 20 inches from the floor.
      (8)   Toilet rooms having multiple stalls shall have one stall with water
closet which is at least five feet by four feet.
   (H)   Public Telephones.
      (1)   An appropriate number of public telephones shall be made accessible
to and usable by physically disabled persons.
      (2)   Such telephones shall be placed so that the dial and the headset
can be reached by individuals in wheelchairs.
      (3)   An appropriate number of public telephones shall be equipped for
those with hearing disabilities and so identified with instructions for use.
   (I)   Water Fountains. Where water fountains are required or otherwise
installed, they shall be accessible to and usable by the physically disabled,
located approximately 30 to 40 inches from the floor.
   (J)   Elevators. Where elevators are installed into a multiple-store
building, they shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Elevators shall be accessible to and usable by the physically
disabled in the level that they use to enter the building, and at all levels
normally used by the general public.
      (2)   Elevators shall allow for traffic by wheel chairs.
      (3)   Elevators shall be provided in all new public buildings over two
stories in height.
   (K)   Identification of Public Buildings. All facilities within a building
used by the public shall be identified in the following manner:
      (1)   Raised letters or numbers shall be used to identify rooms or
offices.
      (2)   Identification should be placed on the wall to the right or left of
the door, at a height between 4’6” and 5’ 6”.
      (3)   Doors that are not intended for normal use and that might prove
dangerous if a blind person were to exit or enter by them shall be made quickly
identifiable to the touch by knurling the door handle or knob.
   (L)   Seating.
      (1)   Places of assembly with fixed seating arrangements in the
aforementioned buildings shall provide performance viewing positions (“parking
spaces”) for wheelchairs.
      (2)   (a)   Viewing positions for wheelchairs shall be provided in a
reasonable and convenient section or sections of the facility by either or both
of the following methods:
            1.   Providing portable seats which can be easily removed.
            2.   Providing clear space devoid of any portable or fixed seating
arrangement.
         (b)   These positions shall be located so as not to interfere with
egress from any row or seats, shall be reachable by means of ramps and/or
elevators, and shall not infringe upon aisle requirements.
      (3)   There shall be no steps in the aisles or in the access route to the
performance viewing positions, but the aisles may be inclined.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.12)
§ 150.14 PARKING LOTS - STORM WATER DETENTION.
   (A)   No premises within the City of Mt. Vernon shall be improved for
parking or parking lot purposes, whether for surface parking or by a parking
structure, unless and until an excavation permit or a building permit shall
have been issued therefor and the requisite fee paid therefor.
   (B)   No building permit or excavation permit shall be issued for any
structure or for any parking lot, other than a single family structure, unless
there shall have been attached to the application therefor a storm water
detention plan describing the method for handling storm water in a manner so
that storm water runoff shall not be increased as a result of such structure
without detention and other storm water handling facilities, and until such
structure without detention and other storm water handling facilities, and
until such storm water detention plan shall have been approved by the City
Engineer.
(Prior Code, Art. 5, § 5.13)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Inspections
   
151.03   Enforcement
   
151.04   Minimum basic standards
   
151.05   Minimum light, ventilation and heating standards
   
151.06   Minimum safety and sanitary requirements
   
151.07   Minimum space and use requirements
   
151.08   Responsibilities of owners
   
151.09   Rooming houses
   
151.10   Designation of unfit dwelling and procedure for proscription
   
151.11   Violations
   
151.12   Appeals
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this ordinance:
      APARTMENT. A self-contained unit with private bath and cooking
facilities.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having
less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
      CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
      DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing
as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and other
pests.
      GARBAGE. The vegetable and animal waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet, compartments, laundries pantries, foyers, or communicating
corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents, or other pests.
      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over 1 year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or morning unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, who:
         (a)   shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or who
         (b)   shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee,
or guardian of the estate of the owner.
      PLUMBING. Means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed clothes washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
      ROOMING HOUSE. Any building or portion of a building in which sleeping
accommodations not constituting an apartment are furnished at a fee for four or
more persons ordinarily renting such accommodations at a specified rate for a
specified time, and occupying the premises as a permanent place of abode rather
than on a transient basis for a short term period of occupancy.
      ROOMING UNITS. Any room or group of rooms to be used for living or
sleeping, but not for cooking purposes.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage,
and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke,
and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, etc.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of,
the owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
   (B)   Meaning of Certain Words. Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT,
PREMISES, are used in this ordinance, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words OR ANY PART THEREOF.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.1)
§ 151.02 INSPECTIONS.
   The Housing Inspector and his designated agents are hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units and premises. All persons residing within the corporate
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon shall permit the Housing Inspector or his
designated agents to enter upon premises owned or occupied by then for the
purpose of making such inspections during regular business hours or weekdays.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.2)
§ 151.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
Article, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor. Such notice shall be in writing, stating the
reasons for its issuance. It shall state a reasonable time for the performance
of any act it requires and shall be served upon the owner or his agent, or the
occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served with
such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this
State.
   (B)   Said notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this Article and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Failure to comply with the requirements
of such notice shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
   (C)   Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice
or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Failure to comply with the requirements of such order shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.3)
§ 151.04 MINIMUM BASIC STANDARDS.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a toilet room which affords privacy
to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet
and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to a
water and sewer system. The toilet cannot be within a room intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system.
   (D)   Every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, and bathtub or shower
shall be properly connected with hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Every dwelling shall have water-heating facilities which are properly
installed and connected with the hot water lines required under the preceding
paragraph, and are capable of heating water to such temperature as to permit
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, tub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120°Fahrenheit.
   (F)   The occupants of every dwelling unit shall supply adequate rubbish
storage facilities, adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
containers.
   (G)   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level.
   (H)   The windows, doors and other openings to external air shall be
equipped with adequate springs or other appliances so attached or arranged as
to prevent the ingress of flies, mosquitoes and other winged insects to the
interior from April 15 to November 15 of each year and as to prevent the
ingress of rodents to the interior.
   (I)   No cellar space shall be used for human habitation.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.4)
§ 151.05 MINIMUM LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING STANDARDS.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   (1)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or sky light
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area for every
habitable room shall be at least ten percent of the floor area of such room.
      (2)   Whenever walls or other portions of structures are located less
than 3 feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
and shall not be included as contributing to the minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window is the sky light type window in the top of such room,
the total window area of such sky light shall equal at least 12% of the total
floor area of such room.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or sky light which
can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal
to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum sky light type
window size, as required in the previous paragraph (A), except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Building Inspector.
   (C)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for applicable rooms contained in the
previous paragraph (B), except that no window or sky light shall be required in
adequately ventilated systems which are kept in continuous operation and
approved by the Building Inspector.
   (D)   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable
of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of
at least 70°Fahrenheit, at a distance of 3 feet above the floor level, under
ordinary minimum winter conditions.
   (E)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing 5
or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public
hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and
containing not more than 4 dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently
located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be
turned on when needed, instead of full time lighting.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.5)
§ 151.06 MINIMUM SAFETY AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Every floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weather-
tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof; and shall be kept in reasonably sound
working condition and good repair.
   (B)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with electricity and have at
least two electric outlets in each habitable room. Electric wiring and fixtures
shall be properly installed and maintained in safe working condition.
   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstructions.
   (E)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is
required under this ordinance shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
   (F)   No owner shall occupy or let to another occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy conforming with
the requirements of this ordinance.
   (G)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor shall
be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so
as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.6)
§ 151.07 MINIMUM SPACE AND USE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor
space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated
on the basis of total habitable room area.
   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space per each occupant
thereof.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by
going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or closet compartment; nor
shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only
by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet
compartment.
   (D)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of at least 7 feet; and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than 5 feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
   (E)   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface run-off water and are insulated against dampness.
      (2)   The total of the window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes required under §
151.05.
      (3)   The clear inner height is at least 7 feet and no pipes and beams
are below 6 feet from lower level.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.7)
§ 151.08 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
   (A)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (D)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a
clean and sanitary manner.
   (E)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the
premises. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
   (G) Every owner or operator of a building, who permits to be occupied any
dwelling unit, or rooming unit herein under an agreement, express or implied,
to the occupants thereof, shall supply heat adequate to maintain therein from
September 15 through May 30 of the following year, a minimum inside temperature
of 70°Fahrenheit at 3 feet above floor level based on outside design
temperature in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, shower rooms, and toilet rooms
or compartments, between the hours of 6:30 A.M. and 11:00 P.M. and not less
than 60°Fahrenheit between the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 6:30 A.M. in all such
rooms. Provisions of this section shall not apply where the failure to maintain
minimum requirements is caused by a general shortage of fuel, neglect, or
malicious act to the occupant, necessary repairs or alteration, or any cause
beyond the control of the owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.8)
§ 151.09 ROOMING HOUSES.
   (A)   No persons shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming house, except in compliance with provisions
of every section of this Article, except the provisions of §
151.04(A) through (B) and all parts of §
151.08.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Housing Inspector in the name of the
operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall
apply to the City Clerk for such permit which shall be issued by the Building
Inspector upon inspection and upon compliance by the operator with the
applicable provisions of this ordinance and of any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. The annual fee for such permit shall be $2.00 per
sleeping room.
      (2)   Each permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person
holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the Housing Inspector
within twenty-four hours after having sold, transferred, or otherwise disposed
of ownership or interest in or control of any rooming house. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of such rooming house. Every rooming permit shall expire on January 1
of the year following the year of issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked
as hereinafter provided. Permits not renewed by January 31 of each year shall
be charged a penalty of $1.00 per month for each month overdue.
   (C)   Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Board of Appeals under the procedure set out in this Article.
   (D)   Whenever the inspection of any rooming house indicates that conditions
or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this ordinance or
of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto or of any code previously or
subsequently adopted by this Council, the Inspector shall give notice in
writing to the operator of such rooming house that unless conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period, the operator’s rooming
house permit will be suspended. At the end of such period, the Housing
Inspector shall reinspect such rooming house and if he finds that such
conditions and practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in
writing to the operator that the operator’s permit has been suspended. Upon
receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease
operation of such rooming house and no person shall occupy for sleeping or
living purposes any rooming unit therein.
   (E)   Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended,
or who has received notice from the Housing Inspector that his permit is to be
suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are
corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Board of Appeals referred to herein; provided that if no petition for such
hearing is filed within 30 days following the day on which such permit was
suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
   (F)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a sewer and water system approved by the Housing
Inspector and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight
persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members
of the operator’s family wherever they share the use of said facilities.
Provided it is a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals
may be substituted for not more than 2 of the required number of water closets.
All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably
accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement
except by written approval of the Housing Inspector.
   (G)   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof.
   (H)   Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the
State of Illinois and ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (I)   The owner or operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and the
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house;
and he shall further be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the
operator.
   (J)   Every provision of this ordinance which applies to rooming houses
shall also apply to hotels and motels except to the extent that any such
provision may be found in conflict with the laws of the State of Illinois or
with the lawful regulations of any State Board or Agency.
   (K)   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linens
and towels therein at least once every week and prior to the letting of any
room to an occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of
all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.9)
§ 151.10 DESIGNATION OF UNFIT DWELLING AND PROCEDURE FOR PROSCRIPTION.
   The designation of dwelling or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedures for the proscription and placarding of such unfit dwellings
or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be proscribed as unfit for human habitation or required
to be brought up to standards of this Article and shall be so designated and
placarded by the Housing Inspector or his designated agents.
      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe,
or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to health or safety of the
occupants or to the public.
      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
      (3)   One which, because of its general condition or location, is
unsanitary or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or
of the public.
   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit proscribed as unfit for human
habitation, and so designated and placarded shall be vacated within a
reasonable time as ordered by the Housing Inspector. Failure to comply with
such vacation order shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been proscribed and placarded
as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the Housing
Inspector. The Housing Inspector shall remove such placard whenever the defect
or defects upon which the proscription and placarding action were based have
been eliminated.
   (D)   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been proscribed as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in the preceding paragraph (C).
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.10)
§ 151.11 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who maintains as occupant or owner any dwelling, dwelling unit or
premises which does not comply with the requirements of §§
151.04 through
151.09 of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.11)
§ 151.12 APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   An appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board, or bureau of the City from any decision of the
Housing Inspector under the terms of this Article. An appeal shall be initiated
by the filing of a written notice to appeal within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision appealed.
      (2)   Such notice shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals created
under the terms of §
161.120 of this Revised Code of Ordinances and shall specify the grounds of
appeal, except that in the case of a building or structure which in the opinion
of the Building Inspector, Housing Inspector, Fire Chief or Fire Prevention
Inspector, may in his order limit the time for appeal to a shorter period.
      (3)   The Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board
of Appeals all of the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken when
notified of the appeal by the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The term “Building Inspector” as it is used within this
Chapter 151 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be and is hereby amended to
read “Housing Inspector” in any other place in which it appears in this
Chapter 151.
(Prior Code, Art. 10, § 10.12)
CHAPTER 152: HOUSING CODE FOR NON-OWNER OCCUPIED DWELLINGS
Section
   
152.01   Legislative findings of fact
   
152.02   Purpose of Housing Code
   
152.03   Applicability to all dwellings
   
152.04   Conflict with other ordinances
   
152.05   Conflicts of permits and licenses
   
152.06   Definitions
   
152.07   Standards for exterior property areas
   
152.08   Standards for maintenance of dwellings and dwelling units
   
152.09   Standards for basic equipment and facilities
   
152.10   Standards for light, ventilation and heating
   
152.11   Standards for space, use and location
   
152.12   Standards for rooming houses
   
152.13   Standards for security
   
152.14   Primary responsibilities
   
152.15   Enforcement
   
152.16   Mandatory rental dwelling inspection program
   
152.17   Unlawful interruption of tenant occupancy
   
152.18   Nonliability of city officials
   
152.19   Penalty
   
152.20   Effective date
§ 152.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT.
   It is hereby found and declared there exists in the City, premises used,
designed, or intended for human habitation which are, or may become in the near
future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, and
further that such conditions together with inadequate provisions for light and
air, insufficient protection against fire hazards, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions and overcrowding constitute a menace to the health,
safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of its citizens. It is further
found and declared that the existence of such conditions, factors, or
characteristics has created and will continue to create, slum and blighted
areas requiring large scale clearance, and further that in the absence of
corrective measures, such areas will experience a deterioration of social
values, a curtailment of investment and tax revenues, and an impairment of
economic values. It is further found and declared that the establishment and
maintenance of minimum housing standards are essential to the prevention of
blight and decay and the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals and
welfare.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-1)
§ 152.02 PURPOSE OF HOUSING CODE.
   (A)   The intent and purpose of this Article is to protect the public
health, safety and the general welfare of the citizens of the City of Mt.
Vernon. These general objectives include, among others, the following specific
purposes:
      (1)   To protect the character and stability of residential areas within
the City of Mt. Vernon.
      (2)   To provide minimum standards for heating and sanitary equipment
necessary to the health and safety of occupants of buildings.
      (3)   To provide facilities for light and ventilation, necessary to
health and safety of occupants of buildings.
      (4)   To prevent additions or alterations to existing dwellings that
would be injurious to the life, health, safety or general welfare of the
occupants of such dwellings or neighboring properties.
      (5)   To provide minimum standards for the maintenance of existing
residential buildings to prohibit unsuitable residential housing.
      (6)   To preserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
City.
      (7)   To fix responsibility and duties of owners, operators, agents, and
occupants of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, multiple dwellings, and
rooming units unfit for human habitation.
      (8)   To fix penalties for the violations declared to be remedial and
essential to the public interest.
   (B)   It is the intent of this Article that each provision of this Article
shall be liberally constructed to effectuate the purposes as stated above.
   (C)   Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the City of Mt. Vernon or its officers or agents relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe
or unsanitary or the abatement of any nuisance.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-2)
§ 152.03 APPLICABILITY TO ALL DWELLINGS.
   Each building or premises, or any part thereof, used, designed, or intended
to be used for any non-owner occupied dwelling purpose, except temporary
housing, shall, subject to the provisions of §
152.11(C) and (D), comply with the provisions of this Article, irrespective of
when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and
irrespective of any permit or license which shall have been issued for that
construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of
equipment or of the facilities prior to the effective date of this Article.
This Article establishes minimum standards (except as provided in §
152.04 of this Article) required to be met at all times for the use of
dwellings, building facilities, and equipment.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-3)
§ 152.04 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety,
or health ordinance, or regulation of the City regulating existing buildings,
the provision which established the most restrictive standard shall prevail,
except that the provisions of this
Chapter 152 shall, with regard to non-owner occupied dwellings, supersede the
provisions of
Chapter 151.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-4)
§ 152.05 CONFLICTS OF PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   All departments and officials of the City having the duty or authority to
issue permits or licenses in regard to the construction, installation, or
repair of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, multiple
dwellings, equipment, or facilities, shall conform to the provisions of this
Article and no such permit or license shall be issued, if such would be in
conflict with this Article. Any permit not authorized to be issued shall be
subject to revocation.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-5)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached structure which is not used and not intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and which is located on
the same premises as a principal structure and the use of such accessory
structure is incidental to the principal structure.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Building and Inspection Department of the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building partly underground by having more than
half its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
   BATHROOM. Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both,
and which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar
purposes.
   BUILDING. A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having
a roof to form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals or property.
The word BUILDING shall be construed, when used herein as though followed by
the words “or parts thereof” unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used, designed, or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that “temporary
housing” as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming
a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, designed, or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, working, and eating.
   EGRESS. Arrangements and openings to assure a safe means of exit from
buildings.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS. Open spaces on the premises and vacant open space
on adjacent premises.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborages; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the proper authorities.
   FLOOR AREA. The total horizontal area of habitable space.
   GARBAGE. Anything that may decompose and become offensive or dangerous to
health, including, but not limited to waste products resulting from the
handling, storage, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GRADE (GROUND LEVEL). The average of the finished ground level. In case
walls are parallel to and within five feet (5’) of a sidewalk, the said
finished ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, and utility rooms of
less than fifty (50) square feet, foyers, or communicating corridors,
stairways, closets, storage spaces, and workshops, hobby and recreation areas
below ground level or in attics.
   HOT WATER. Water heated to a temperature of not less than one hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (100°F) at the outlet.
   HOTEL and MOTEL. See definition of ROOMING HOUSE.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, multiple dwelling, rooming unit, or premises, of insects,
rodents, vermin and other pests.
   KITCHEN. Any room containing any or all of the following equipment, or any
area of a room within three feet (3’) of such equipment: sink or other device
for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other
device for cold storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage or cooking
equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.
   LEAD BEARING SUBSTANCE. Any paint, plaster, or other material or substance
containing more than six-tenths of one percent (0.6%) by weight (calculated as
lead metal) in the total nonvolatile content of liquid paints or in the dried
film of paint previously applied.
   LET. Any lease, agreement or arrangement permitting occupancy or use; and
also any contract for deed, or agreement to purchase, or unrecorded deed
permitting occupancy or use of a dwelling unit which is not actually receiving
the General Homestead Exemption from taxation under 35 ILCS 200/15-175 during
said occupancy or use.
   MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS.
      (1)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNITS, ROOMING UNITS,
PREMISES, STRUCTURE are used in this Article, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words OR ANY PART THEREOF.
      (2)   Words used in the singular include the plural, and in the plural
the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the
masculine.
   MOBILE HOMES. A factory-assembled, movable dwelling designed and constructed
to be towed on its chassis, comprised of frame wheels, to be used without a
permanent foundation, and distinguishable from other types of dwellings in that
the standards to which it is built include provisions for its mobility on that
chassis as a vehicle. Removal of the tongue, wheels, or hitch, or placement of
the structure upon a permanent foundation shall not be considered in
determining whether or not a structure is a MOBILE HOME.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling units
and/or rooming units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having
actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming units.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple dwelling,
hotel, motel or rooming house, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let
or offered for occupancy.
   ORDINARY WINTER CONDITIONS. Means a temperature 15°F (-9.4°C) above the
lowest recorded temperature in the City for the prior 10-year period.
   OWNER. Any person or entity who shall have a legal, equitable or beneficial
interest in the subject real estate, or any improvements thereto; or a
reversionary leasehold interest in the subject real estate, or any improvements
thereto; or a capacity to manage the subject real estate or any improvements
thereto pursuant to an Order of Court, power, or agreement.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   PLUMBING. All of the following facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas
burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, installed
clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar
equipment and fixtures, and the installation thereof, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   POTABLE WATER. Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any buildings or
structures thereon.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewerage system operated by the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, and available for public use.
   RENTAL DWELLING. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which is occupied pursuant to
a lease or other agreement or arrangement including a contract for deed or
agreement to purchase or unrecorded deed permitting occupancy in exchange for
any consideration. RENTAL DWELLING does not include a dwelling unit which is
occupied by a named grantee within a deed recorded within the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds, Jefferson County, Illinois.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or part of a dwelling containing one or more
rooming units in which space is rented by the owner or operator to three (3) or
more persons who are not the husband and wife, father or mother, son or
daughter, grandparent or grandchild, brother or sister, uncle or aunt, nephew
or niece or cousin of the first degree, of the owner or operator.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms intended to be used for living or
sleeping but not for cooking purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage.
   SEWAGE. Waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or
laundry machine, or the water carried waste from any other fixture or equipment
or machine.
   STRUCTURE. A combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable,
forming construction, including buildings. The word structure shall be
construed as though followed by the words “or part or parts thereof”.
   SUPPLIED FACILITIES. Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by, or under
the control of the owner or operator.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, recreational vehicle as defined by 625 ILCS 5/
1- 169 or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or,
to any utility system for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days or 30 days
during any calendar year.
   VENTILATION. Supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or
mechanical means.
   VENTILATION, MECHANICAL. Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks with wind-driven devices.
   VERMIN HARBORAGE. Any place where rats, mice, raccoon, opossum, groundhog,
stray cats or other animals that are pests can live, nest or find shelter.
   VERMIN PROOFING.
      (1)   A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of
vermin to or from a given space or building, or gaining access to food, water,
or vermin harborage.
      (2)   It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in
foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first
floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, and other places that may
be reached and entered by vermin by climbing, burrowing or other methods, by
the use of materials impervious to vermin gnawing and other methods approved by
the appropriate authority.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-6)
§ 152.07 STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following requirements;
   (A)   Free From Hazards. Exterior property areas shall be free from
conditions which might create a health, accident or fire hazard, or which might
endanger the public welfare, including but not limited to holes and
excavations, sharp protrusions, barbed wire (unless 6 feet above the ground
atop a chain link, solid, or other approved fence), sheer embankments,
inoperative or abandoned vehicles or machinery, unused household goods or
appliances and other objects or materials. Walks, steps, and driveways that
contain holes or tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired, or replaced as
necessary. Open wells, cesspools, septic tanks or cisterns shall be kept
securely closed if in approved use. If they are not in approved use, they must
be filled with natural soil. No unlicensed, inoperable, junk, or nuisance motor
vehicle nor other nuisance as defined within Chapter 90 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances shall be permitted on the premises.
   (B)   Free From Rubbish And Garbage. Disposal of rubbish and other refuse
shall be done in accordance with all regulations of the City. The property
shall be free of accumulating rubbish and garbage.
   (C)   Fences: All fences provided by the owner or agent on the premises and/
or all fences erected by an occupant shall be constructed of manufactured metal
fencing material, wood, masonry or other material. Such fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Wood materials, other than decay-resistant wood,
shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other preservative. Any
paint or other protective material must be maintained free of deterioration, in
sound condition and good repair. The permissible height and other
characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the City and State. Wherever any egress from the
dwelling opens into the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the
premises to any public way adjacent thereto.
   (D)   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures present or provided by the
owner, agent or tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be
structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and free from insects and
rats, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of
such structure shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay-
resistant materials or the use of paint or other preservatives. Paint or other
protective coverings must be maintained free of deterioration, in sound
condition and good repair.
   (E)   Sewage. Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer system or if
otherwise permitted by the Revised Code of Ordinances into an approved septic
tank. Discharge of inadequately treated sewage shall not be permitted upon the
surface of the ground or into any natural or artificial drainage way.
   (F)   Noxious Weeds. Exterior property areas shall be kept free of all weeds
which are detrimental to the public health, including, but not limited to
ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac.
   (G)   Insect And Vermin Harborage. Where insect or vermin breeding areas,
harborage, or infestation exist, the same shall be eliminated.
   (H)   Storage Of Materials. In the event that occupancy usages would result
in stacking or piling materials, the materials shall be so arranged as to
prohibit the creation of a vermin harborage area. Such shall be accomplished by
orderly stacking and elevating so that there will be at least a twelve inch
(12”) opening between the material and the ground level. No stacking or piling
of material shall take place against the exterior walls of the structure.
   (I)   Water shall not be permitted to accumulate or stand on the premises so
as to create any stagnant condition, mosquito breeding ground, offensive smell,
unsightly condition, unsafe or hazardous condition or other condition
potentially harmful to the public health or safety.
   (J)   All outdoor spas, and hot tubs must be securely enclosed in a solid,
chain link, or other approved fence not less than four feet in height with a
self-closing and self-latching gate or locked gate. Fencing or barriers for
swimming pools and wading pools shall comply with the applicable building and
residential Codes adopted by the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-7)
§ 152.08 STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.
   No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Foundations, Floors, Walls, Ceilings And Roofs.
      (1)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weather tight and vermin proof, shall afford privacy, and shall be kept in good
repair. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
points; floors shall be free of hazard; every exterior wall shall be free of
holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards and timbers, and any other condition
which might admit vermin, rain or dampness to the interior portions of the
walls, or the interior spaces of the dwelling; all exterior surface materials
shall be protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective
covering or treatment, when required to prevent deterioration.
      (2)   Any paint or other protective materials must be maintained free of
deterioration, in sound condition and good repair. Every interior wall shall be
free of holes and large cracks, loose plaster and other structural material.
The roof shall be tight and shall have no defects which admit rain. All
openings for pipes, conduits and other utility services accessible to vermin
shall be closed solidly for the full thickness of the wall, floor, roof, etc.,
with an approved vermin proof material or fitted with a collar or shield,
securely fastened to the wall or floor, of not less than twenty four (24) gauge
galvanized sheet metal or other approved materials, extending at least three
inches (3”) beyond all sides of the opening.
   (B)   Lead Bearing Substances.
      (1)   No person shall sell, use, or apply any substance in which the
total nonvolatile ingredients contain more than six-tenths of one percent
(0.6%) of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead in or upon any exposed
interior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or temporary housing, nor in or
upon any fixture or other object used, installed or located in or upon such
surface or intended to be so used, installed or located.
      (2)   Upon notice from the City of the existence of any such substances
herein prohibited, it shall be the responsibility for the owner to remove or to
securely and permanently cover such surfaces within fourteen (14) days after
the receipt of such notice, unless the Building Inspector shall, for good cause
shown, grant in writing an additional period of time to complete such removal
or covering.
   (C)   Windows, Exterior Doors And Basement Hatchways. Every window, exterior
door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably watertight, and vermin proof;
and shall be kept in good working condition and good repair. Every opening
located at or within one and one-half feet (1-1/2’) of ground level which might
provide an entry for vermin, shall be adequately covered with screening or some
other device so as to effectively prevent the entrance of vermin, but so as not
to prevent emergency egress where such egress is appropriate.
   (D)   Stairs And Porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and
every appurtenance to any of the foregoing shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and all of
the aforesaid shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every inside
and outside stair or step shall have uniform risers and uniform treads.
   (E)   Handrails. Structurally sound handrails shall be provided on any steps
containing five (5) risers or more. If steps are not enclosed, handrails and
balusters spaced no more than six inches (6”) apart shall be provided. Porches
and balconies located more than three feet (3’) higher than the adjacent area
shall have structurally sound protective handrails thirty inches (30”) to
thirty six inches (36”) high and, if unenclosed, balusters spaced no more than
six inches (6”) apart shall also be provided.
   (F)   Chimneys, Flues, And Vents. All chimneys, flues, and vents on every
structure used for human habitation shall be structurally sound, free from
defects and capable of performing the function for which the same are designed
or used. Each shall have sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the
equipment. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be structurally
safe, durable, smoke tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gasses or shall be rendered functionally unusable by interior fireplaces and
all other heating facilities as provided within the Fire Code of the City.
   (G)   Rubbish And Garbage. The interior of every structure used for human
habitation shall be maintained free from rubbish and garbage that might become
a health, accident or fire hazard.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-8)
§ 152.09 STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit intended for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Kitchen Equipment. A room or portion of a room in which food may be
prepared and/or cooked, such room or portion thereof having adequate
circulation area and being equipped with the following minimum equipment:
      (1)   A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to
a water and sewerage system in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the
City and the statutes of the State.
      (2)   Cabinets or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking and cooking
equipment and utensils and of food that does not under ordinary summer
conditions require refrigeration for safekeeping;
      (3)   (a)   A counter or table for food preparation.
         (b)   All of the foregoing equipment shall be of sufficient size and
design so as to be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling or
dwelling unit and all shall have surfaces that are easily cleaned and that will
not impart any toxic or harmful effect to food.
      (4)   A stove or similar device for cooking food and a refrigerator or
similar device for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) but more than thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F)
under ordinary maximum summer conditions must be provided by the owner or
occupant. All must be properly installed with all necessary connections for
safe, sanitary and efficient operation. No stove, refrigerator or similar
devices aforesaid need be installed, however, in any dwelling unit that is not
occupied if sufficient space and adequate connections are provided so that the
same may be installed immediately by owner or occupant upon any occupancy of
such dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (B)   Toilet Facilities. A room affording privacy to a person within said
room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and lavatory basin, both
in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewage system
in accordance with the applicable ordinances to the City and the statutes of
the State.
   (C)   Bathing Facilities. A room which affords privacy to a person within
said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewage system in accordance
with the applicable ordinances of the City and Illinois statutes. The room
containing the toilet facilities required by subsection (B) above and the room
containing the bathing facilities required by the provisions of this subsection
may be one and the same room.
   (D)   Water Supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower required under the provisions of this Article shall be properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water heating
facilities which are properly installed and connected and are capable of
heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, tub or shower at a
temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
   (F)   Garbage Storage Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate
garbage storage containers. Garbage shall be placed in containers with tightly
fitted lids. Containers shall not be located in such a manner to be a visually
offensive, health threat, or nuisance due to the blowing of debris from
containers by the wind, odors from the container or for any other reason.
Containers, except on the day of pick-up shall be situated within an enclosed
building or shall be situated immediately adjacent to a building; containers
shall not be placed or situated adjacent to any street or alley or within any
yard, except as herein provided. In the event, a dumpster or other community
container is provided for the temporary storage of garbage prior to disposal
such dumpster or community container shall be enclosed within a building, or
shall be enclosed by a solid, six foot screening device such as a fence or wall
so as to be completely concealed on three sides, with only one side open for
accessibility by a garbage collection crew.
   (G)   Rubbish Storage. No rubbish shall be stored or placed upon any
premises or within dwelling unit, except rubbish may be temporarily placed
within containers with tightly fitted lids or inside an accessory structure in
a manner such that the rubbish creates no nuisance, fire hazard, vermin
harborage, or other danger.
   (H)   Egress Requirements. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one
unobstructed means of egress that leads to a public street or alley either
directly or through a court or yard. Every dwelling unit located on the second
or higher story shall have at least two such exits. An emergency escape ladder
placed upon each second or higher story shall be considered an acceptable
second means of egress as long as it is UL Underwriters Laboratory listed and
approved; the requirement to provide an approved emergency escape ladder shall
be the sole responsibility of the owner unless the written lease of the owner
with a tenant requires the tenant to obtain and place said approved emergency
escape ladder during the entire term of the lease; in the event it is the
tenant’s primary responsibility to provide and place an emergency escape
ladder, then said emergency escape ladder shall be obtained and placed within
48 hours of the tenant entering into possession of the dwelling unit. The
following language within a lease shall be sufficient to place primary
responsibility upon the tenant to provide an emergency escape ladder: “Within
48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises, tenant shall
place, and shall thereafter maintain during the lease term, an approved
emergency escape ladder upon each second or higher story floor of the leased
premises”. Passage to a dwelling unit’s exit(s) shall not lead through any
other dwelling unit or through a space that might reasonably be locked by
anyone who is not a member of the household. Provided, that dual egress shall
not be required in structures that are of fireproof condition as defined in the
adopted Building Codes of the City. Any basement bedroom shall have a minimum
of two exits, if one exit is a window it shall be at least 5.7 square feet of
clear opening and no more than 44 inches above the floor.
   (I)   Medication and Poison Storage Facilities. Each dwelling unit shall
provide for the safe storage of medications and household poisons. Each cabinet
or storage facility used for medications or household poisons shall have an
improved child resistant locking device if any part of the storage area of said
cabinet or storage facility is less than four feet in height above the floor.
The requirement to provide approved child resistant locking devices shall be
the sole responsibility of the owner unless the written lease of the owner with
a tenant requires the tenant to obtain, install and maintain said approved
child resistant locking devices during the entire term of the lease; in the
event it is the tenant’s primary responsibility to provide approved child
resistant locking devices, then said locking devices shall be installed within
48 hours of the tenant entering into possession of the dwelling unit. The
following language within a lease shall be sufficient to place the primary
responsibility upon the tenant to provide child resistant locking devices:
“Within 48 hours of the tenant assuming occupancy of the leased premises,
tenant shall install, and shall thereafter maintain during the lease term,
approved child resistant locking devices for each cabinet or storage facility
used for storage of medications or household poisons having any storage area
less than four feet in height above the floor.”
   (J)   Locks. No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling units unless all exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling unit are
equipped with safe, functional locking devices, and are further made secure as
set forth in §
152.13 of this Article.
   (K)   Smoke Detectors. All dwellings and dwelling units shall have an
operable smoke detector in the immediate area of the bedrooms. Every dwelling
unit shall be equipped with a properly installed smoke alarm on each story of
the dwelling unit and within fifteen feet of each sleeping room area, which
detector shall comply with the applicable Codes of the City and with the
Statutes of the State of Illinois.
   (L)   Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with
a properly installed carbon monoxide detector on each story of the dwelling
unit and within fifteen feet of each sleeping room area, which detector shall
comply with the applicable articles of the City and with the Statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   (M)   Plumbing. Every dwelling unit shall have properly installed sewer
lines, water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents, and drains all of which shall be
maintained free from obstructions, leaks, or defects so as to prevent
structural deterioration or health hazards. All plumbing shall comply with the
State of Illinois Plumbing Code and the applicable Ordinances of the City.
   (N)   Stairway and Porches. Every stairway, inside or outside a dwelling,
and every porch shall be kept in a safe condition, free of deterioration, and
in sound repair. Every open stairwell and every flight of stairs and every
porch shall comply with the applicable Building Code of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-9)
§ 152.10 STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING.
   No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit intended for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Lighting.
      (1)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing outdoors or artificial lighting capable of producing at least an average
illumination of six (6) foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of
thirty inches (30”) above the floor (3 foot-candles minimum requirement in
bathrooms), excepting that such rooms that are connected to another room or
area and such other room or area is used only seasonally (such as, but not
limited to, porches) and adequate daylight enters the said habitable room
through the interconnection, are not required to have such windows or
skylights. The minimum total window or skylight area shall be measured between
stops and shall be, for every room where required, equal to at least eight
percent (8%) of the floor area of the room in which located. No window shall be
deemed to be facing outdoors if any light-obstructing structures are located
less than three feet (3’) from such window and extend to a level above that of
the ceiling of the room in which such window is located, and the same shall not
be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
      (2)   Every public hall and every stairway in every multiple dwelling
shall be adequately lighted by natural or electrical light at all times, so as
to provide in all parts thereof at least ten (10) foot-candles of light at the
tread or floor level. Every public hall and every stairway in structures
containing not more than two (2) dwelling units or not more than two (2) rooms
used as rooming units shall comply with the provisions of this subsection
relating to multiple-dwellings, or in the alternative, shall be supplied with
conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system to
be turned on when needed with full-time lighting not being required.
   (B)   Ventilation. Every habitable room, excepting those connected to
another room or area that is used only seasonally and adequate ventilation is
provided through such interconnection and further excepting those rooms
ventilated by some other approved device, shall have at least one window or
skylight facing outdoors which can be easily opened, or provided mechanical
exhaust of sixty (60) cfm, exhausted to the atmosphere above the roof line or
secured into a vented soffit area and away from openable windows into which
foul air might be blown. The total of openable window or skylight area required
shall be equal to at least four percent (4%) of the floor area of the room in
which it is located.
   (C)   Bathroom Ventilation. Every bathroom and water closet compartment
shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as provided
in subsection (B) of this Section.
   (D)   Electrical Service. The electrical service within each dwelling,
dwelling unit, and accessory structure shall comply with the applicable
electrical, fire, residential, and other Codes adopted by the City, including
but not limited to the following requirements:
      (1)   Where there is usable electrical service available from power lines
which are situated not more than three hundred feet (300’) from a dwelling,
every dwelling unit situated in such dwelling and all public and common areas
of such dwelling shall be supplied with electrical service, outlets, and
fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and
safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electrical power
in a lawful manner and in accordance with applicable Codes. Under no
circumstance shall temporary wiring for electrical service within a dwelling
unit or for any accessory structure be permitted.
      (2)   The minimum capacity of such service and the number of outlets and
fixtures shall be as follows:
         (a)   Every habitable room shall have electrical service and outlets
and/or fixtures capable of providing at least three (3) watts per square foot
of total floor area. Outlets should be distributed reasonably evenly around the
room. Extension cords may not be used for more than their UL rated capacity; no
extension cord shall be used as a receptacle for another extension cord.
         (b)   Every habitable room and every non-habitable room used for food
preparation shall have at least one floor-type or one wall-type electrical
convenience outlet for each sixty (60) square feet or fraction thereof total
floor area, and in no case less than two (2) such outlets.
      (3)   (a)   Every Bathroom, water closet compartments, kitchen or
kitchenette, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least
one ceiling-type or one wall-type electrical light fixture.
         (b)   No dwelling shall have less than a 100 amp service. No dwelling
or electric service upon any dwelling premises shall utilize or have knob and
tube wiring; upon removal of knob and tube wiring the entire electric service,
outlets, and fixtures shall comply with the Electrical Code of the City.
   (E)   Heating Facilities.
      (1)   Every dwelling shall have permanent heating facilities which are
properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition with proper
safety devices, and which are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit
located therein, to a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit
(68°F) at a distance of thirty six inches (36”) above floor level under
ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Permanent, heating facilities are not capable of being readily
moved around the dwelling and are generally affixed directly to the building.
Examples of permanent heating facilities include but are not limited to oil,
gas, electric and coal furnaces or boilers; electrical heat pumps; wood
furnaces or stoves; electric baseboard heaters, active or passive solar
devices; or devices connected to a district heating system. Permanent heating
facilities can be used singly or in combinations to meet the performance
standards contained herein. Any auxiliary heater shall be UL approved and
equipped with automatic shutoff. All auxiliary heaters must be used in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Auxiliary heaters are intended to
supplement the permanent heating facilities. Auxiliary heating devices include
but are not limited to portable electric space heaters and portable kerosene or
oil heaters. The capacity of auxiliary heaters shall not be counted in
determining whether the performance standards for heating are met in a
dwelling.
   (F)   Insect Protection. During that portion of each year between May 1 and
October 1, both dates inclusive, every door opening directly from a dwelling
unit or rooming unit to outside space that is used for ventilation and every
window and other device with openings to outside space that is used or capable
of being used for ventilation shall have properly fitted screens having at
least sixteen (16) mesh so as to afford protection against mosquitoes, flies,
and other flying insects. Screens must be on premises and available for
inspection from October 2 through April 30, both dates inclusive. Also between
May 1 and October 1 all hinged screen doors shall be equipped with self-closing
devices. Provided however, that if a dwelling unit has fully functioning and
operating central air conditioning which services the entire dwelling unit,
then the screening requirements herein are not applicable.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-10)
§ 152.11 STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
   No person shall own or occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or dwelling unit, intended for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   Minimum Space In Dwelling Units. The minimum habitable room space of
any dwelling unit shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area for the first occupant and not less than an additional one hundred
(100) square feet of floor area for every additional occupant.
   (B)   Minimum Space In Sleeping Rooms. Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum floor area of at least seventy
(70) square feet. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each
occupant.
   (C)   Access To Bathrooms And Sleeping Rooms. Any dwelling or dwelling unit
containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangement so
as to provide access to a bathroom or water closet compartment so as to permit
persons using each of such sleeping rooms to have access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment without the necessity of passing through another sleeping
room and shall further have such room arrangement so as to provide access to
each sleeping room so as to permit persons using such sleeping room to have
access thereto without the necessity of passing through another sleeping room
or through any bathroom or water closet compartment. Provided however that if a
dwelling, constructed in full compliance with the applicable Codes on the date
of its construction, because of its structural design is noncompliant with the
provisions of this subsection, such nonconformity may continue but shall not be
expanded.
   (D)   Height Requirements. At least one-half (1/2) the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet (7’). The
floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five
feet (5’) shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the
total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the minimum
permissible occupancy thereof. Provided however that if a dwelling, constructed
in full compliance with the applicable Codes on the date of its construction,
because of its structural design is noncompliant with the provisions of this
subsection, such nonconformity may continue but shall not be expanded.
   (E)   Rooms Below Grade.
      (1)   Basements may be used as dwelling units if they meet the light,
ventilation, heating, egress and all other applicable portions of this Article.
      (2)   No basement space shall be deemed fit for or used as a habitable
room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls thereof are impervious to
leakage of underground and surface runoff water and dampness.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-11)
§ 152.12 STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES.
   Notwithstanding anything in this Article to the contrary, no person shall
operate a rooming house or occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming
house except in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Article and
unless such rooming house complies with the following requirements:
   (A)   Bathing And Toilet Facilities. At least one flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, in good working condition and properly
connected to sewer and water system in accordance with the applicable articles
and ordinances of the City and the laws of the State shall be supplied for each
six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the operator’s family wherever they share the use of said
facilities; provided, however, that in the case where rooms are rented only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2) of the
required number of water closets. Such bathing and toilet facilities shall be
so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common
hallway or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No
such facilities as aforesaid that are located in a basement shall be considered
to meet the aforesaid requirements unless the same shall conform to the
provisions of §
152.10(E) of this Article.
   (B)   Bed Linen And Towels. Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied,
the owner or operator shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall furnish clean bed linen and towels at least once each week and in any
event prior to the renting of any room to any occupant.
   (C)   Rooming Unit. Every room constituting or being a part of a rooming
unit that is occupied for sleeping purposes shall comply with the standards set
forth in subsection (B) of this Section, and shall, in addition, contain not
less than four (4) square feet of closet space per occupant.
   (D)   Means Of Egress. Every rooming unit shall have immediate access to not
less than two (2) safe, unobstructed means of egress, with minimum head room of
six feet four inches (6’4”) leading to safe and open space at ground level.
   (E)   Maintenance. Every rooming house shall be maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition and full compliance with those standards set forth in §
152.08 of this Article and each subsections thereof of §§
152.01 through
152.16 of this Article.
   (F)   Hotels And Motels. Every provision of this Article applicable to
rooming houses shall apply equally to hotels and motels, provided, that the
provisions of §
152.10(A) entitled “Lighting” does not apply to hotels and motels if said
hotels and motels meet the requirements of §
152.10(B) entitled “Ventilation”.
   (G)   Mobile Homes. Every provision of this Article applicable to rooming
houses shall apply equally to mobile homes used for rooming houses.
   (H)   Hot Air Heating System Returns. Where hot air heating systems are
used, no return air shall be circulated directly from one unit or sleeping room
to another.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-12)
§ 152.13 STANDARDS FOR SECURITY.
   (A)   Scope. All dwelling units within the City shall meet the minimum
requirements as set forth herein except structures which, although providing
sleeping accommodations, are primarily used for:
      (1)   Medical care or other treatment of individuals suffering from
physical or mental illness, disease or infirmity;
      (2)   The care of infants, convalescents, or the elderly;
      (3)   Penal or corrective purposes; and
      (4)   Hotel or motel purposes and which provide temporary sleeping
accommodations for hire used by transients with or without meals.
   (B)   Alternative Materials And Methods Of Construction. The provisions of
this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of
structural design or analysis not specifically prescribed herein, provided any
such alternate is substantiated by suitable evidence.
   (C)   Approval Of Alternate Material Or Method. The Building and Inspection
Department may approve any such alternate material or method provided the
proposed design is satisfactory and the material or method of work offered is,
for the purposes intended, at least equivalent of that prescribed in this
section.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      CYLINDER. The part of a lock set that has an entrance for the key which
thereby activates the locking mechanism.
      CYLINDER GUARD. A hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the
lock cylinder or other device which is so fastened as to protect the cylinder
from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling at attack tools.
      DEAD BOLT LOCK. A locking device with a bolt that has no automatic spring
action and which is operated manually by a key cylinder on its exterior side
and by a knob, thumb turn, or lever on its interior side, and a bolt that is
positively held fast when in the projected position (also known as deadlock).
      DORMITORY. A building, not open to transients, where lodging is provided
for ten (10) or more non-family persons, and no kitchen facilities other than
one central kitchen facility, are provided any dwelling unit occupied by
persons other than management personnel.
      FLUSH OR SURFACE BOLT. A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that
is attached to the top and bottom and/or side of the door and engages in the
frame and/or base of the door.
      HOOK OR EXPANDING BOLT. A dead bolt lock in which the bolt or bolts
interlock with the strike plate into which the bolt or bolts are projected.
      LOCKING DEVICE. A mechanical implement or combination of mechanical
implements attached to the door, window or other access points of a building or
structure which is designed to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the
building or structure through the door, window, or other access point on which
the locking device is activated.
      SINGLE CYLINDER LOCKING DEVICE. A bolt that is activated on its exterior
side by a key and on its interior side by a knob, thumb turn, lever or similar
mechanism.
      THROW. The outward movement of a bolt or spring bolt which is measured by
the distance which such a bolt travels, i.e., when the bolt or spring bolt is
moved from the open position to the locked position (extended), it is said to
have been thrown.
   (E)   Security Standards. Except as otherwise herein provided, exterior
doors serving as the required means of egress to the exterior of a multiple
dwelling, dormitory and rooming house shall comply with the provisions of the
edition of the International Building Code which has been adopted by the City
of Mt. Vernon. All other doors to individual dwelling units shall comply with
the following provisions:
      (1)   Doors to individual dwelling units shall meet the following
security standards:
         (a)   Single doors shall be secured with a single cylinder locking
device. In addition, if requested in writing by a tenant, each single door
shall also be secured with a deadbolt lock having a minimum throw of one inch
or a hook or an expanding bolt with a throw of 3/4 inch provided that the type
of lock shall be at the election of the landlord with the cost of the lock and
installation thereof to be paid by the tenant and provided that upon
installation of such additional locking device the locking device shall become
the property of the landlord and shall thereafter remain installed and be
maintained by the landlord so that it is functional. All locking devices
required herein shall have bolts that contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt.
         (b)   On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the
type lock required for single doors in subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section.
The inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush or surface bolts protected by
hardened material with a minimum throw of three-fourths inch (3/4”) at the head
and foot of the door. Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active
leaf and complying with subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section and the
requirements herein, may be used in lieu of flush bolts.
         (c)   Exterior doors to individual dwelling units shall have rabbeted
jambs which are reinforced at the point where the required lock engages the
jamb.
         (d)   Firmly secured metal strike plates are required on the jambs of
all doors and are to be located at the point when the required lock engages the
jamb.
         (e)   Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used
if they bear any numbers or letter which would reveal a combination from which
the key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected which could
deactivate the locking device.
      (2)   All patio type of sliding doors opening onto patios or balconies
which are accessible from the outside shall comply with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Patio type or sliding doors shall not be used or installed as
exterior doors for the main entrance of any individual dwelling unit.
         (b)   All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of
the door sliding on the inside of the fixed portion of the door, except as
provided in subsection (B) of this section.
         (c)   Dead bolt locks shall be provided on all single sliding patio
doors. If the lock is operable from the outside, it shall be activated by a key
utilizing a cylinder of pin tumbler construction. Mounting screws for the lock
case shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be of hardened
steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable of withstanding a
force of three hundred (300) pounds applied in any direction. The lock bolt
shall engage the strike sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged by any
possible movement of the door within the space or clearances provided for
installation and operation. The strike area shall be reinforced to maintain
effectiveness of bolt strength. In lieu of providing a dead bolt lock that
meets the requirements of this subsection, a single sliding patio door may
utilize a removable physical barrier (such as a rod or pipe of substantial
construction) of suitable and functional length that is manually placed within
the tract of the sliding patio door to securely block the patio door closed.
         (d)   Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail
and meet the locking requirements as specified in subsection (E)(1)(b) of this
section.
         (e)   Alternate methods for securing doors with movable sections of
the door sliding on the outside of the fixed portion of the door must be
approved by the building official.
      (3)   Any exterior door and any garage door or other inside door leading
to the common areas of any multiple dwelling, dormitory or rooming house or to
a garage attached to any dwelling unit, which has outside hinge pins shall be
secured by a minimum of two (2) safety hinge studs or hinges having non-
removable hinge pins, one hinge above and one below the center of any locking
device.
      (4)   (a)   Parking facilities either under or within the confines of the
perimeter walls of any dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling, dormitory, or
rooming house which are equipped with any garage door shall be so equipped that
such doors are capable of being locked. Specific locking devices to be employed
shall be of one or more of the following types:
            1.   throw bolt or flush bolt,
            2.   dead bolt,
            3.   cylinder type lock,
            4.   padlock and hasp,
            5.   or an electronic power operated mechanism with automatic
locking capabilities.
         (b)   When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or
hasp and shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of
hardened steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when the
door is closed and the padlock is activated.
      (5)   All exterior windows other than fixed windows or those designed not
to be opened, less than twelve feet (12’) off ground level or any other
accessible exterior level shall comply with the following requirements:
         (a)   Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked
it cannot be lifted from the frame.
         (b)   All windows shall be equipped with a locking device which shall
be capable of withstanding a force of one hundred fifty (150) pounds applied in
any direction, and all locks should fully engage.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-13)
§ 152.14 PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this Section to establish primary
responsibilities in certain areas of compliance with the provisions of this
Article. Each owner or occupant shall have responsibility for compliance with
this Article and be subject to enforcement, notwithstanding any agreement
assigning primary or other responsibility to the other or to a third person.
   (B)   Primary Responsibilities Of Occupants. Every occupant above the age of
eighteen (18) years shall be primarily responsible as to that part of any
building, structure or premises over which such occupant shall have a right to
possession or control, for the following:
      (1)   To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (2)   To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so
as to create a vermin harborage.
      (3)   To dispose of rubbish, garbage and other material in the manner
provided by City ordinances.
      (4)   The extermination of insects and vermin, after twenty one (21)
continuous days of occupancy where:
         (a)   the dwelling contains only one dwelling unit, or only the
occupant’s dwelling unit of a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit
is infested, and
         (b)   infestation has resulted from some cause other than the failure
of an owner to maintain the dwelling in a vermin proof or reasonably insect
proof condition prior to the commencement of the occupancy.
      (5)   To not do anything to cause intentional interruption or
disconnection of any utility for which the occupant is liable.
      (6)   To maintain and replace required screens after the owner has
fulfilled all his primary responsibilities regarding the same as hereinafter
set forth in subsection (C) of this Section.
      (7)   To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery owned
by the occupant as provided by City ordinance.
   (C)   Primary Responsibilities Of Owners. Every owner shall be responsible
as to that part of any building, structure or premises over which such owner
has the right to possession or control, including but not limited to areas used
by the public or used in common by occupants of two (2) or more dwelling units,
as hereinafter set forth (such responsibilities shall likewise apply to any
other part of a building, structure or premises where the content of any such
responsibility so implies) as follows:
      (1)   To provide and install all required screens once each calendar
year.
      (2)   To keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (3)   To not permit rubbish, garbage or other materials to accumulate so
as to create a vermin harborage.
      (4)   To provide adequate and suitable containers for rubbish, garbage or
other waste materials where the premises in question contains three (3) or more
dwelling units.
      (5) “Vermin proofing” as defined in §
152.06 of this Article.
      (6)   The extermination of insects and vermin in all instances excepting
those instances where the occupant is primarily responsible therefor as herein
above provided in subsection (B) of this section.
      (7)   To keep and maintain all supplied facilities in good and proper
condition and operation.
      (8)   To provide and maintain in working order a permanent heating system
as specified in §
152.10(E) of this Article. In structures in which the permanent heating system
supplies heat to two (2) or more dwelling units, or rooming units, the owner
shall be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with the standard in §
152.10(E) of this Article. Where compliance is not reasonably possible because
of general shortage of fuel or because of some act of an occupant, the
provisions of this subsection shall not apply until such causes have been
corrected.
      (9)   To not do anything to cause an intentional interruption or
disconnection of any utility for which an owner is liable.
      (10)   To remove any abandoned or inoperative vehicle or machinery not
owned by the current occupants from the premises as provided by City ordinance.
      (11)   To keep and maintain all accessory structures in good and proper
condition.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-14)
§ 152.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement Officer Duties. The Chief Building Inspector of the City
and Inspectors of the Fire Department or authorized designees of each, are
hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this
Article. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to, the
following specific duties:
      (1)   To inspect dwellings, accessory structures, and residential
premises in accordance with this Article;
      (2)   To take appropriate actions to correct violations of this Article;
      (3)   To review and issue applications for occupancy permits and
temporary occupancy permits;
      (4)   To maintain up-to-date records of all matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this Article;
      (5)   To periodically review the provisions of this Article to determine
whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these matters to
the City Manager.
      (6)   To provide information to the general public on matters related to
this Article;
      (7)   To attend the applicable meetings of the City Council, any Court
hearings concerning this Article, and to cooperate with the corporate
authorities, including the City Attorney’s Office;
      (8)   To prepare an occupancy permit application form, inspection
checklist, and Certificate of Occupancy;
      (9)   To make surveys in any area of the City to determine the general
condition of structures used for human habitation, the extent of any
deterioration, lack of facilities and maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary
conditions, the extent of overcrowding and land use, and any other matters
relating to the provision and requirements of this Article.
      (10)   To perform such other duties as the corporate authorities may from
time to time prescribe.
   (B)   Inspections. In order to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of
the public, inspectors of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire
Department are hereby authorized to make exterior and interior inspections of
all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, hotels, motels,
multiple dwellings and premises, when the same shall appear necessary to
determine the condition thereof and the compliance or noncompliance with the
provisions of this Article. Immediate access to and entry to any such dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, hotel, motel, multiple dwelling or
premises, shall be afforded any such inspector in the case of an emergency
determined by the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department to
exist. No such access and entry shall be required, however, unless such
inspector shall first identify himself and request entry; and exhibit his badge
or other visual identification to any person entitled to the same who requests
said identification. Every owner, owner’s agent, an occupant of a rental
dwelling(s) shall provide access to the rental dwelling(s) as required by §
152.16 of this Article. If any owner or occupant of a dwelling unit fails or
refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises under his
control, or any part thereof, with respect to which an inspection authorized by
this Article is sought to be made, the Building and Inspection Department or
Fire Department may petition and obtain an Administrative Search Warrant as
provided within §
150.09 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Whenever inspections of any rental
dwelling units are made by the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department and there are no violations, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be
issued to the property owner or owner’s agent and shall be made available by
the owner or the owners’ agent to tenants and prospective tenants. If upon
subsequent inspections, violations of this Article are found, the Certificate
of Occupancy shall be surrendered to the City, and if not surrendered it may be
revoked.
   (C)   Notice Of Violations. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, in
those instances where the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department
shall determine that there exists a violation of this Article, written notice
of such violation shall be given the person alleged to have committed the
violation or to be responsible for the violation. In the case of rental
dwellings, notice of violation shall be given to the owner or the owner’s agent
and the occupant of the rental dwelling or unit. Such written notice shall
state the alleged violation and a legal description or local address of the
structure in violation. It shall state that such violation must be corrected
within a reasonable time period specified by the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department based on the nature and severity of the
violation. Such notice may be personally served on the person to whom addressed
or may be sent by first class, registered, or certified mail, to the last known
address of the addressee; such service by mail shall be deemed to have been
served at the time of the deposit in the mail thereof. Service shall also be
made by posting a placard copy of such notice in a conspicuous place in or
about the building, structure or premises in question. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary, notice may be given in any other manner permitted by law in
the service of process in civil cases.
   (D)   Unfit Dwelling Units. In addition to any other rights and powers
granted the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department under the
provisions of this Article, the Building and Inspection Department or Fire
Department may designate and find unfit for human habitation any dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house, hotel, motel, rooming unit, multiple dwelling or
premises and may so placard the same, in the manner described in subsection (C)
of this section upon determining that one or more or all of the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   The building, structure or premises lacks illumination,
ventilation, sanitation, heat or other facilities adequate to protect the
health and safety of the occupants or of the public;
      (2)   The building, structure or premises is damaged, decayed,
unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested in such a manner and to such extent as to
create a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or of the
public;
      (3)   The building, structure or premises, because of the location
thereof, the general conditions existing, the state of the premises or number
of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to
the health and safety that it creates a serious hazard to the health and safety
of the occupants or of the public.
   (E)   Notice Of Intent To Vacate. Whenever the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling, is unfit for human
habitation as provided in Subsection (D) of this section, it shall include such
findings within the notice of violations provided for in subsection (C) of this
Section, and it shall also include a statement of its intent to vacate and
placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple
dwelling, if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not
been secured.
   (F)   Order To Vacate. Whenever a notice of violation, as provided for under
Subsection (C) of this Section, has not been complied with the Building and
Inspection Department or Fire Department may order the dwelling to be vacated.
A copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator
or the occupant, as provided in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Vacating An Unfit Dwelling. Any dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling designated as unfit for human
habitation pursuant to Subsection (D) of this section and ordered vacated as
provided in Subsection (G) of this section, shall be vacated within such
reasonable time as the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department
may specify in the order. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or
multiple dwelling shall again be used for human habitation and the placard
removed until written approval is secured from the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department.
   (H)   Removal Of Placard. No person shall deface or remove the placard from
any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling
which has been designated as unfit for human habitation.
   (I)   Vacated Dwellings Made Secure. The owner, agent, or operator of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or multiple dwelling
shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or
multiple dwelling safe and secure in whatever manner the Building and
Inspection Department or Fire Department shall deem necessary. Any vacant
building open at a door or window or other unenclosed opening shall be deemed
dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of this provision.
   (J)   Power To Act In Emergencies.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the notice of violation provisions of this section,
as provided by subsection (C) of this section, whenever the Building and
Inspection Department or Fire Department, at any time, shall determine that a
violation of this Article exists and that such violation is of such a nature as
to require immediate action to abate a hazard or immediate danger to the
health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of any building or structure
or of the public, the Building and Inspection Department or Fire Department may
issue an order citing the violation and ordering the immediate abatement or
removal or correction of such hazard or danger as to the Building and
Inspection Department or Fire Department appears necessary and proper. Such
order may include, but is not limited to, an order to vacate the building,
structure or premises in question.
      (2)   Any order issued under the provision of this subsection shall be
and become effective immediately upon the issuance thereof. The powers granted
by this subsection shall be in addition to any and all other rights and powers
granted by law.
   (K)   Transfer Of Interest In Certain Property. No person having any
interest in any property that is described in any notice of any violation of
this Article or any order issued under this Article shall sell, transfer,
grant, convey, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of any such interest in
said property so long as any such violation continues to exist, unless such
person having the right to sell, transfer, grant, convey, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such interest in said property shall first furnish to the
intended purchasee, transferee, grantee, donee, mortgagee, lessee or other
intended recipient of such property interest a true and exact copy of such
notice or order, and concurrently therewith furnish the Building and Inspection
Department and Fire Department with the names and addresses of all such
parties.
   (L)   Records. All requests to inspect and/or copy records or documents
prepared, maintained and under the control of the City shall be made in
accordance with Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140).
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-15)
§ 152.16 MANDATORY RENTAL DWELLING INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Inspection Required. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
lease, let, or otherwise permit occupancy of any rental dwelling within the
City, unless the rental dwelling has been inspected by the Building and
Inspection Department and Fire Department and an Occupancy Permit has been
issued for the property. Any person who leases to another any rental dwelling
on or before the effective date of this Article may continue leasing said
rental dwelling without an inspection and a Certificate of Occupancy for a
period of one year from the effective date of this Article. In addition, any
owner who converts the usage of an owner occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling
during the five year period subsequent to the effective date of this Article
may lease said rental dwelling without an inspection and a Certificate of
Occupancy for a period of one year from date of conversion of the owner
occupied dwelling to a rental dwelling.
   (B)   Inspections Authorized.
      (1)   The Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department are
hereby authorized to conduct inspections of any and all rental dwellings, or
units thereof, within the City to determine compliance with the Revised Code of
Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, including this Article.
      (2)   The employees and agents of the Building and Inspection Department
and Fire Department are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey all
rental dwellings within the City. All inspections shall occur at reasonable
hours except in emergency situations where the life, health, and/or safety of
any individual is threatened.
   (C)   Frequency, Access For And Notice Of Inspection.
      (1)   All rental dwellings shall be inspected by the employees or agents
of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department at least once
every three (3) years. Inspections may occur more frequently provided there is:
         (a)   Reasonable suspicion to believe that there exists within such
rental dwelling conditions which present a threat to the health, safety,
welfare or general comfort of the resident(s) of such rental dwelling; or
         (b)   A complaint lodged by the resident(s) of the rental dwelling to
be inspected; or
         (c)   A request made by a prospective resident accompanied by the
consent of the owner (or owner’s agent) of the rental dwelling to be inspected;
or
         (d)   A request made by the owner or owner’s agent.
      (2)   Every owner or owner’s agent of any rental dwelling shall provide
access to such rental dwelling, or any unit thereof, to the employees or agents
of the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department for purposes of
inspecting the rental dwelling or unit thereof for compliance with all
applicable standards and regulations set forth in Mt. Vernon City Code, as
amended. Either the owner, the owner’s agent, or the occupant shall be offered
the opportunity to accompany the inspector during the inspection.
      (3)   Notice shall be given to the owner or the owner’s agent and the
occupant of the rental dwelling or unit thereof at least five (5) days in
advance of such inspection except in those situations described in subsection
(C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b), and (C)(1)(d) of this Section.
      (4)   Notice of inspection shall be provided to both the owner or owner’s
agent and occupant and may consist of a letter sent by first class mail,
personal service, telephone call, email upon an owner’s or occupant’s request
or, for occupants only, the posting of a door hanger upon the door knob of the
rental dwelling or unit thereof. The form of notice given shall be at the
City’s sole discretion provided the form used substantially achieves the
purpose of this “notice” requirement. Where a rental dwelling or unit thereof
is occupied by more than one person, notice to one occupant of each dwelling
unit shall be deemed notice to all occupants of a dwelling unit.
      (5)   Notice of Inspection to which an owner or occupant is entitled may
be waived by said owner or occupant or agent thereof.
   (D)   Identification Of Rental Dwelling And Designation Of Owner’s Agent.
      (1)   Any person owning, managing, or supervising any rental dwelling
shall within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof or within thirty
(30) days of assuming ownership, management or supervision of any rental
dwelling, whichever date is later, inform the Building and Inspection
Department and Fire Department on a form approved by the City of such rental
dwelling.
      (2)   Every owner of any rental dwelling, or unit thereof, who does not
reside on the premises of such rental dwelling shall appoint and designate an
individual to act as an agent in his behalf. Every owner shall notify, in
writing, the Building and Inspection Department, the Fire Department, and each
occupant of the rental dwelling, of the name, address and telephone number of
the agent. Such written notice shall contain the signature of the agent
accepting appointment and designation as agent of the owner.
      (3)   Any individual, who is appointed and designated as agent of the
owner, shall reside within Jefferson County, Illinois, or within a county which
adjoins Jefferson County, Illinois. An owner of a rental dwelling may act as
his own agent provided he meets the residency requirements set forth herein.
   (E)   Occupants To Provide Access For Inspections And Compliance With
Article.
      (1)   Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner
thereof, his agent, or employee or agents of the Building and Inspection
Department and Fire Department access to the rental dwelling, or unit thereof
under their control, to conduct inspections authorized by this Article.
      (2)   Each and every occupant of a rental dwelling shall give the owner
thereof, or his agent or his employees, access to any part of such rental
dwelling at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
Article or with any standard regulation set forth in the Mt. Vernon City Code,
as amended.
   (F)   Fees.
      (1)   A fee as provided within subsection (I) shall be assessed against
the owner by the Building and Inspection Department for inspection of any
rental dwelling unit pursuant to this Article. Notice of Assessment of the fee
shall be served upon the owner by regular mail.
      (2)   Any inspection fees assessed by reason of an inspection initiated
by the Building and Inspection Department and/or Fire Department remaining
unpaid after thirty (30) days shall be a debt due and owing the City and shall
be a lien upon the real estate and, as such, may be collected in accordance
with applicable law. In the event a lien is filed with the Recorder of Deeds of
Jefferson County, a reasonable attorney fee, an administration fee for
preparation of the lien and the cost of recording shall be assessed and
included as part of the lien. In the event the City incurs any attorney fees in
enforcing any lien or in otherwise collecting any fee, all such reasonable
attorney’s fees shall be paid by the party against whom collection is made.
   (G)   Occupancy Permit. Except as provided under temporary occupancy permits
and as except provided within subsection (A) herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to occupy and unlawful for any owner or agent to allow another
person to occupy any rental dwelling unit unless the Building and Inspection
Department has issued a valid occupancy permit. The Building and Inspection
Department shall not issue an occupancy permit until an inspector of the
Building and Inspection Department and the Fire Department have inspected the
dwelling unit and the dwelling unit conforms to the requirements of this
Article. However, if an inspection is performed by another agency or financial
institution and is submitted in writing to the Building and Inspection
Department, if the Building and Inspection Department and Fire Department deem
the outside inspection to be sufficient to comply with the requirements of the
Article, the Building and Inspection Department can issue an occupancy permit
based upon said outside inspection. An occupancy permit shall be valid for
three years from date of issuance unless sooner revoked; the existence of an
occupancy permit for a dwelling unit shall not prevent inspection of a dwelling
unit.
   (H)   Temporary Occupancy Permit. A rental dwelling or unit therein not in
full compliance with this Article may be occupied while repairs are being made
if the Building and Inspection Department has issued a temporary occupancy
permit. No temporary occupancy permit shall be issued until the Building and
Inspection Department and Fire Department have inspected the dwelling unit and
determined that the occupancy thereof does not constitute a serious hazard to
the health or safety of the occupants as indicated by the inspection checklist.
A temporary occupancy permit shall be valid for up to thirty days, and may be
renewed once upon written request.
   (I)   Application for Permits.
      (1)   Every application for an occupancy permit or a temporary occupancy
permit shall be filed with the Building and Inspection Department on a
prescribed form. The application filing fee (which includes the initial
inspection fee and one (1) subsequent re-inspection if required) for each
occupancy permit or for the temporary occupancy permit, for each the initial
permit or its renewal shall be Fifty Dollars ($50) per dwelling unit except
that dwelling units sharing a common roof and foundation (e.g. multiple
dwelling) shall pay a fee in accordance with the following schedule:
 
2—10 dwelling units$38.00 per unit
11—20 dwelling unit$35.00 per unit
21 units and above   $30 per unit
 
      (2)   An inspection fee of Twenty Five (25) Dollars per dwelling unit
shall be paid and assessed for each inspection by the Building and Inspection
Department and Fire Department for each inspection subsequent to the initial
application inspection to and to one (1) re-inspection. All application fees
shall be paid at the time of the application. Inspection fees shall be paid
within thirty (30) days after assessed. Any fee not timely paid may be
collected as provided within subsection (F) herein.
      (3)   Every application for any occupancy, temporary, or renewal permit
shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and
applicant’s relationship to property (i.e. tenant, owner, occupant); name,
address, and telephone number of the owner; the address and general description
of the premises to be occupied; and such other necessary information as may be
required by City.
   (J)   Revocation of Permits.
      (1)   The Building and Inspection Department, upon 5-day notice to the
owner and occupant in writing, may revoke any occupancy permit or temporary
occupancy permit if:
         (a)   The Building and Inspection Department determines that material
information contained in the application for said permit is false;
         (b)   The occupant refuses to allow an authorized inspection of the
premises at any time;
         (c)   The work authorized by a temporary occupancy permit is not
proceeding; or
         (d)   The occupant or owner fails to comply with a corrective action
order or fails to maintain the property in compliance with this Article.
         (e)   The permit was issued in error by the Building and Inspection
Department.
      (2)   The 5-day Notice of Revocation shall be served in the same manner
as required for a Corrective Action Order. During the 5 day period the
applicant or current permit holder may provide such information as desired by
the applicant or permit holder to the Building and Inspection Department and
Fire Department for consideration by the Building and Inspection Department in
the decision to revoke.
   (K)   Utilities Not to be Provided. No utility company shall provide gas, or
electric service until a valid occupancy or temporary occupancy permit is
presented to said utility. The City of Mt. Vernon may refuse to provide and/or
may disconnect water, sewer, and garbage service until or unless a valid
occupancy or temporary occupancy permit is obtained and presented by the owner
to the City’s Billing Services Department.
   (L)   Corrective Action Order. Whenever the Building and Inspection
Department or Fire Department determines that any occupancy or any dwelling
unit, accessory structure, or other portion of premises is in violation of this
Article, it shall so notify the owner and/or occupant in writing, and order
appropriate corrective action.
      (1)   Contents of Order. The order to take corrective action(s) shall
include the following information:
         (a)   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
         (b)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
         (c)   A statement of the remedial action (repairs, reduced number of
occupants, etc.) necessary to effect compliance;
         (d)   The date (at least 5-days unless an emergency condition) by
which the violation must be corrected;
         (e)   Statement that if the violation is not corrected, the occupancy
permit may be revoked, a complaint for violation issued, and/or the property
may be declared unfit for human habitation with attendant consequences. If a
Corrective Action Order has been served s provided herein, no additional Notice
of Revocation is required to be given.
      (2)   Service of Order. The corrective action order shall be deemed
properly served upon the owner, agent, or occupant if it is:
         (a)   Served upon each personally or sent by registered or certified
mail to the last known address of each, with service being effective upon
deposit in the mail.
   AND
         (b)   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the dwelling or
premises
      (3)   Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dwelling who has been served a corrective action order to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of the dwelling or its
ownership interest until he/she has either:
         (a)   effected compliance with the provisions of this Article; or
         (b)   furnished the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a true
copy of the corrective action order, and has given the Building and Inspection
Department and Fire Department a signed and notarized statement from said
grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee that acknowledges receipt of such
corrective action order and unconditionally accepts responsibility for making
the required repairs.
      (4)   Access by Owner or Operator. The occupant(s) of every dwelling unit
shall give the owner or operator, or his agent or employee, free access thereto
at any reasonable time in order to allow him to make any inspection,
alteration, maintenance, or repair necessary to effect compliance with this
Article.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to occupy or let or hold out to
another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein,
where such dwelling unit does not comply with the steps required by the
corrective action order.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-16)
§ 152.17 UNLAWFUL INTERRUPTION OF TENANT OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for any landlord or any person acting at
their direction to knowingly oust or dispossess or attempt to oust or
dispossess any tenant from a dwelling unit without authority of law, by
plugging, changing, adding or removing any lock or latching device; or by
blocking any entrance into said unit; or by removing any door or window from
said unit; or by interfering with the services to said unit, including, but not
limited to, electricity, gas, hot or cold water, plumbing, heat or telephone
services; or by removing a tenant’s personal property from said unit; or by the
use of force or threat of violence, injury or force to a tenant’s person or
property; or by any other act rendering a dwelling unit or any part thereof or
any personal property located therein inaccessible or uninhabitable.
   (B)   The following shall constitute a valid defense to any prosecution by
the City of a complaint alleging violation of Subsection (A) above (although
nothing herein shall authorize any landlord or other person to take any action
or to commit any act otherwise prohibited by state or federal law):
      (1)   A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining
to forcible entry and detainer and engages the Sheriff of Jefferson County to
forcibly evict a tenant or his personal property; or
      (2)   A landlord acts in compliance with the laws of Illinois pertaining
to distress for rent; or
      (3)   A landlord acts pursuant to court order; or
      (4)   A landlord interferes temporarily with possession only as necessary
to make needed repairs or inspection and only as provided by law; or
      (5)   The tenants with a right to possession of the dwelling unit have
been absent therefrom for thirty (30) consecutive days without advising the
landlord of such absence or their intent to return, and the current rent is
thirty (30) or more days overdue, and after diligent inquiry the landlord has
valid reason to believe that tenants have abandoned the premises and do not
intend to return; or
      (6)   After diligent inquiry the landlord has valid reason to believe
that the tenants identified within a written lease have surrendered possession
of the premises and do not intend to return, and by the express language of
said lease document the lease term has expired for at least ten days, and the
landlord has not accepted any rental or other payment after expiration of the
lease term for rental for periods after expiration of the lease term.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-17)
§ 152.18 NONLIABILITY OF CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   No officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally liable
for any damage to persons or property resulting from any act required or
permitted in the discharge of the duties of such officer, agent, or employee
under the provisions of this Article.
   (B)   Any lawsuit of any nature brought against such officer, agent, or
employee as a result of any act, requirement or permitted function in the
discharge of the official duties of such officer, agent, or employee aforesaid
shall be defended at the sole expense of the City until a complete and final
determination of such lawsuit.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-18)
§ 152.19 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provisions of
this Article, shall, upon a finding of guilt, be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition, said persons shall be subject to an action for
injunction to eliminate or to prevent violations of this Article or of any
other applicable Code of the City related thereto.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-19)
§ 152.20 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this Article shall be effective beginning January 1, 2011.
(Prior Code, Art. 10A, § 10-20)
CHAPTER 153: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Adoption of National Electrical Code
   
153.03   Electrical Inspector
   
153.04   Electrical Inspector duties
   
153.05   Fees paid to General Corporate Fund
   
153.06   Permit requirement
   
153.07   Electrical Commission
   
153.08   Registration requirement
   
153.09   Special provisions
   
153.10   Permit/inspection fees
   
153.11   Annual inspection
   
153.12   Revocation of permits
   
153.13   Responsibility/liability for damages
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms and words, as they are used in this Article are defined
as follows:
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment for the
utilization of electricity for light, heat or power, not including radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and not including
apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities,
including common carriers, under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission or other public utilities for use in their operation as public
utilities.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Conductors and equipment installed for the utilization
of electricity, supplies for light, heat or power, but does not include radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds or signals and does not
include apparatus, conductors, and other equipment installed for or by public
utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or other public utilities for use in their
operation as public utilities.
   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The Building Official of the City appointed and
compensated under
Chapter 150 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, or any
of his duly authorized agents.
   WORK, WIRING, APPARATUS, DEVICE AND SIMILAR WORDS AND TERM. Means and refers
to and include all details in connection with any attachment or any part
thereof of any and all similar things used in connection with electricity,
either directly or indirectly.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.1)
§ 153.02 ADOPTION OF NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois that
certain Electrical Code, NFPA 70: National Electric Code, 2023 Edition, issued
by the National Fire Protection Association, at least one copy of which is on
file with the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein and so set out in full; and, from the date of which this Ordinance shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the installation,
alteration, and use of electrical equipment within the City of Mt. Vernon and
on any City property that may be located outside the corporate limits.
   (B)   Any part of said Code which may conflict with this Ordinance is hereby
superseded. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use
any electrical device that does not comply with said Code.
   (C)   The following provisions of the 2023 National Electric Code are hereby
amended as follows:
      (1)   Chapter 2, Section 210.12(B)(1) shall be deleted in its entirety
and will have no effect.
      (2)   Chapter 4, Section 406.12(1) shall be deleted in its entirety and
will have no effect.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.2) (Ord. 2024-37, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 153.03 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   The Electrical Inspector shall not engage in the occupation or business of
electrical work or contracting, or be interested directly or indirectly in any
firm or corporation engaged in such business, during his term of office.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.3)
§ 153.04 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR DUTIES.
   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment. He shall be
subordinate to the City Manager, who shall have the administrative authority
under this Ordinance.
   (B)   The Electrical Inspector, in the discharge of his official duties,
shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any
reasonable hour. If the Electrical Inspector shall inspect and examine any
building, structure or premises and shall determine that such building,
structure or premises is unsafe or dangerous by reason of faulty, defective or
deteriorated electrical usages, or wiring or by reason of improper and unsafe
electrical usages, the Electrical Inspector shall have full power and authority
to order the public utility supplying electrical energy or service to said
property to disconnect such electrical service until the dangerous or unsafe
conditions found in such building, structure or premises are corrected.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall sign and issue all permits and certificates
required by this Ordinance and keep a record of such permits and certificates,
but the City Clerk shall not issue any permit or certificate until same has
been approved by the Electrical Inspector.
   (D)   The Electrical Inspector shall sign and issue all notices required by
this Ordinance and cause a record of the performance of his office to be kept
by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall collect all fees required by this
Ordinance. In the absence of the Electrical Inspector the Fire Chief may issue
temporary permits and otherwise act for the Electrical Inspector.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.4)
§ 153.05 FEES PAID TO GENERAL CORPORATE FUND.
   All registration fees, including the registration fees of the Electrical
Contractor and also of the inspection fees, shall be retained by the City as
General Corporate Funds.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.5)
§ 153.06 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered in the City of
Mt. Vernon except upon a permit first issued by the Electrical Inspector.
However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to repairs and
maintenance, public service agencies, power companies, temporary testing
systems, railway utilities and transmitting equipment. That each permit fee
provided for in this Ordinance will include an inspection fee as hereinafter
set forth and a registration fee of fifty cents (50¢).
   (B)   No real estate shall be annexed to the City of Mt. Vernon upon which
there has been constructed or erected any building or improvement within 12
months prior to the date of annexation, where the construction or erection
thereof would have required an electrical permit if same had been located
within the City of Mt. Vernon on the date of such construction or erection,
unless and until the owner thereof shall have obtained an inspection of such
electrical installation in the manner provided by the within Electrical Code
and shall have paid the inspection fee provided herein for such inspection; and
shall have obtained a certificate that such electrical work complies with the
provisions of the within Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.6)
§ 153.07 ELECTRICAL COMMISSION.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-37 et seq., there is
hereby established an Electrical Commission for the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois.
   (B)   The Electrical Commission shall be composed of six members, as
follows: The Electrical Inspector, who shall be ex-officio Chairman; and of the
other five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, one shall be an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one the Chief of the Fire Department and one a
representative of an electricity supply company; and one a registered
professional engineer.
   (C)   The Electrical Commission shall have such powers as are fixed by
statute and by ordinance, including this Article; it shall interpret this
Article, where necessary, hear appeals from the orders of the Electrical
Inspector and make recommendations to the Electrical Inspector and City
Council.
   (D)   The members of the Electrical Commission shall serve without pay,
including the Electrical Inspector, for his services in this behalf.
   (E)   Each member of the Electrical Commission shall serve for a period of
three years from the date of his appointment or until his successor shall be
appointed.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.7)
§ 153.08 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
installing or altering electrical equipment in the City shall apply for
registration to the City Clerk. Upon the filing of an application in the form
prescribed by the Electrical Commission and payment of the registration fee and
inspection deposit fixed herein, and upon approval by the Electrical
Commission, the Electrical Inspector shall register the applicant as an
Electrical Contractor, and shall cause to be issued to the applicant a
certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in
such business for the fiscal year in which it is issued.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Electrical Inspector, any registered
Electrical Contractor shall have willfully or repeatedly violated any of the
provisions of this ordinance, the Electrical Inspector shall prefer charges
against such offending registered Electrical Contractor to the Electrical
Commission. The Electrical Commission shall immediately conduct a hearing,
after which, by a majority vote, if found guilty, such registration of said
Electrical Contractor shall be revoked, and any unexpired registration fee
shall be returned by the City as liquidated damages. The City Clerk shall keep
a suitable record of all registrations.
   (C)   The fee for registration as an Electrical Contractor shall be Forty
dollars ($40.00) payable on or before April 30 of each year hereafter, which
sum shall be paid by the applicant to the City Clerk. The certificate of
registration issued by the City Clerk shall expire on the first day of May
following its issuance. Neither the City Electrical Inspector nor the
Electrical Commission shall cause to be issued any such certificate of
registration until the payment of such fee shall be made.
   (D)   The license holder shall maintain on deposit with the City Clerk, the
sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to cover the cost of inspection fees. This
deposit will be drawn upon monthly to cover the fees charged for the previous
month. Failure to maintain this deposit in its full amount for a period of more
than thirty (30) days will be reason for revocations of license by the
Electrical Commission.
   (E)   Before any permit to install or alter electrical work shall be issued
to any person, firm or corporation entitled to secure permits under this
ordinance, he shall designate himself or some other person who shall be known
as “Supervising Electrician”, who shall be responsible for electrical work.
   (F)   (2)   The Supervising Electrician shall be not less than twenty-one
(21) years of age, and shall have had at least four (4) years experience in the
installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires,
equipment, and apparatus, or an experienced equivalent thereto.
      (2)   Applicant shall furnish the names and addresses of former
employers, the period of time employed, and in what capacity, proof of which
service shall be furnished in a manner satisfactory to the Electrical
Inspector; or, every applicant provided for in the preceding article shall be
required to answer a reasonable number of questions in writing, to show that he
has sufficient Electrical Code knowledge and technical training to supervise
the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires and
apparatus authorized by permits issued by the Electrical Inspector.
      (3)   Applicants shall be required to answer to the satisfaction of the
Electrical Inspector at least seventy percent (70%) of the questions prepared
by him.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.8)
§ 153.09 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Receptacles installed on 15 to 20 ampere branch circuits must be of
the grounding type in kitchen, basement, laundry, garage, and all damp
locations.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exchange or sell
installation within the corporate limits of the City, any electrical equipment
that requires additional wiring, such as stokers, blowers, air conditioning
units, ranges, built-in cooking units, signs, coin operated devices, etc.,
without listing such apparatus, describing such equipment, complete with the
name and address of the purchaser, and the location where the equipment is to
be installed.
      (2)   This list to be made available to the Electrical Inspector upon
request.
   (C)   Illuminated signs of all types shall have a minimum clearance from the
ground or walkway of ten (10) feet and shall not extend more than ten (10) feet
out from the property line, nor closer than two (2) feet to the curb line of
the street. All signs in alleys and over driveways shall have a minimum
clearance of fifteen (15) feet. The sign support shall be of steel sufficient
strength to adequately support it under all wind and weather conditions. Guys
shall be of chain or galvanized steel cable.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.9)
§ 153.10 PERMIT/INSPECTION FEES.
   In addition to a permit fee of fifty cents (50¢) as heretofore provided
herein, the following inspection fees shall be paid to and collected by the
City Clerk for various classes of work, as follows:
   (A)   Minimum charge, $3.00.
   (B)   Reinspection Charge, $6.00 per hour.
   (C)   All residential buildings remaining unoccupied for a period of six
months, or residential buildings in which meters have been removed, shall be
reinspected before the electrical use is permitted.
   (D)   All other buildings shall be reinspected upon change of occupancy.
Hourly rates for unclassified work, $5.00.
   (E)   Inspection for permission to cover electric work, $2.00 each.
   (F)   Service entrance charges:
      (1)   100 ampere or less $3.00; $2.00 per each additional.
      (2)   100 ampere capacity beyond 100 ampere capacity. (This charge
applies to each individual feeder).
   (G)   Branch circuit charges, fifty cents (50¢) per each installed branch
circuit.
   (H)   Motor and/or generator: $2.00 up to and including 5 h.p. 104,less than
5 h.p. for the purpose of arriving at charges. Entire motor load may be
totalized in arriving at charges.
   (I)   Transformers
      (1)   No charge up to and including 3 KVA or KW.
      (2)   $1.00 each transformer over 3 KVA up to and including 10 KVA.
      (3)   $2.00 for each transformer over 10 KVA up to and including 25 KVA.
      (4)   Transformers over 25 KVA shall be charged at a rate of 10c per KVA
or MN.
   (J)   Fixture schedule $2.00 for first ten lamps. Ten cents (10¢) for each
lamp over ten.
   (K)   Convenience outlets. Two dollars ($2.00) for first ten and ten cents
(10¢) for each convenience outlet over ten.
   (L)   Welders:
      (1)   $2.00 for each welder up to and including 15 KVA or KW.
      (2)   10¢ for each KVA or KW over 15 KVA or KW.
      (3)   Appliances rated in KW or KVA will be the same as welders.
   (M)   Appliances by h.p. - 1/3 h.p. or less will be figured as convenience
outlets. See motor charge for appliance in excess of 1/3 h.p.
   (N)   Switchgear:
      (1)   $3.00 for the first operating unit.
      (2)   $1.00 for each additional operating unit.
   (O)   Motor Control Center: $2.00 per section.
      (1)   Illuminated Signs:
         (a)   Signs mounted inside buildings and in windows. $3.00
         (b)   Signs mounted outside -
            1.   First fifty (50) sq. ft. of area or less, 5.00.
            2.   Each sq. ft. of area over fifty (50) sq. ft., .10.
         (c)   Maximum for any one sign, 30.00.
      (2)   Outline Lighting:
         (a)   First fifty (50) linear feet or less of tubing, 5.00.
         (b)   Each 1 foot over 50 feet, .05.
         (c)   First 50 sockets or less, 5.00.
         (d)   Each socket over 50, .02.
         (e)   Maximum for any one installation, 30.00.
   (P)   (1)   Isolated control system for furnaces, 150 watt or less, $2.00.
      (2)   (In excess of 150 watt, see Motors.)
   (Q)   Called Inspections:
      (1)   Called inspections shall be those field trips required by the
licensed holder for the convenience and information of the license holder per
hour, $5.00.
      (2)   X-Ray Equipment. (Transformers) 504 per KVA or KW capacity.
      (3)   Motion Picture Projector (professional) 504 per KVA or KW capacity.
   (R)   Panelboard (each panelboard):
      (1)   100 ampere main and less $2.00 - $1.00 each additional 100 ampere
capacity.
      (2)   Charges made for the inspection of items which are charged by watts
or horsepower shall not receive additional charges for the branch circuit in
connection with the same item.
      (3)   Flat fee (total charge for one family new residence provided with):
         (a)   Total amperage of less than 100 amps and not less than 200 amps,
$18.50.
         (b)   A service of 200 amps, 24.50.
         (c)   Excess of 200 amps or parts thereof, 10.00 per 100 amps.
         (d)   For all other electrical permits, services, updating and other
electrical work, a minimum fee of $7.50 for all services up to 200 amps and
$10.00 for 200 amps and above.
      (4)   Flat Fee (total charge, except for illuminated signs and outline
lighting), for new structure provided with 400 ampere service or greater, .08
times total service of 400 ampere or above.
      (5)   The fees for the permit above described shall not be charged to or
collected from an applicant under the following circumstances:
         (a)   The work is being done for the use of a governmental entity or
for a not-for-profit organization whose purposes are religious, educational, or
charitable.
         (b)   The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City
that said fees have not been and will not be included in any payment to any
contractor or other person.
         (c)   Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary
permits and otherwise fully comply with the ordinances of the City, unless
exempted therefrom by any law of the State of Illinois or of the United States.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.10)
§ 153.11 ANNUAL INSPECTION.
   There shall be an annual inspection of all business buildings, factories,
schools, churches and other buildings where large group of persons congregate,
by the Electrical Inspector and the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.11)
§ 153.12 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The Electrical Inspector may revoke permits or registrations for cause,
subject to appeal for hearing before the Electrical Commission. Appeals of the
orders of the Electrical Inspector shall be informal and as may be prescribed
by rules of said Commission.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.12)
§ 153.13 RESPONSIBILITY/LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   This Article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or
liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any
electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect
therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of
the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by the enactment and
administration of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 7, § 7.13)
CHAPTER 154: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
154.01   Compliance with state law
   
154.02   Office of Inspector
   
154.03   Plumbing permits
   
154.04   Fees for permits
   
154.05   Notification to Building Inspector
   
154.06   License, permit, and nuisance violations
   
154.07   Prohibition on use of groundwater as potable water supply
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois, either as a plumbing contractor, employing plumber, or
journeyman plumber unless said person shall comply with the requirements and
provisions, including the minimum code of plumbing standards, of the Plumber’s
License Law of the State of Illinois, 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.
   (B)   All installations of plumbing within the City of Mt. Vernon shall
comply with the following Codes:
      (1)   The State of Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Illinois Administrative
Code 890) (hereinafter the “Illinois Plumbing Code”);
      (2)   The Illinois Plumbing License Law (225 ILCS 320 et seq.);
      (3)   The Illinois Plumbers Licensing Code (68 Illinois Administrative
Code, Part 750);
      (4)   The Illinois Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System
Registration Code (77 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 892);
      (5)   The Illinois Plumbing Contractor Registration Code (77 Illinois
Administrative Code, Part 894).
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.1)
§ 154.02 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall sign and issue all notices, permits, and
certificates required by this Article. He shall keep a record of the
performance of his duties which shall include a record of all notices issued,
applications received, and permits granted. He shall keep a record of
violations of this Article. He shall cause to be inspected in the manner
required by law, and for the purpose thereof may enter, all buildings in the
course of erection and all buildings undergoing alteration or repair as often
as may be necessary to ensure conformance with the requirements of this
Article. He shall compel all work in plumbing to be performed in accordance
with applicable State law and the provisions of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.2)
§ 154.03 PLUMBING PERMITS.
   No plumbing (except replacement of existing fixtures only) shall be
installed, altered, or changed in any building or structure; nor shall any
plumbing be installed, altered, or changed upon any service or lateral between
a structure and the City’s water or sewer system within the corporate limits of
the City of Mt. Vernon or any area outside of the corporate city limits
serviced by the City of Mt. Vernon water and/or sewer system except by
authorized employees of the City until a permit for such installation,
alteration, or change shall have been obtained from the Building Inspector.
Said permit shall be issued only to a plumber contractor, employing plumber, or
self-employed journeyman plumber licensed under the Plumber’s License Law of
the State of Illinois or to the owner occupant or lessee occupant of a single-
family residence. After the permit shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector, no change or modification in the plans or specifications shall be
made unless such change shall first have been submitted to the Building
Inspector and approved.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.3)
§ 154.04 FEES FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall collect the following fees for permits issued,
which said fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit.
 
ITEM                                 FEE
Each water tap or connection per §  $500.00 + meter cost
50.022
Each sewer tap or connection per §  $500.00
50.097
 
   (B)   The fees for the permits above described shall not be charged to or
collected from an applicant if all of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The work is being done for the use of a governmental entity or a
not-for-profit organization whose purposes are religious, educational, or
charitable.
      (2)   The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that
said fees have not been and will not be included in any payment to any
contractor or other person.
      (3)   Such organization shall apply for and obtain all necessary permits
and otherwise fully comply with the Ordinances of the City, unless exempted
therefrom by any law of the State of Illinois or of the United States.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.4)
§ 154.05 NOTIFICATION TO BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall be notified by the firm or person doing
the work when any plumbing work is begun and when it is ready for inspection.
The Building Inspector shall cause all inspections to be made, except
inspections of taps for sewer or water, which inspections will be caused to be
made by the Director of Public Works, all of said inspections to be made by a
licensed plumber. All work shall be left uncovered and convenient for
examination until inspected and approved. If such work shall not be left
uncovered and convenient for inspection, the Building Inspector, the Director
of Public Works, or their respective designee is hereby authorized to require
such excavation as shall be necessary to make the inspection.
   (B)   The inspection shall be made within one day after receipt of notice
that the work is ready for inspection. All plumbing must be tested as provided
by law in the presence of the inspector, and all defective materials and work
replaced and corrected. Upon satisfactory completion of the work, the Building
inspector or Director of Public Works as applicable shall issue a Certificate
of Approval.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.5)
§ 154.06 LICENSE, PERMIT, AND NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall engage in the business of plumbing as a journeyman plumber,
contracting plumber, or employing plumber in the City without having obtained a
license from the State of Illinois. No person shall commence any plumbing work
within the City without first having obtained a permit as required herein. No
person shall refuse, neglect, or disobey any order of the Building Inspector to
correct or remove a nuisance existing by reason of unsanitary plumbing or
plumbing installed in violation of this Article.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.6)
§ 154.07 PROHIBITION ON USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   The use of groundwater as a potable water supply is prohibited except for
such uses or methods in existence before October 1, 2011. The use or attempt to
use groundwater from within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon as a
potable water supply by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other
method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the City of
Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.7)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other provision herein, any person violating any
provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine and penalty in
accordance with §
10.99 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Any person who shall be in violation
of any provision of this Article shall also be subject to injunctive relief.
(Prior Code, Art. 15, § 15.8)
CHAPTER 155: PLAN COMMISSION
Section
   
155.01   Creation
   
155.02   Members; terms
   
155.03   City Engineer
   
155.04   Procedure, powers and duties of Plan Commission
   
155.05   Plans; provisions for streets, alleys, public grounds and other
requirements
   
155.06   Cooperation
   
155.07   Employment of necessary help
§ 155.01 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Zoning and Planning Commission for the City of Mt.
Vernon (which Zoning and Planning Commission is also established by §§
161.105 through
161.109 of the Revised Code of Ordinances). Said Zoning and Planning Commission
shall perform the duties and have the authority as hereinafter set forth for
the Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.1)
§ 155.02 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   The membership of the Zoning and Planning Commission shall consist of five
(5) members, all residents of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Members shall
serve for a 5-year term, with the terms to be determined from a beginning date
of January 1, 2020; provided that in the event of a vacancy or late appointment
the appointment shall be for the unexpired term only. The Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council shall appoint the membership and designate the
Chairman who shall serve in such capacity until a vacancy in his term of
appointment exists. Members of the Zoning and Planning Commission may be
removed for cause after a public hearing; cause shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the failure to attend two consecutive meetings or four meetings
during any 12-month period.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.2)
§ 155.03 CITY ENGINEER.
   In addition to the regular members provided for herein, the City Engineer
shall be a nonvoting ex-officio member of said Zoning and Planning Commission
and shall aid, assist, and advise said Zoning and Planning Commission when
requested.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.3)
§ 155.04 PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan
Commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary,
and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with City ordinances and state laws. The Commission shall
keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to
public inspection. The Commission shall also file an annual report with the
City Council, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
   (B)   Said Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council of Mt. Vernon a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment and
growth of said City. Such a plan after its adoption by the City Council will be
known as the official plan of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Such plan shall include
reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, and public grounds
within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of and distant
not more than one and one-half miles from such limits, and not included in any
municipality, such requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be
subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
      (2)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council of Mt. Vernon from
time to time, such changes in the plan or any part thereof, as may be deemed
necessary by the City Council or by the Plan Commission.
      (3)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time,
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such
official plan.
      (4)   To give aid to the officials of the City of Mt. Vernon, charged
with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official
plan, to further the making of these projects, and generally to promote the
realization of the official plan.
      (5)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
      (6)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and
other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
      (7)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the General Assembly of the State of Illinois entitled,
“The Illinois Municipal Code” and in particular, §§ 11-12-4 through 11-12-12
(65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 through 11- 12-12) thereof, as amended, as may be conferred
by the City Council of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.4)
§ 155.05 PLANS; PROVISIONS FOR STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC GROUNDS AND OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
   Following the adoption of an official plan for the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, no map or plat of any subdivision or re-subdivision presented for
record affecting land within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon,
Illinois, or in contiguous territory outside of the City limits of the City of
Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and within a one and one-half (1-1/2) mile radius thereof
and not included within any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or
shall be valid unless the said subdivision or re-subdivision shall provide for
streets, alleys, public grounds and other requirements applicable thereto of
such official plan.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.5)
§ 155.06 COOPERATION.
   The City Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data that may in any way assist the said Plan
Commission in its duties. That all City officials shall cooperate and assist
the Plan Commission in its work and particularly, with reference to the
official plan of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.6)
§ 155.07 EMPLOYMENT OF NECESSARY HELP.
   The Plan Commission may, with the consent of the City Council, employ
necessary help and incur necessary expenses in order to perform its duties.
(Prior Code, Art. 14, § 14.7)
CHAPTER 156: MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
Section
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Standards
   
156.03   Building permit and inspection
   
156.04   Mobile home use
   
156.05   Enforcement
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Article, the term “mobile home” shall have the same meaning
as defined within §
161.210 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.1)
§ 156.02 STANDARDS.
   (A)   All mobile homes placed upon any lot within the jurisdiction of the
City after August 22, 2017, except a mobile home placed upon lands zoned R-MH
(which lands and mobile home are subject to Chapter 157 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances), must have been manufactured not more than 10 years prior to the
date of the Application for Building Permit permitting placement of the mobile
home upon said lot and must comply with the construction standards of the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as
amended, which compliance shall be verified by the presence of the permanently
attached HUD seal/emblem on the home. In addition, no mobile home shall be
placed, or remain, upon any lot unless said mobile home shall meet the
following health and safety requirements:
      (1)   Each mobile home shall have all wheels, tongues, and hitch
mechanisms removed or retracted.
      (2)   The base of the mobile home shall be completely enclosed with
mortared brick, mortared concrete blocks, a poured concrete foundation on a
footing of 1 foot by 1 foot, a basement wall, or other commercial skirting,
provided that said skirting shall not be of vinyl, plastic, or metal
construction. All skirting shall be weather resistant; shall be uniform in
construction, style, and color; and shall be compatible with the siding of the
mobile home.
      (3)   The mobile home chassis shall be undamaged, and free from defects
and deterioration. The chassis shall be properly anchored to the floor system
with approved fasteners. The chassis shall accommodate all live loads and dead
loads of the structure. The belly wrap, or bottom board, between the chassis
and floor system shall be intact, with no holes or opening to ensure the
structures thermal envelope. All structural members of the mobile home shall be
free from deterioration.
      (4)   The mobile home shall be placed upon and supported by piers,
runners, or a solid slab which meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Piers. The minimum size requirement per pier used shall be two
(2) feet by two (2) feet by two (2) feet (2’ x 2’ x 2’) deep, if a round pier
is used the minimum size requirements shall be eighteen (18) inches in diameter
and twenty-four (24) inches in depth. The distance from the center of a pier to
the center of another pier shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
         (b)   Runners. Runners shall be at least thirty (30) inches wide by
six (6) inches deep with two (2) three-eights (3/8) inch reinforcing rods
installed the entire length of each runner. The runners shall be placed beneath
the center of the I-beams of the mobile home. If a crossbeam type of runner is
preferred, the beams shall be a minimum size of ten (10) feet from the center
of a beam to a center of a beam.
         (c)   Solid Slab. The minimum depth of a solid slab shall be six (6)
inches with reinforcing wire mesh in the concrete. A footing of one (1) foot by
one (1) foot deep is required around the perimeter of the solid slab.
      (5)   The pitch of the roof of the mobile home shall be within a range of
three-twelfths (3/12) pitch to five-twelfths (5/12) pitch and the mobile home
shall have properly draining and functioning guttering encircling the entire
roof of the mobile home.
      (6)   Each mobile home shall have a porch at its primary access entrance
having a minimum size of not less than 92 inches in width and 60 inches in
depth, not including stairs. In addition, each mobile home shall have a porch
or deck at its secondary access entrance of not less than 48 inches in width
and 48 inches in depth, not including stairs. Every stair, porch, deck or other
appurtenance attached to the mobile home shall be so constructed as to be safe
to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained
in sound condition and good repair and constructed in accordance with all
applicable State and local codes. Every stair, porch, deck or other
appurtenance shall have rails if more than 30 inches above the ground surface.
Concrete blocks, lumber, or other materials shall not be stacked or used as
stairs or a porch.
      (7)   Each mobile home shall have a minimum of two off-street parking
sites. Each parking space shall comply with the requirements of §
161.210 of the Revised Code or Ordinances, definition of “parking space, off-
street”.
      (8)   The minimum setup elevation for a mobile home shall be 32 inches.
      (9)   Each mobile home shall have lap siding.
      (10)   The minimum size of the mobile home shall be 800 square feet,
exclusive of any porch, garage, or other non-dwelling space.
      (11)   Every mobile home shall have smoke detectors, carbon monoxide
detectors, and fire extinguishers installed and in good working condition in
accordance with manufacturer specifications and in accordance with all
applicable laws, codes, and regulations.
      (12)   The plumbing system, electrical system, heating and air
conditioning system, and all other equipment and systems must be safe,
sanitary, and in good working condition, and installed and operated in
accordance with manufacturer specifications and in accordance with all
applicable laws, codes and regulations.
      (13)   (a)   The exterior walls and roof shall be structurally sound and
tight and free from defects which might admit rain or dampness. All exterior
surface materials shall be uniform in color, maintained weatherproof, and shall
be properly surface coated when required to prevent deterioration. Every
window, door, and frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to be weather tight. Every window sash shall
be fully supplied with approved glazing materials and without open cracks or
holes. Every window, other than stationary windows, shall be easily opened and
closed and shall be capable of being held in position by the window’s hardware
and shall have a locking device; every window, other than stationary windows,
shall have screens and the screens shall fit tightly into the tract of the
window.
         (b)   All floors, walls, windows, doors, ceilings, and other interior
surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, sanitary, and structurally sound
operable condition. All exterior doors, doors assemblies, and hardware shall be
in good working condition; all entrances to the mobile home shall have locks
that tightly secure the door; all exterior doors shall be sealed with proper
weather stripping and weather resistant to outside elements.
      (14)   All interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean, and
sanitary condition. Surfaces shall be free from peeling, chipped, flaking, or
abraded paint, and free from cracked or loose plaster, and free from damage or
deteriorated wall panels. Every interior door shall properly fit within its
frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed and be properly and
securely attached to jambs, header or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of
the attachment hardware.
      (15)   Each mobile home utilizing gas shall be connected to the mobile
home site outlet by a listed flexible mobile home connector of sufficient
capacity to supply gas to the connected load. Approved rigid pipe and fittings
shall be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home site gas
outlet if the distance between the mobile home site gas outlet and mobile home
gas service connection exceeds six (6) feet. All gas outlet risers, regulators,
meters, valves, or other exposed equipment shall be protected from physical
damage by vehicles or other causes.
      (16)   The mobile home shall be used only as a residential dwelling unit.
No mobile home shall be used as a storage building upon any lot at any time nor
shall any mobile home be used as, or for, a commercial or business structure or
use. The area underneath a mobile home shall not be used for storage.
      (17)   All mobile homes shall be securely anchored in accordance with the
tiedown requirements of the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act 210 ILCS 120/1 et
seq.
   (B)   All mobile homes lawfully placed, in full compliance with applicable
ordinances, and existing on August 22, 2017 may be continued in use even though
such mobile home does not conform to the construction and installation
requirements of this Section provided there is no physical change to the mobile
home other than normal maintenance and repairs; if there is a physical change
other than normal maintenance and repair, then the mobile home must comply with
the standards of this Section. All mobile homes shall comply with the
maintenance requirements that the mobile home be structurally sound and
weatherproof and that all features and systems of the mobile home be properly
installed, in good working condition, and in compliance with all applicable
Ordinances, Codes, and regulations.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.2)
§ 156.03 BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place a mobile home within the jurisdiction of
the City without first obtaining a Building Permit permitting placement of the
mobile home. The fee for the Building Permit shall be as provided within §
150.10 of the Revised Code or Ordinances.
   (B)   The application for Building Permit shall be upon such forms and shall
comply with such procedures as prescribed by the City of Mt. Vernon pursuant to
the Revised Code of Ordinances and the applicable Ordinances and Codes of the
City of Mt. Vernon.
   (C)   Each application for a Building Permit for a mobile home shall include
proof satisfactory to the Building Inspector of the City of Mt. Vernon of all
matters needed to determine inspection requirements as hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   No Building Permit for placement of a mobile home within the
jurisdiction of the City shall be issued until after the following inspection
requirements have been satisfied:
      (1)   If the mobile home is new and has not been previously set up or
occupied and if the Certificate of Origin, Certificate of Title, Purchase
Agreement, or other evidence satisfactory to the Building Inspector
establishing such fact is filed with the Application for Building Permit, no
physical inspection of the interior and exterior of the mobile home shall be
required, provided the Building Permit application shall include not less than
five (5) quality color photographs of the interior rooms of the mobile home and
not less than five (5) quality color photographs of the exterior of the mobile
home, which photographs shall become the property of the City.
      (2)   If the requirements of subparagraph (D)(1) above are not met, then
the interior and exterior of the mobile home shall be subject to inspection by
the Building Official (or his designee) of the City of Mt. Vernon to determine
whether said mobile home meets the Mobile Home Standards as set forth within
this Article. The fee for inspection, which shall be paid prior to the issuance
of a Building Permit, shall be $30 if the mobile home is situated within
Jefferson County, Illinois and $50 plus the prevailing standard mileage rate
under the U.S. Internal Revenue Code per mile for travel to and from the site
where the mobile home is inspected if said site is not situated within
Jefferson County, Illinois; the inspection fee shall be in addition to the fee
for the Building Permit.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision herein, the City of Mt. Vernon
reserves the right to inspect any mobile home for which an application for
Building Permit is filed. If an inspection is conducted and if a
misrepresentation or other inaccuracy in the information provided under
paragraph (C)(1) above is discovered then the inspection fee shall be assessed
and paid in addition to any penalties imposed under this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.3)
§ 156.04 MOBILE HOME USE.
   A mobile home shall be used only as a residential dwelling unit. No mobile
home shall be used as a storage building upon any lot at any time nor shall a
mobile home be used as a commercial or business structure or use.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.4)
§ 156.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection Department of
the City or the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that
exists which violates the provisions of this Ordinance, the Inspection
Department or the City Manager or the designee of any of them is hereby
authorized to serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the owner
and occupant of the mobile home alleged to be in violation, which such Notice
shall describe the alleged violation and shall require the owner and occupant
to remedy the violation within a reasonable time of not more than 10 days after
service of such Notice. The Notice shall be served in writing, either
personally or to the last known address of such person or persons; or, if no
address is known, by posting Notice upon the mobile home. In the event the
owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or refuse to remedy the violation within
10 days after the service of Notice, then the City may proceed to remedy the
violation, including the institution of legal action against the owner and/or
occupant for an Order authorizing removal of the mobile home or for imposition
of a fine or for issuance of an injunction and for such other remedies as
provided by law. All costs and expenses incurred by the City in obtaining
removal of the mobile home or in otherwise remedying the violation shall be
assessed and shall be a lien against the mobile home subject of the proceeding
and shall be assessed against the owner and occupant of the mobile home. Costs
and expenses shall include but shall not be limited to: inspection and re-
inspection fees; title searches; postage or service fees; costs of Notice
preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and equipment costs and
fees; travel time for equipment to and from the property; other costs
associated with the remedying of the violation; the cost of disposal of
materials, debris, or other such items; administrative and clerical costs; all
reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation, institution,
enforcement, collection, or foreclosure of any lien or suit filed or defended
hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by the City pursuant to
exercise of its authority hereunder. Costs assessed against a mobile home may
be recovered by the City by public sale of the mobile home pursuant to and in
accordance with such order as may be entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson
County, Illinois within the enforcement action, provided no such sale shall
occur until after Notice is given to each party known to have a lien or other
interest in said mobile home.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.5)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates or omits or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this Article will be subject to a fine of not less than $5.00 or more than
$200.00 for each separate offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to
have been committed upon each day on which such violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Art. 19, § 19.6)
CHAPTER 157: MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
157.01   Definitions
   
157.02   License required for manufactured home development
   
157.03   Building permit, inspection and certificate of occupancy for
manufactured home
   
157.04   Restricted use and restricted age
   
157.05   Zoning
   
157.06   License fee
   
157.07   Application for license
   
157.08   Supervision
   
157.09   Sites (spaces)
   
157.10   Restrictions and requirements
   
157.11   Accessory or auxiliary buildings
   
157.12   Water supply
   
157.13   Drainage
   
157.14   Sewer facilities
   
157.15   Garbage
   
157.16   Vermin and other nuisances
   
157.17   Lights
   
157.18   Dust control
   
157.19   Tie down requirements
   
157.20   Utility hookup
   
157.21   Register
   
157.22   Enforcement, abatement and lien
 
   
157.99   Penalty
§ 157.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   MANUFACTURED HOME. Has the same meaning as DWELLING, MOBILE HOME as defined
within §
161.210 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. The term MANUFACTURED HOME and
MOBILE HOME shall be synonymous terms. Neither use of a permanent foundation
nor removal of wheels, towing devices, or any other alteration shall qualify a
manufactured home as a modular unit or as a conventional single-family
dwelling.
   MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT. Means and includes an area of land on which
two or more occupied manufactured homes are placed, either free of charges or
for revenue, together with any building, structure, or improvement used as part
of the equipment of such development.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.1)
§ 157.02 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, or operate any
manufactured home development within the jurisdiction of the City without first
having obtained a license therefor. The license shall be an annual license
expiring on April 30 of each year. Application for such license shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk. The City Building Inspector shall review all
license applications; no license shall be issued until the manufactured home
development has been inspected by the City Building Inspector or his designee
and approved as meeting the requirements of this Article and §
161.293 “Planned Manufactured Home Development (R-MH)” of the Revised Code of
Ordinances. Each manufactured home development shall be inspected at least as
often as annually prior to renewal of the annual license. The license fee shall
be as provided within §
157.06 herein.
   (B)   All licenses to construct, all licenses to operate, and all licenses
to make alterations within a manufactured home development shall be prominently
displayed in the office of the Manufactured Home Development. Licenses issued
hereunder may be transferred by the licensee; provided, however, that such
transfer shall not be effective until a Notice of License Transfer identifying
the new license holder by name, address, tax number, and telephone number is
filed with the Office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.2)
§ 157.03 BUILDING PERMIT, INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR
MANUFACTURED HOME.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place a manufactured home within a
manufactured home development within the jurisdiction of the City without first
obtaining a Building Permit permitting placement of each manufactured home and
without complying with the standards established by Chapter 156 and §
161.293 Planned Manufactured Home Development (R-MH) Standards of the Revised
Code of Ordinances, provided that if there shall be a conflict or a difference
in the standards or the provisions of this
Chapter 157 and of §
161.293, then §
161.293 shall control.
   (B)   An applicant for Building Permit shall be entitled to a Building
Permit if the Manufactured Home Development within which the manufactured home
is to be placed is licensed and in good standing and if the manufactured home
complies with the standards and requirements identified herein. After placement
of the manufactured home within the development, the manufactured home shall be
inspected by the Inspection Department to determine compliance with this
Article. The fee for the Building Permit shall be as provided within §
150.10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances and the fee for each inspection shall
be $30.00 per manufactured home.
   (C)   No manufactured home shall be occupied without a Certificate of
Occupancy issued by the City. There shall be no fee for issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.3)
§ 157.04 RESTRICTED USE AND RESTRICTED AGE.
   (A)   Only structures meeting the definition of manufactured home shall be
permitted within a manufactured home development for residential occupancy. No
travel trailer nor other structure lacking toilet, bath, or shower facilities
nor any nonpermanent shelter nor any other vehicle (including recreational)
designed or used solely for sleeping purposes shall be permitted for occupancy
at any time within a manufactured home development.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided below, no Building Permit shall issue
permitting a manufactured home to be placed within a manufactured home
development for any manufactured home manufactured more than 3 years prior to
the date of the Application for Building Permit for placement of the
manufactured home within the manufactured home development.
      (2)   Said date of manufacture shall be established only by the HUD seal/
emblem affixed to the manufactured home in accordance with the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C.
§§ 5401 et seq.), as amended.
   (C)   A manufactured home placed within a currently existing and licensed
Mobile Home Park established prior to August 7, 2017 shall not be subject to
the age restriction of three (3) years provided above, but shall be subject to
an age restriction of 10 years prior to the date of the Application for
Building Permit for placement of the manufactured home and shall be subject to
the building permit provisions and inspection requirements within §
156.03 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.4)
§ 157.05 ZONING.
   All manufactured home development shall be situated within the Planned
Manufactured Home District, R-MH zoning, as provided within Chapter 161 of the
Revised Code and shall comply with the performance standards set forth within §
161.293 for said zoning classification.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.5)
§ 157.06 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee shall be $100.00 for each manufactured home
development plus $10.00 for each manufactured home site in excess of 25 within
the manufactured home development, provided the annual license fee in no case
shall exceed $1,000.00. The license fee shall be payable on or before May 1 of
each year.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.6)
§ 157.07 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   In order to obtain a license to construct a new manufactured home
development, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a written application
and plan documents, including the following:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, plus the
names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership and the
names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   The address, location, and legal description of the tract of land
upon which it is proposed to construct, operate and maintain a manufactured
home development.
      (3)   The name of the manufactured home development.
      (4)   Detailed plans and specifications sealed by a registered engineer
or architect licensed to practice in the State of Illinois which include a
general plot plan of the manufactured home development with all sites and
structures shown, the water supply system, the sewage disposal system, the
electrical system, the fuel supply systems, the lighting system, the method of
disposal of solid waste, all streets and sidewalks, swimming and bathing
facilities, fire hydrants and details of all accessory and auxiliary
structures.
      (5)   The number of manufactured home sites proposed to be constructed or
licensed.
      (6)   A statement of the fire-fighting facilities, public or private,
which are available to the manufactured home development.
      (7)   A plan review fee of $100.00; the fee shall be nonrefundable and
shall be in addition to the required license fee.
   (B)   No changes to the water, sewage, fuel, or electrical systems other
than normal maintenance, or any relocation or modification of any site, or the
expansion of the number of sites in the development, or any relocation or
modification to any access or to any parking space or to any recreational,
open, or storage space shall be made without first submitting a new license
application (regardless of whether any additional licensing fees are due) and
without first obtaining any required Building Permits.
   (C)   An application for a license to alter a licensed manufactured home
development shall be submitted to the City for any changes to the water,
sewage, fuel, or electrical systems other than normal maintenance, the
relocation of sites or the expansion of the number of sites in the development.
Detailed plans and specifications shall be provided to show compliance with
this Act and the promulgated rules. A plan review fee of $50.00 shall accompany
the application. This fee shall not be refundable.
   (D)   An application to reduce the number of licensed sites shall be
submitted to the City no later than 10 days prior to the proposed date of
reduction. The specific sites no longer required to be licensed, and either the
method of disconnecting the required utilities or a description of the method
of immobilizing the manufactured homes shall be provided. The licensee shall be
responsible for ensuring that all utilities at vacated spaces are disconnected
or sealed, as prescribed by the City.
   (E)   Upon receipt, and after review, of an application for a license to
construct a new manufactured home development, an application to renew a
license to operate and maintain a manufactured home development, or an
application for a license to alter a licensed manufactured home development,
the City shall, if the development is, or the proposed development will be, in
conformity with this Article issue a license to construct or a license to renew
or a license to alter an original license, as the case may be. If the
application for a license to construct or a license to renew or a license to
alter an original license is declined, the City shall give the reasons
therefore in writing to the applicant; and if the objections can be corrected,
the applicant may amend his application and re-submit it for approval.
   (F)   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or
suspension by the City. however, the City shall first serve or cause to be
served upon the licensee a written notice specifying the way or ways in which
such licensee fails to comply with the ordinances of the City pertaining
thereto. Said notice shall require the licensee to correct the deficiency or
violation specified in such notice within 10 days or within a longer period of
time as may be allowed by the City. If the licensee fails to comply with the
terms and conditions of said notice, within the time specified or such extended
period of time, the City may revoke or suspend such license.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.7)
§ 157.08 SUPERVISION.
   Every manufactured home development shall be managed by a responsible
individual whose name, address, and telephone number shall be on file at all
times with the City Clerk; the duty of the manager, attendant, or caretaker
shall be to maintain the development, its facilities, and equipment in a clean,
orderly, and sanitary condition and to comply with the provisions of this
Article and all other ordinances and laws relating to manufactured home
development. The manager, attendant, or caretaker of the manufactured home
development shall, in addition to the licensee and owner of the manufactured
home development, be responsible for any violation of the provisions of this
Article or other ordinance and law relating to the manufactured home
development.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.8)
§ 157.09 SITES (SPACES).
   (A)   Each manufactured home shall be allotted a site of not less than 5000
square feet. Each individual manufactured home site shall abut or face on a
driveway or clear, unoccupied space of not less than 20 feet in width which
space shall have unobstructed access to a public street. There shall be an open
space of at least 15 feet between the sides of every manufactured home and at
least 15 feet between the ends of every manufactured home. No manufactured home
shall be parked closer than 5 feet to the side lot lines of a manufactured home
development if the abutting property is improved property or closer than 10
feet if the abutting property is a private road or closer than 15 feet if the
abutting property is a public street, provided that in no event shall the front
setback for each manufactured home be less than 15 feet. No accessory building
shall be placed within the setback areas described above. Said minimum setback
requirements shall not be subject to variance.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, mobile home parks established,
existing, licensed and lawfully operated and in full compliance with applicable
ordinances and state law as of January 1, 2003 and as of August 7, 2017 may
continue utilizing existing spaces provided the following requirements are met:
Each mobile home shall be allotted a site of not less than 1,000 square feet if
licensed as of January 1, 2003 or not less than 2,300 square feet if licensed
after January 1, 2003 but prior to August 7, 2017. No mobile home shall be
parked closer than 5-feet to the side lot lines of a mobile home park, if the
abutting property is improved property, or closer than 10-feet to a public,
alley or building. Each individual mobile home site shall abut or face on a
driveway or cleared unoccupied space of not less than 20-feet in width, which
space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or alley. There shall
be an open space of at least 10-feet between the sides of every mobile home and
at least 5-feet between the ends of every mobile home. If a mobile home park in
existence prior to August 7, 2017 alters its mobile home spaces or the plan of
the mobile home park, then the mobile home park shall meet the requirements set
forth within the first paragraph of subsection (A). If a mobile home park in
existence prior to August 7, 2017 ceases to operate for a period of 30 days,
thereafter all spaces shall comply with the requirements set forth within the
paragraph (A) of this §
157.09.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.9)
§ 157.10 RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each manufactured home within a Manufactured Home Development, except
a nonconforming manufactured home as hereinafter permitted, shall comply with
the following restrictions and requirements:
      (1)   The manufactured home shall have all wheels and hitch mechanisms
removed or retracted.
      (2)   The base of the manufactured home shall be completely enclosed with
commercial skirting, mortared brick, mortared concrete blocks, a poured
concrete foundation on a footing of one foot by one foot, or basement wall. All
skirting shall be weather resistant; and uniform in construction, style and
color; and shall be compatible with the siding of the manufactured home.
      (3)   The manufactured home shall be placed upon and supported by piers,
runners, or a solid slab which meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Piers. The minimum size requirement per pier used shall be two
(2) feet by two (2) feet by two (2) feet (2’ x 2’ x 2’) deep, if a round pier
is used the minimum size requirements shall be eighteen (18) inches in diameter
and twenty-four (24) inches in depth. The distance from the center of a pier to
the center of another pier shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
         (b)   Runners. Runners shall be at least thirty (30) inches wide by
six (6) inches deep with two (2) three-eights (3/8) inch reinforcing rods
installed the entire length of each runner. The runners shall be placed beneath
the center of the I-beams of the manufactured home. If a crossbeam type of
runner is preferred, the beams shall be a minimum size of ten (10) feet from
the center of a beam to a center of a beam.
         (c)   Solid Slab. The minimum depth of a solid slab shall be six (6)
inches with reinforcing wire mesh in the concrete. A footing of one (1) foot by
one (1) foot deep is required around the perimeter of the solid slab.
      (4)   The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home shall be within a
range of three-twelfths (3/12) pitch to five-twelfths (5/12) pitch, and the
roof shall have architectural shingles.
      (5)   The manufactured home shall have properly draining and functioning
guttering encircling the entire roof of the manufactured home.
      (6)   The interior walls of the manufactured home shall be of drywall
construction.
      (7)   The manufactured home shall have a porch at its primary access
entrance having a minimum size of not less than 100 square feet, not including
stairs; in addition, each manufactured home shall have a porch or deck at its
secondary access entrance of not less than 30 square feet in size, not
including stairs. All porches and stairs shall comply with the applicable
building and safety codes.
      (8)   All manufactured mobile homes shall have lap siding.
      (9)   The minimum size of the manufactured home shall be 800 square feet
exclusive of any porch, garage, or other non-dwelling space.
      (10)   Every manufactured home must have at least one approved smoke
detector in operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping
purposes; in addition, each manufactured home must contain at least one ten
pound A.B.C. fire extinguisher in working order and easily accessible from the
interior of the manufactured home.
      (11)   The plumbing system, electrical system, heating and air
conditioning system, and all other equipment and systems must be safe,
sanitary, and in good working condition, and installed and operated in
accordance with manufacturer specifications and in accordance with all
applicable laws, codes and regulations.
      (12)   (a)   The exterior walls and roof shall be structurally sound and
tight and free from defects which might admit rain or dampness. All exterior
surface materials, including wood, composition, or metal siding, shall be
uniform in color, maintained weatherproof, and shall be properly surface coated
when required to prevent deterioration.
         (b)   Every window, door, and frame shall be constructed and
maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to be
weather tight. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing
materials which are without open cracks and holes.
      (13)   (a)   Each manufactured home utilizing gas shall be connected to
the manufactured home site outlet by a listed flexible mobile home connector of
sufficient capacity to supply gas to the connected load.
         (b)   Approved rigid pipe and fittings shall be used between the
flexible connector and the manufactured home site gas outlet if the distance
between the manufactured home site gas outlet and manufacture home gas service
connection exceeds six (6) feet. All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters,
valves, or other exposed equipment shall be protected from physical damage by
vehicles or other causes.
      (14)   The manufactured home shall be used only as a residential dwelling
unit. No manufactured home shall be used as a storage building upon any lot at
any time nor shall any manufactured home be used as, or for, a commercial or
business structure or use. The area underneath a manufactured home shall not be
used for storage.
   (B)   Any manufactured home lawfully placed, in full compliance with
applicable ordinances, and existing on August 7, 2017 may be continued in use
even though such manufactured home does not conform to the restrictions and
requirements of this Section subject to the following:
      (1)   the manufactured home must comply with the standards and
requirements of Chapter 156 of the Revised Code of Ordinances;
      (2)   Any legal non-conforming manufactured home may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than normal maintenance and repairs;
      (3)   a non-conforming manufactured home shall not be replaced unless the
replacement fully complies with all of the requirements of this Section, except
for subparagraphs (A)(4), (A)(6), (A)(7), and (A)(8).
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.10)
§ 157.11 ACCESSORY OR AUXILIARY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Within the Manufactured Home Development, the owner or operator of the
Manufactured Home Development or a party contracting with said owner or
operator may construct maintenance or storage areas dedicated solely for use by
the Manufactured Home Development or by the residents of the Manufactured Home
Development. Said maintenance or storage area shall either be completely
enclosed in a building complying with all applicable building codes or, if not
within an enclosed building shall be within an enclosed secured fence which
shall be screened by appropriate landscaping or other screening approved by the
City Council so that the visibility of said storage and/or maintenance area
from manufactured homes and public street is minimized to the greatest extent
reasonably possible.
   (B)   The Manufactured Home Development may also have auxiliary buildings or
facilities such as a swimming pool or recreation facilities for use solely by
residents of the Manufactured Home Development and their guests. No auxiliary
or accessory building, facility, or area within a Manufactured Home Development
shall be operated as a commercial business open to the public, nor shall any
such building, facility, or area be adjacent to a public street within the
Manufactured Home Development. Individual manufactured home sites may have one
garage or storage building, but said garage or storage building shall comply
with all applicable codes and shall be located only in a side yard or rear yard
and shall not be located within the setback areas required by §
161.293(B)(3) of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.11)
§ 157.12 WATER SUPPLY.
   An adequate supply of potable water for drinking and domestic purposes from
a municipal water supply shall be supplied to each manufactured home within the
manufactured home development. The potable water system within the manufactured
home development shall comply with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.12)
§ 157.13 DRAINAGE.
   Each manufactured home development shall be so located that it shall be well
drained. No water shall be permitted to puddle or remain upon any property,
including without limitation any yard or ditch, within the manufactured home
development, except recreational bodies of water, a detention pond, or
naturally occurring stream.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.13)
§ 157.14 SEWER FACILITIES.
   All sewage and other water-carried waste for each manufactured home shall be
disposed of into the municipal sewage system. The sanitary sewer facilities
within the manufactured home development shall have sewer backflow valves and
the sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the State of Illinois Plumbing
Code.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.14)
§ 157.15 GARBAGE.
   (A)   A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and watertight containers
with lids for garbage shall be supplied. Garbage containers shall be placed no
further than 250 feet apart and shall be emptied at least once a week and shall
not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling or a breeding
place for flies.
   (B)   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner that creates
neither a nuisance nor a menace to health. The manufactured home development
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.15)
§ 157.16 VERMIN AND OTHER NUISANCES.
   No insect, vermin, rodent, or other nuisance animal or pest harborages shall
be permitted to exist in the manufactured home development. No condition
creating a nuisance shall be permitted within a manufactured home development.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.16)
§ 157.17 LIGHTS.
   The manufactured home development shall be kept properly and adequately
lighted at all times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants and
visitors. Outdoor security lights shall be placed no further than 200 feet
apart.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.17)
§ 157.18 DUST CONTROL.
   (A)   All private streets, alleys, common driveways, access routes, and
public or common parking areas in every manufactured home development must be
maintained in a passable and safe condition at all times and shall be a hard
surface and meet the following standards:
      (1)   six inches of rock and two inches of asphalt or equivalent in
concrete;
      (2)   provide for disposal of storm water and insure such water shall not
flow onto adjoining property or sidewalks;
      (3)   traffic flow direction shall be appropriately marked;
      (4)   comply with the requirements of the applicable zoning
classification.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, public and private streets, alleys,
commons driveways, access routes and public or common parking areas in a
manufactured home development established and existing prior to January 1, 2003
and continually in existence thereafter may be constructed or repaired by rock
(chip) and oil if the existing surface is not asphalt or concrete.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.18)
§ 157.19 TIE DOWN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each manufactured home placed within a manufactured home development
shall be securely anchored in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois
Mobile Home Tiedown Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
   (B)   The owner of each manufactured home development shall make available
to the owner of each manufactured home moved within or into the manufactured
home development a copy of the Mobile Home Owners Tiedown Guide Pamphlet
prepared by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.19)
§ 157.20 UTILITY HOOKUP.
   The licensee of every development shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary, electrical, and utility
hookups in the development. Electrical and utility hookups for each individual
mobile home site shall be provided, and the installation shall be in accordance
with all state and local codes and ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.20)
§ 157.21 REGISTER.
   (A)   A register shall be maintained by the manager of each manufactured
home development. Such register shall include:
      (1)   the name and address of the owner of each manufactured home and
every occupant of such manufactured home;
      (2)   the make, model, year of manufacture, and serial number of each
manufactured home;
      (3)   the square feet or floor space contained in the manufactured home;
and
      (4)   the date of entry of such manufactured home into the development.
The register shall be signed by the owner or occupant of the manufactured home.
   (B)   The registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and
no registration records shall be destroyed until six years have elapsed
following the date of removal of the manufactured home from the development.
The registration shall be available for inspection upon request by all law
enforcement officers and by inspectors and agents of the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.21)
§ 157.22 ENFORCEMENT, ABATEMENT AND LIEN.
   When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection Department of
the City or the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any condition that
exists which violates the provisions of this Article, the Inspection Department
or the City Manager or the designee of any of them is hereby authorized to
serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of
the mobile home alleged to be in violation, which such Notice shall describe
the alleged violation and shall require the owner and occupant to remedy the
violation within a reasonable time of not more than 10 days after service of
such Notice. The Notice shall be served in writing, either personally or to the
last known address of such person or persons; or, if no address is known, by
posting Notice upon the manufactured home. In the event the owner or occupant
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to remedy the violation within 10 days after the
service of Notice, then the City may proceed to remedy the violation, including
the institution of legal action against the owner and/or occupant for an Order
authorizing removal of the manufactured home or for issuance of an injunction
and for such other remedies as provided by law. All costs and expenses incurred
by the City in obtaining removal of the manufactured home or in otherwise
remedying the violation shall be assessed and shall be a lien against the
manufactured home subject of the proceeding and shall be assessed against the
owner and occupant of the manufactured home. Costs and expenses shall include
but shall not be limited to: inspection and re-inspection fees; title searches;
postage or service fees; costs of Notice preparation; labor expenses; man-hour
costs; machinery and equipment costs and fees; travel time for equipment to and
from the property; other costs associated with the remedying of the violation;
the cost of disposal of materials, debris, or other such items; administrative
and clerical costs; all reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from
preparation, institution, enforcement, collection, or foreclosure of any lien
or suit filed or defended hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by
the City pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder. Costs assessed
against a manufactured home may be recovered by the City by public sale of the
manufactured home pursuant to and in accordance with such order as may be
entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois within the
enforcement action, provided no such sale shall occur until after Notice is
given to each party known to have a lien or other interest in said manufactured
home.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.22)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall also be
subject to the penalties as provided within §
10.99 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this Article shall also be subject to an action for injunction and
injunctive relief.
(Prior Code, Art. 19A, § 19A.23)
CHAPTER 158: TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Section
   
158.01   Definitions
   
158.02   Restricted use
   
158.03   License and regulations for travel trailers
   
158.04   Enforcement
 
   
158.99   Penalty
§ 158.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A structure which does not have toilet and bath or
shower facilities.
   MOBILE HOME. Has the same meaning as defined within §
161.210 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Neither use of a permanent
foundation nor removal of wheels, towing devices, or any other alteration shall
qualify a mobile home as a conventional single-family dwelling.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation purposes.
   TRAVEL TRAILER PARK.
      (1)   Means and includes an area of land on which one or more travel
trailers are placed for occupancy for any period, either free of charge or for
revenue, together with any building, structure, or enclosure used as part of
the equipment of such park.
      (2)   The placement of a travel trailer upon a lot for storage only of
the travel trailer shall not constitute a travel trailer park, provided said
travel trailer shall not be occupied at any time upon said lot.
(Prior Code, Art. 19B, § 19B.1)
§ 158.02 RESTRICTED USE.
   (A)   No travel trailer, dependent mobile home, or nonpermanent shelter or
other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes, excluding mobile homes as
defined herein, shall be permitted for occupancy at any time except within a
travel trailer park.
   (B)   No travel trailer, dependent mobile home, or nonpermanent shelter or
other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes shall be used for living,
sleeping, housekeeping, or dwelling purposes when parked or stored on a
residential lot, or at any location or lot not zoned or approved for such use.
   (C)   No travel trailer, dependent mobile home, or nonpermanent shelter or
other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes shall be used as a storage
building or as an accessory building upon any lot.
(Prior Code, Art. 19B, § 19B.2)
§ 158.03 LICENSE AND REGULATIONS FOR TRAVEL TRAILERS.
   Travel trailer parks shall be licensed and subject to the same regulations
as provided within
Chapter 156 for mobile home parks, except no Building Permit shall be required
for a travel trailer and except that with regard to the licensing of a travel
trailer park a license shall be obtained and fee paid for each site proposed to
be used for a travel trailer whether in use or whether occupied or not. Travel
trailers and travel trailer parks shall also be subject to the additional
following regulations:
   (A)   An adequate supply of water of safe and sanitary quality shall be
furnished for each travel trailer. In the event there shall be a common faucet
or drinking fountain or other water source, it shall be conveniently located in
the park. No common drinking cup shall be permitted.
   (B)   Each travel trailer park shall provide toilets and baths or showers
which shall comply with the provisions of any ordinances or other codes
relating thereto with separate accommodations for men and women.
   (C)   All sewage and other water-carried waste shall be disposed of in a
safe and sanitary manner and so that no odors are emitted, and so that no water
is permitted upon the park grounds, and so that no nuisance is created.
   (D)   Electrical outlets shall be provided for each individual site, and the
installation shall be in accordance with all state and local codes.
   (E)   If community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries, or other facilities
are provided, such facilities and equipment must be maintained in a sanitary
condition and kept in good repair.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other
transporting device from any travel trailer or otherwise to affix said travel
trailer permanently to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of such travel
trailer.
(Prior Code, Art. 19B, § 19B.3)
§ 158.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When a complaint shall be made by any person to the Inspection
Department of the City or the City Manager of the City of Mt. Vernon about any
condition that exists which violates the provisions of this Ordinance, the
Inspection Department or the City Manager or the designee of any of them is
hereby authorized to serve or cause to be served a Notice in writing upon the
owner and occupant of the travel trailer alleged to be in violation, which such
Notice shall describe the alleged violation and shall require the owner and
occupant to remedy the violation within a reasonable time of not more than 10
days after service of such Notice.
   (B)   The Notice shall be served in writing, either personally or to the
last-known address of such person or persons; or, if no address is known, by
posting Notice upon the travel trailer. In the event the owner or occupant
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to remedy the violation within 10 days after the
service of Notice, then the City may proceed to remedy the violation, including
the institution of legal action against the owner and/or occupant for an Order
authorizing removal of the travel trailer or for imposition of a fine or for
issuance of an injunction and for such other remedies as provided by law. All
costs and expenses incurred by the City in obtaining removal of the travel
trailer or in otherwise remedying the violation shall be assessed and shall be
a lien against the travel trailer subject of the proceeding and shall be
assessed against the owner and occupant of the travel trailer.
   (C)   Costs and expenses shall include but shall not be limited to:
inspection and re-inspection fees; title searches; postage or service fees;
costs of Notice preparation; labor expenses; man-hour costs; machinery and
equipment costs and fees; travel time for equipment to and from the property;
other costs associated with the remedying of the violation; the cost of
disposal of materials, debris, or other such items; administrative and clerical
costs; all reasonable attorney fees and costs arising from preparation,
institution, enforcement, collection, or foreclosure of any lien or suit filed
or defended hereunder; and any other cost or expense incurred by the City
pursuant to exercise of its authority hereunder.
   (D)   Costs assessed against a travel trailer may be recovered by the City
by public sale of the travel trailer pursuant to and in accordance with such
Order as may be entered by the Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois
within the enforcement action, provided no such sale shall occur until after
Notice is given to each party known to have a lien or other interest in said
travel trailer.
(Prior Code, Art. 19B, § 19B.4)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall be subject
to the penalties as provided within §
10.99 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, Art. 19B, § 19B.5)
CHAPTER 159: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
159.01   Purpose, scope
   
159.02   General regulations
   
159.03   Definitions
   
159.04   Procedure
   
159.05   Requirements
   
159.06   Minimum design and development standards
   
159.07   Improvements
   
159.08   Special minimum design and development standards
   
159.09   Inspection
   
159.10   Variations and exceptions
   
159.11   Platting authority
   
159.12   Building permit - zoning certificate
   
159.13   Enforcement
   
159.14   Plats
§ 159.01 PURPOSE, SCOPE.
   The provisions of the within Article shall govern every subdivision of land
in the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, and the unincorporated area
within one and one-half miles beyond such corporate limits, in order to promote
the public health and the safety, convenience, comfort, and general welfare of
persons resident within such areas so regulated. The within provisions shall be
administered to insure orderly growth and development, the conservation,
protection, and proper use of land and adequate traffic circulation, utilities
and services.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.1)
§ 159.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No land, within the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon and
within the unincorporated area within one and one-half miles beyond such
corporate limits, shall be subdivided without complying with the provisions of
this Article.
   (B)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be given
until such subdivision plans have been properly reviewed by the Mt. Vernon Plan
Commission and officially approved by the City Council of the City of Mt.
Vernon, as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm. water
drainage, sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service or lighting, or
grading, paving or surfacing of any street, shall be made within any such
subdivision by any owner or owners or his or their agent, or by any public
service corporation at the request of such owner or owners or by his or their
agent, until the plats for the subdivision and also the plans for the
improvement have been properly reviewed by the Plan Commission and officially
approved by the City Council of Mt. Vernon as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   Where a tract of land is proposed to be subdivided in several stages
over a period of years, and the subdivider requests approval in parts, he shall
at the time of submission of the first part, submit a detailed plan of the
entire tract to be eventually developed, with appropriate sectioning to
demonstrate to the Plan Commission that the total design as proposed for the
entire subdivision is feasible. The Plan Commission may give preliminary
approval to the overall plan and final approval on the parts as submitted from
time to time.
   (E)   The provisions of this Article shall be held to be the minimum
requirements necessary in the subdivision of land.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.2)
§ 159.03 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in these regulations, the following words shall have the meanings
and references given, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The officer designated and authorized by the City
Council to enforce the Subdivision Regulations.
   ALLEY. A permanent public serviceway or right-of-way, dedicated to public
use, other than a Street, Place, Road, Cross-Walk, or Easement, designed to
provide a secondary means of access for the special accommodation of abutting
property.
   BLOCK. A unit of property entirely surrounded by public highways, streets,
railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or other barriers, or combination thereof.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE - BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front or side of
and across a Lot establishing the minimum yard to be provided between the
principal building or structure and the Lot Line.
   CITY. The City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The complete plan, or any of its parts, for the
development of the City, proposed by the Commission and adopted by the Council,
in accordance with the authority conferred by Division 12, Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/11-12 et seq.), as amended.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
   COUNTY. The County of Jefferson, Illinois.
   CROSS-WALK. A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is reserved
across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
   CUL-DE-SAC. (COURT OR DEAD END STREET). A short street having one end open
to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
   DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY. The lands required for the installation of storm
water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or water
course for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein
to safeguard the public against flood damage.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public for specified purposes.
   FINAL PLAT. The final map of all, or a portion of, the subdivision which is
presented to the Commission for final approval in accordance with these
regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper county
recording officer.
   JURISDICTION. The corporate area of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois and the
unincorporated area contiguous thereto that is within one and one-half miles of
the corporate limits.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership or development.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security which may be accepted in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Commission or other
approving body approves a Final Plat; including performance bond, escrow
agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PLACE. An open, unoccupied, officially designated space, other than a Street
or Alley, permanently reserved as the principal means of access for abutting
property.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. The drawings and documents described in §
159.06 indicating the proposed layout of the Subdivision which is submitted to
the Planning Commission for consideration and tentative approval.
   STREET. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated or otherwise legally
established to the public use, usually affording the principal means of access
to abutting property. A STREET may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, lane, drive, or other appropriate name. For
the purpose of this Article, streets shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   COLLECTOR STREETS. These facilities serve intercity movements of
traffic such as that moving between a subdivision and a major street. The
principle difference between the collector street and the major street is the
length of trip which each principally serves. They are intended to supply the
abutting property with the same degree of land service as the local street,
while at the same time serving larger volumes of traffic.
      (2)   LOCAL STREETS. The sole function of these streets is to provide
access to the immediately adjacent property. Local access streets generally
carry low volumes of traffic.
      (3)   MAJOR STREETS. This type of facility serves mainly to move through
traffic, but also performs a secondary function of providing direct access to
abutting land. MAJOR STREETS inter-connect principal traffic generators within
a City. Illinois and U.S. marked routes, as well as important, intra-city
streets, are considered under this classification.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person responsibly engaged in developing or improving a
tract of land which complies with the definition of a Subdivision as defined in
this report.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit, as part of
a unit, or as contiguous units on the last preceding transfer of ownership
thereof, into two or more parcels, sites, or lots, any one of which is less
than five acres in area, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition of
land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or
easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot
owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites,
shall not be considered a Subdivision; or the improvement of one or more
parcels of land for residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups
of structures involving the Subdivision and Allocation of land as Streets or
other open spaces for common use by the owners, occupants, or lease holders or
as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm
drainage, or other public utilities and facilities; provided, however, that
where no new streets or roads are involved, divisions of land for agricultural
purposes where the resulting parcels are more than three acres or larger in
size, divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions, or
divisions of property upon court order shall not be considered SUBDIVISIONS.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The part of the Comprehensive Plan, now or hereafter
adopted which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth in
location alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing
and proposed streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
   YARD. A space of the same lot with a building, which is open, unoccupied and
unobstructed by structures, except as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.3)
§ 159.04 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preliminary Considerations. In order to make the most of opportunities
related to the subdivision and to conserve time, effort, and expense, the owner
or subdivider shall consult with the Plan Commission, the City Engineer, and
other public officials prior to the preparation of the Preliminary Plat for the
subdivision. The Comprehensive Plan of the City shall be reviewed to determine
how the Preliminary Plat will fit into the Comprehensive Plan. Requirements for
major and minor streets, school and recreation sites, community facilities,
shopping centers, sanitation, water supply and drainage, and the relationship
to other developments, existing or proposed in the vicinity shall be determined
in advance of the preparation of the Preliminary Plat.
   (B)   Filing of Preliminary Plats. A subdivider desiring approval of a plat
of a subdivision shall submit a written application therefore to the Plan
Commission. Such Application shall be accompanied by the information,
requirements, and plans set forth in this Article.
      (1)   Four copies of the completed Application for Subdivision Approval
Form, together with at least eight prints of each drawing submitted as a part
of the Preliminary Plat, shall be submitted to the City Clerk no later than two
weeks prior to the Plan Commission meeting at which consideration is desired.
At the time of filing, a fee of $35.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk. The
City Clerk shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Plan Commission upon
receipt of the Application and Preliminary Plat. The Plan Commission shall
approve or disapprove said application for preliminary approval within ninety
(90) days from the date of application or the filing by the applicant of the
last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later. If such plat is
disapproved, then within said 90 days the Plan Commission shall furnish to
applicant in writing a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to
conform to the ordinances of the City, including the official map. If such plat
is approved, the City Council shall accept or reject said plat within 30 days
after its next regular stated meeting following the action of the Commission.
      (2)   (a)   If the Preliminary Plat is approved by the City Council, the
applicant shall be authorized to proceed with the preparation of the Final
Plat. The City Clerk shall attach to a copy of the Preliminary Plat a certified
copy of the resolution approving or disapproving the Preliminary Plat; in case
of disapproval, said resolution shall give reasons and specify aspects of
nonconformance with existing ordinances.
         (b)   A copy of the resolution shall be filed in the City Clerk’s
office and shall be signed by the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Plan
Commission.
      (3)   Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a one year period from the date of approval.
         (a)   That the general terms and conditions under which the
preliminary approval was granted will not be changed.
         (b)   That the said applicant may submit on or before the expiration
date the whole or part or parts of said plat for final approval. In the case of
a subdivision being developed in stages, the applicant may elect to have final
approval delayed for a period not to exceed three years from the date of
preliminary approval for the remaining portions of the plat, after submission
of the original part within the above specified period.
   (C)   Approval of Final Plats.
      (1)   The final plat shall be submitted to the City Clerk for transmittal
to the Plan Commission for final approval. The submission shall include the
plans and specifications for the required improvements as set forth in §
159.07, together with an estimate of cost of the proposed improvements for
performance guarantee purposes. All documents shall bear the approving
signature of the City Engineer and the transmittal to Council shall include a
letter from the City Engineer describing such approval.
      (2)   Upon review by the Plan Commission and the City Engineer, the final
plat shall be returned to the City Clerk for submission to the City Council
with all recommendations from the Plan Commission attached. If the final plat
is approved by the Plan Commission, the original tracing shall bear the
signature of the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Plan Commission. The City
Council shall approve such plat, if all requirements of this Ordinance and
other Ordinances of this City have been met, within 60 days from the date of
filing the last required document or other paper, whichever date is later.
      (3)   (a)   The City Clerk shall attach to a copy of the final plat a
certified copy of the City Council’s ordinance approving or disapproving the
final plat; in the case of disapproval giving reasons and specifying aspects of
non-conformance with existing ordinances. The approved copy of the final plat
shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
         (b)   The approval of the final plat by the City Council shall be
indicated on the document to be filed for record by the affixing of the
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. The approved final plat shall then
be returned to the City Clerk to be held until such time as the subdivider has
posted the Performance Guarantee as set forth in §
159.05(D).
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.4)
§ 159.05 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Preliminary Plat. A preliminary plat shall be provided by the
subdivider and consist of the following:
      (1)   Location map (which may be prepared by indicating the following
data on available maps) showing:
         (a)   Boundary line of the proposed subdivision indicated by a solid,
heavy line and the total approximate acreage involved.
         (b)   Subdivision name and location, legal description, specifying
U.S. Survey and Township Lines, County and State.
         (c)   Any and all thoroughfares related to the subdivision.
         (d)   Existing elementary and secondary schools, parks and playgrounds
available for serving the area proposed to be subdivided, and other community
features.
         (e)   Title, scale, north arrow and date.
      (2)   Preliminary Plat showing:
         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision and location.
         (b)   Names, addresses of the owner, subdivider, the City Planner,
land planning consultant, Engineer, or registered land surveyor who prepared
the plat.
         (c)   Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of the
proposed subdivision; showing the names, including roadway widths, approximate
gradients, types of widths of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, planting strips and
other pertinent data.
         (d)   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision.
         (e)   Layout of lots, showing approximate dimensions and numbers.
         (f)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community purposes.
         (g)   Easements, existing and proposed, showing locations, widths, and
purposes.
         (h)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions.
         (i)   Location, size of nearest water main, sewer outlet and other
pertinent utilities.
         (j)   Location, type and approximate size of utilities to be
installed.
         (k)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles and
references to known land lines.
         (l)   Contours at vertical intervals of two (2) feet, except where the
slope exceeds 50%; elevations at top and bottom of slopes should be indicated.
         (m)   Tree masses and all individual trees having a caliper of 12” or
greater; Key plan, legend and notes.
         (n)   Location of existing structures.
         (o)   A preliminary outline of the deed restrictions and covenants
that would be placed upon the subdivision.
         (p)   Landscaping plans and proposed limits on the location and
intensity of signs, advertising and off-street parking shall be included in the
case of a proposed subdivision for industrial or commercial use.
         (q)   Scale, North arrow and date.
      (3)   The Preliminary Plat of the Subdivision shall be drawn to a scale
of fifty feet to one (1) inch or one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch,
provided, however, that if the resulting drawing would be over thirty-six
inches (36”) in the shortest dimensions, such other scale as recommended by the
Commission may be used.
   (B)   Final Plat. The Final Plat shall be provided by the subdivider and
meet the following specifications:
      (1)   The Final Plat may include all or only a part of any Preliminary
Plat which has received approval.
      (2)   The original drawing of the Final Plat shall be drawn on new linen,
tracing cloth, or equal, with waterproof black India Ink to a scale of fifty
feet to one inch, provided that, if the resulting drawing would be greater than
thirty-six inches (36”) in the shortest dimension, a scale of up to one hundred
feet (100’) to one inch (1”) may be used. Four black or blue line prints shall
be submitted with the original Final Plat; or, in order to conform to modern
drafting and reproduction methods, four black; or, blue lines and a
reproducible cloth of film positive of the Final Plat shall be submitted.
Prints filed with the City shall include four cloth prints made after recording
of the Final Plat as approved and bearing the official stamp attesting the fact
of the recording.
      (3)   All elevations shall be referenced to the established datum and the
said reference shall be clearly stated on any plans or drawings showing such
datum.
      (4)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
      (5)   The title shall be placed in the lower right corner and a suitable
border line shall be placed on all tracings with a margin of not less than one-
half inch (1/2) on all sides.
      (6)   The following basic information shall be shown; all surveys for a
final plat shall be made under the active and personal direction of a
registered professional engineer or registered surveyor of Illinois:
         (a)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot in five thousand feet.
         (b)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
street corner or official monuments. Reference corners shall be accurately
described on the Final Plat.
         (c)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract, shown by heavy, solid lines.
         (d)   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary and the
included area to the nearest one hundredth of an acre.
         (e)   Right-of-way line of streets, easements and other rights-of-way,
and property lines of lots and other tracts, with accurate dimensions, bearings
and curve data, including radii, arcs and chords, points of tangency, and
central angles.
         (f)   Name and right-of-way width for each street or other right-of-
way.
         (g)   Location, dimensions and purposes of any easement, shown by
light, dashed lines.
         (h)   Number to identify each lot or site.
         (i)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved.
         (j)   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions.
         (k)   Floor elevation and sitting of each proposed building.
         (l)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot
makers, including elevations related to mean sea level as established by the
U.S. Geological Survey.
         (m)   Names of owners and mortgages accepting said plat, with owner or
owners personally signing all plans or drawings.
         (n)   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land, shown by
medium dashed and two dotted lines.
         (o)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted
land by record name, date and number, shown by medium dashed and two dotted
lines.
         (p)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds for lots. Restriction lines should be shown by
medium dashed lines.
         (q)   Title, north arrow, scale and date.
         (r)   Certification by registered surveyor or registered professional
engineer with registration numbers and seal affixed to all documents of the
Final Plat.
         (s)   Certification by the registered surveyor or registered
professional engineer stating that all lots conform to the requirements of the
Zoning District in which it is located.
         (t)   Certification by the registered surveyor or registered
professional engineer to the absence of, or presence, location and depth of
mine openings, subsurface mine workings.
         (u)   Certificate of dedication of all public areas.
         (v)   Certificate for approval by the Plan Commission.
         (w)   Certificate for approval by the City Council.
   (C)   Improvement Plans and Specifications.
      (1)   The final Plat submission to City Council shall be accompanied by
the plans and specifications for the improvements required under §
159.07. The plans and profiles of all streets, storm and sanitary sewers, water
lines and drainage structures, together with their drainage area, shall be
prepared on standard plan and profile sheets and shall bear the seal and
signature of the registered professional engineer responsible for their
preparation.
      (2)   A cross-section of the proposed streets shall be included, showing
the widths of roadways, location and width of sidewalks and the location of
underground utilities. The plans shall show the lines of all proposed sidewalks
and the location of all proposed street lights. The plans, cross sections and
specifications for the proposed improvements shall be submitted to and approved
by the City Engineer prior to submission to the City Council with the Final
Plat.
      (3)   Four black or blue line prints of the approved documents shall be
included with the Final Plat submission. After the completion of the
construction of the improvements, a set of prints showing the as-built details
and changes, if any, shall be filed with the City Engineer.
   (D)   Performance Guarantees.
      (1)   A Performance Guarantee Bond, or other guarantee as hereinafter
described, shall be required from the subdivider in the amount of the estimate
approved by the City Engineer for the cost of all required land improvements
yet remaining to be installed. The guarantee shall be in one of the following
described forms:
         (a)   Deposit with the City a subdivider’s bond in the amount of one
and one-half times the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be
completed.
         (b)   Deposit with the City cash in the amount of one and one-half
times the estimated costs of the land improvements remaining to be completed.
         (c)   Deposit with the City a lien to be recorded in the County
Recorder’s Office on all property being subdivided, with. the provision that
partial releases may be obtained when a financial institution executes with the
City an agreement to withhold one and one-half times the estimated cost of the
land improvements yet remaining to be installed, in escrow, until such time as
all land improvements have been completed and accepted by the City. All
expenses incurred in determining the amounts apportioned against said land and
the cost of releasing each lot or tract shall be paid by the subdivider.
         (d)   Deposit with the City other collateral equivalent to one and
one-half times the estimated cost of land improvements yet remaining to be
installed, such collateral to be approved by the City Council.
      (2)   All required land improvements shall be installed and completed
within a period of two years after the recording of the final plat. Failure of
the subdivider to complete all of the improvements during such two year period
shall result in forfeiture of the guarantee unless an extension of time is
granted by the City Council. In the event of failure to complete improvements
in the required time, the City may direct that no further building permits be
issued for property in the subdivision until required land improvements are
provided.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.5)
§ 159.06 MINIMUM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
   (A)   General. The subdivision plan shall conform to design standards that
will encourage good development patterns and particularly to the principles and
standards which are generally exhibited in the Comprehensive Plan. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks, playgrounds and other
public facilities shown on the officially adopted Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map, shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
   (B)   Streets.
      (1)   The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and
parcels of land within the subdivision. Street jobs of less than one hundred
and twenty-five feet (125’) shall be avoided. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five
hundred feet (500’) in length, unless necessitated by site topography.
      (2)   Neighborhood streets shall be designed so as to discourage through
traffic.
      (3)   Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as
to produce usual lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
      (4)   Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to
the boundary of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for normal
circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
      (5)   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or
alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street or
alley shall be platted to the prescribed width within the proposed subdivision.
      (6)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is definitely placed in the City Council under
conditions approved by the Plan Commission.
      (7)   Widths of major and collector street rights-of-way shall conform to
the widths specified in Plat 1. These widths may be increased or decreased or
varied upon approval of the Plan Commission and the City Engineer.
      (8)   The minimum right-of-way of local streets, including marginal
access streets and cul-de-sacs, shall be fifty feet (50’). All cul-de-sacs
shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of one
hundred feet (100’) and a minimum diameter of seventy-five feet (75’) for the
vehicle turn around (i.e. paved area). The City may require a wider right-of-
way in order to comply with typical street cross section with minimum drainage
swell and blank slopes.
      (9)   Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to the required widths shall dedicate additional width along either or
both sides of said street.
      (10)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly at right
angles as possible.
      (11)   If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is less than
sixty degrees (60°), the radius of the arc of the intersection of the property
lines shall be determined by the Plan Commission.
      (12)   At the intersection of other streets the property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than twenty feet (20’), or
chords of such arcs.
      (13)   At intersections of streets and alleys the property lines corners
shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than fifteen feet (15’) or
chords of such arcs.
      (14)   Intersections of streets and alleys, the property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than fifteen feet (15’) or
chords of such arcs.
      (15)   Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the Plan
Commission may apply special standards to be followed in the design of such
parkways. or streets.
      (16)   Whenever the subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way or a highway designated as a “Limited Access Highway”, by the
appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a Marginal Access
Street, or a parallel street. at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use
of the land between the highway or railroad and such streets.
      (17)   Horizontal visibility on curved streets and vertical visibility on
all streets shall be maintained along the center line as follows:
         (a)   Major streets: Five hundred feet (500’).
         (b)   Collector streets and parkways: Three hundred feet (300’).
         (c)   Local streets: One hundred fifty feet. (150’).
      (18)   Horizontal curvature measured along the center line shall have a
minim radius as follows:
         (a)   Major streets: Five hundred feet (500’).
         (b)   Collector streets and parkways: Three hundred feet (300’).
         (c)   Local streets: One hundred fifty feet (150’).
      (19)   All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radii to provide smooth transitions and required sight distances.
      (20)   Between reversed curves on major streets there shall be a tangent
of not less than one hundred feet (100’) and on collector and local streets
such tangent shall be not less than forty feet (40’).
      (21)   Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:
         (a)   Major streets, not greater than six percent (6%), or as approved
by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Other streets and alleys, not greater than ten percent (10%), or
as approved by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
      (22)   The minimum grade of any street gutter shall be not less than
three-tenths of one percent.
      (23)   No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the name of an existing street; unless, the
proposed street is an extension of or in alignment with an existing street, in
which case the duplication shall be mandatory.
      (24)   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential areas but shall be
included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading and
unloading or access purposes; and, where platted, shall be at least twenty feet
(20’) in width.
      (25)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the
dead-end, as determined by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Blocks.
      (1)   Blocks shall not normally exceed twelve hundred fifty feet (1250’)
in length, unless unusual circumstances justify greater length.
      (2)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a limited access
highway, major street or railroad right-of-way.
      (3)   Blocks shall fit easily into the overall plan of the subdivision
and their design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and
public areas.
      (4)   (a)   Within blocks of over seven hundred feet in length, the
Planning Commission may require, at or near the middle of the block, a public
walk connecting adjacent streets or other public areas, shopping centers.
         (b)   Width of right-of-way for such walks shall be at least ten feet
(10’) and shall be intended for the use of pedestrians only.
   (D)   Lots.
      (1)   All lots shall abut on a street, except lots within a Planned
Business Development established pursuant to the Planned Business District
Zoning Classification of the Schedule of District Regulations of Chapter 161
herein which lots shall abut either on a street or a place.
      (2)   Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Pointed or irregular
lots shall be avoided.
      (3)   Double frontage lots shall not be platted, except that where
desired along major streets, lots may face on an interior street and back on
such thoroughfare. In that event a planting strip or a planting screen at least
twenty feet in width should be provided along the rear of the lot.
      (4)   Minimum lot areas, widths and building setback lines shall be
provided in the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is
located within the jurisdiction, except that where a main supply system or a
sanitary system is not available, the lot area necessary to install a private
water supply or sewage disposal system on the lot, in accordance with the
Illinois Department of Public Health, shall become the minimum lot area.
      (5)   Wherever possible, a unit shopping center, based on sound
development standards, shall be designed in contrast to the platting of lots
for individual commercial use.
      (6)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal to permit
appropriate setbacks from both streets.
   (E)   Easements.
      (1)   (a)   Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities shall
be provided. Such easements shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet and
where located along interior lot lines, one-half the width shall be taken from
each lot, except, however, perimeter easements located on the perimeter of the
subdivision adjacent to private property outside the limits of the proposed
subdivision may have a minimum width of ten feet (10’) where no water, sewer,
or gas facilities are to be located within perimeter easement.
         (b)   Before determining the location of easements, the plan shall be
discussed with the local utility companies to assure proper placing for the
installation of services.
      (2)   Whenever a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way
channel or stream there shall be provided a drainage right-of-way which shall
be for the purpose of widening, improving or protecting the stream at the
subdivision’s expense. The width of the drainage right-of-way shall be adequate
for any necessary channel relocations and straightenings and shall be reviewed
by the City Engineer and shall relate as closely as possible to the
requirements of the Comprehensive Plan. Parallel streets or parkways may be
required in connection therewith.
   (F)   Public Use Areas. Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other
public use areas as shown in the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map are located
within the subdivision area, the City Council shall require that such areas be
so designated on the Final Plat. Within one year after the approval of the
Final Plat, the authority having jurisdiction shall acquire the designated land
or commence proceedings to acquire it by condemnation; otherwise, the owner may
make any other permitted use of the site as permitted by the Zoning District
within which it lies.
   (G)   Topography, Natural Vegetation and Flooding.
      (1)   In the subdividing of any land within the jurisdiction, due regard
shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, or
other similar elements which, if preserved, would add attractiveness to the
proposed development.
      (2)   The natural topography shall be retained wherever possible in order
to reduce excessive run-off onto adjoining property and to avoid extensive re-
grading of the site.
      (3)   Floor elevations of all buildings shall be carefully studied in
relation to existing topography, proposed street grades, existing 12” and over
caliper trees, and other pertinent site features.
      (4)   Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots
for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions
or similar circumstances, the Commission shall consider withholding approval of
such lots.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.6)
§ 159.07 IMPROVEMENTS.
   Utility and street improvements shall be provided by the subdivider in each
new subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements described in
the following sections.
   (A)   Streets. Streets shall be completed in accordance with the plans,
profiles, specifications and cross-sections prepared for the subdivider by a
registered professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer.
      (1)   The streets shall be surfaced to a minimum width of 26” face to
face of curbs according to the type of street, as specified in Plat 1, attached
hereto and made a part of this Article.
      (2)   The streets shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the
dimensions required by the cross-sections and the work shall be performed in
the manner prescribed in current edition of Illinois State Highway
Specifications. Alleys shall be paved to the right-of-way. Grading for street
improvements shall not create soil slopes exceeding a vertical rise of one foot
for each two feet of horizontal distance unless retaining walls are provided.
      (3)   The street surface shall be of Portland Cement, Concrete or a
flexible pavement, and shall be constructed in accordance with design
characteristics at least equal to those given below and specifications approved
by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Prior to the construction of street or alley pavements, adequate
surface and sub-surface (if required) drainage facilities shall be installed by
the subdivider. Pipe used for drainage purposes shall be of bituminous coated
corrugated metal, reinforced concrete or extra strength vitrified clay of an
approved design, size and strength to meet the requirements of the specific
conditions which may be encountered. Minimum diameters of pipe to be used shall
be as follows:
 
Roadway Crossdrains    15”
Entrance Culverts      12”
Perforated Underdrains 6”
 
      (5)   (a)   All construction shall be completed in accordance with the
specific conditions in the agreement for improvements and the accepted plans
and specifications, and in a manner acceptable to the authorities having
jurisdiction.
         (b)   When changes from the accepted plan and specifications become
necessary during construction, written approval from the authorities having
jurisdiction shall be secured prior to the execution of such changes.
      (6)   Adequate provision for the maintenance of all street improvements
shall be made by dedication to and acceptance for maintenance by the local
authorities having jurisdiction, or by other suitable means.
   (B)   Curbs and Gutters.
      (1)   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in conjunction with the
street pavements on all streets and shall be of air entrained Portland Cement
Concrete at least eighteen inches wide and not less than six inches thick where
the curb abuts the street pavement.
      (2)   Curb construction for concrete pavements may be integral and roll-
type curbs may be permitted where the distance between the back of the curb and
the nearest sidewalk is at least three feet on residential and feeder streets.
      (3)   All plans for the installation of the curb and gutter shall be
approved by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks on each side of a street shall be provided within a
subdivision. Sidewalks shall be of Portland Cement Concrete with a minimum
thickness of four inches and a minimum width of four feet.
      (2)   Crosswalks within the block shall be improved with a four foot walk
of either Portland Cement Concrete four inches thick or asphaltic concrete two
inches thick on a four inch compacted aggregate base. Extend base beyond
sidewalk on either side to distance equal to depth of base.
   (D)   Sewage Disposal and Water Supply.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide for the disposal of sewage in the
subdivision by a connection to the City sanitary sewer system. In all cases the
subdivider shall construct a sanitary sewer system which shall connect to the
public sewerage system of the City and provide a connection to each lot.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to the water facility system
serving the City; said system shall provide a source of potable water as well
as providing an adequate water supply for fire protection.
      (3)   (a)   Plans and specifications for public and local sewer disposal
and water supply system shall be prepared for the subdivider by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois
Department of Public Health and the City Engineer. All plans and specifications
shall conform to Chapter 50, Regulations for a water system. The City
Engineer’s office shall prepare and keep on file a comprehensive set of
standards pertaining to the City’s requirements for a water supply system.
         (b)   Private sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance
with the regulations of the local health authorities and the Illinois
Department of Public Health.
      (4)   The subdivider shall furnish the City a complete set of plans and
profiles as approved by the various authorities.
   (E)   Storm Drainage.
      (1)   Adequate surface and subsurface drainageways for the removal of
storm water shall be provided by the subdivider. The extent to which storm
drainage facilities shall be required shall be based upon an analysis of need
prepared for the subdivider by a registered professional engineer. The analysis
shall be based upon the rational method of computing storm water run-off, using
the one-hour rainfall to be expected at a five-year frequency. Times of
concentration, soil infiltration rates and other variable factors to be used in
the analysis shall be discussed with and approved by the City Engineer during
the preliminary consideration of the subdivision.
      (2)   A storm water sewer system, which shall be separate and independent
of the sanitary sewer system with surface inlets, shall be provided by the
subdivider in all cases and whenever the available evidence indicates that such
a system is necessary due to the inadequacy of the natural surfaces drainage.
      (3)   Distance from Streams or Main Drainage Channels: Any person
proposing to locate a structure or a use within one hundred feet of any stream
or main drainage channel in any zoning district shall include with the
application for a Building or Use Permit, a statement by a competent engineer,
based on a study of the watershed area and the probable run-off, that the
structure or use in the location proposed will leave adequate space for the
flow of flood water, provided, however, that no building shall be permitted
within fifty feet of the top of the bank of any stream or main drainage
channel.
      (4)   The subdivider shall furnish the City a complete set of plans and
profiles as approved by the various authorities.
   (F)   Public Utilities.
      (1)   All utility lines for telephone and electric service when carried
on overhead poles, provided for with rear and side lot line easements. Gas
mains shall be located within easements or public rights-of-way so as not to
conflict with other utilities.
      (2)   Where telephone and/or electric service lines are to be placed
underground throughout the subdivision, the conduit or cables shall be located
within easements or public rights-of-way in separate trenches in a manner which
will not conflict with other underground services. Furthermore, all
transformers and terminal boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public.
      (3)   All excavations for public utilities made under paved areas shall
be properly backfilled with approved granular materials thoroughly compacted in
place.
   (G)   Street Lighting.
      (1)   Provisions shall be made by the subdivider for the adequate
lighting of public streets within the subdivision in accordance with the
standard and requirements of the City and the electric utility.
      (2)   Street lights shall be provided with a maximum spacing of 300 feet
with concrete or steel poles connected by underground wiring.
   (H)   Street Signs.
      (1)   (a)   Appropriate street signs of aluminum extrusions with
reflectorized lettering mounted on aluminum posts and as specified by the City,
shall be installed by the subdivider at all street intersections on diagonally
opposite corners so that they will be on the far right hand side of the
intersection for traffic on the more important streets.
         (b)   Signs indicating both streets shall be erected at each location
mounted as close to the corner as practical, facing traffic on the cross
street, with the nearest portion of each sign not less than one foot nor more
than 10 feet back from the curb line.
      (2)   Before the Final Plat is approved, the subdivider shall submit to
the Plan Commission a statement from the local Postmaster approving the names
of the proposed streets and of the proposed systems of postal addresses on such
streets.
   (I)   Landscape Development.
      (1)   All unpaved or otherwise unimproved areas within the public rights-
of-way or public use areas shall be graded and seeded in an approved manner.
      (2)   Street trees shall be provided by the subdivider along all streets
where trees do not exist. The trees shall be of a species suitable for local
soil and climatic conditions, adopted to street use and of at least two and on-
half inch caliper. At street corners the trees shall be located a minimum of
twenty-five feet from the intersection of the street right-of-way lines.
Otherwise, they shall be located so as not to interfere with utilities or
sidewalks and placed forty to fifty feet apart. The trees shall be placed in
the grass area between the curb and the sidewalk unless this space is less than
ten feet wide or has a slope of 5 to 1, in which case the trees shall be
planted on the lots.
      (3)   In informal types of street patterns, informal planting of street
trees in accordance with an approved landscape development plan may be
permitted.
      (4)   All residential lots shall have an appropriate cover of undisturbed
existing vegetation, seeding, fresh cut sod, plugs or spot sod.
   (J)   Monuments and Markers.
      (1)   Permanent monuments shall be set:
         (a)   At the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary
of the subdivision.
         (b)   At the intersection of street property lines and at the
beginning and end of all curves along street property lines.
         (c)   In slope areas at principal changes in alignment in the boundary
of the subdivision.
      (2)   Markers shall be set, unless otherwise located by a monument:
         (a)   At all points where lines intersect street right-of way lines.
         (b)   At all angles in the lot property lines.
         (c)   At all other lot corners.
      (3)   Monuments shall be of concrete with minimum dimensions of four
inches and thirty-six inches in length, and shall be marked at the top with
either a copper or steel dowel imbedded so that the top of the dowel should be
flush with the top surface at the center of the monument. Markers shall consist
of galvanized steel or wrought iron pipe or steel bars at least thirty inches
in length and three-quarters of an inch in outside diameter.
      (4)   Monuments and markers shall be provided by the subdivider and so
placed that the center point shall coincide with the intersection of lines to
be marked and the top level with the surface of the surrounding ground after
final grading.
   (K)   Privately Developed Facilities. Where the subdivision is to contain
sewers, sewage treatment facilities, water supply system, park areas, or other
physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public agencies,
provision shall be made by trust agreement, which is a part of the deed
restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies for
jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation and
reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision. Other
restrictions not inconsistent or in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance of the City may also be included.
   (L)   Cluster Development. In order to promote the health and general
welfare of the City and to preserve and make available Open Space, the Plan
Commission may grant a developer the right to vary the residential density
within a tract to be developed, leaving a substantial area free of building
lots. The right to vary the density shall, however, be subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   An overall plan of the entire tract showing roads, lot lines, lot
areas, easements, encumbrances and other relevant data shall be submitted in
accordance with §§
159.04,
159.06 and
159.07.
      (2)   (a)   Overall density shall not exceed that of the Zoning District
in which the land occurs. The houses in the proposed subdivision shall be
grouped in clusters, The minimum lot area shall be two thirds of the minimum
normally required in the Zoning Districts in which the land occurs.
         (b)   Minimum yard requirements in a Cluster Development shall be:
 
Front Yard 10 feet
Side Yard  8 feet (save that garages or carports upon adjacent lots join at the
           property line or be grouped on land away from the individual lot.)
Rear Yard  15 feet
 
      (3)   In cases where a developer has designed special groups of dwelling
and garages, the Plan Commission, after inspecting. plans and elevations, may
grant smaller lot minimum sizes than those in paragraph (L)(2) above, provided
that the sanitary systems are approved by the City Engineer, that the overall-
density does not exceed that permitted within the Zoning District in which the
land occurs, or that the layout is not detrimental to the health and general
welfare of the community.
      (4)   (a)   The balance of the land not contained in the lots or within
the road rights-of-way shall be contiguous and of such condition, size and
shape as to be usable for recreation. Such land shall be held and there shall
be incorporated into the deeds of all property within the development a clause
giving to the owners an interest in such open land which shall be used for
recreational purposes only. (No structure save those incidental to the
recreational use should be permitted thereon.)
         (b)   Open land shall be a minimum of one and one-half acres and shall
be subject to taxation. In the case of such tracts of three or more acres the
developer may petition the City to take over the land to be used in perpetuity
as Open Space.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.7)
§ 159.08 SPECIAL MINIMUM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. If the subdivision meets the following conditions and
requirements, then the Subdivider may conform to the hereinafter described
minimum design and development standards, although the Subdivider shall conform
to all development standards and requirements of this Chapter 159 except as
expressly and specifically modified and addressed within this Section.
   (B)   Conditions and Requirements. The subdivision shall be eligible to
utilize the special minimum design and development standards of this Section if
and only if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The subdivision must be located within the corporate limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon or must be located within one and one-half (1-1/2) miles of
the corporate limits and be subject to a valid Agreement to Annex (pre-
annexation agreement) providing for annexation of all property within the
subdivision upon same becoming contiguous to the corporate limits.
      (2)   The subdivision must have an R- 1 Zoning Classification, Low
Density Residential District and must conform in every respect to all R-
1 Zoning Classification requirements without variance or exception.
      (3)   Availability of and access to the municipal sewer system of the
City must be present for immediate connection for each lot within the
subdivision unless the cost of construction for the extension and connection to
the municipal sanitary sewer system to serve all of the lots in the subdivision
exceeds the sum of $5,000 per lot or the estimated cost of private sewage
disposal, whichever is greater as determined by the City and as determined
pursuant to Subsection (C)(4) herein.
      (4)   The subdivision must not have access by or require the extension of
an existing City street with curb and gutter; nor shall the subdivision be
immediately adjacent to a subdivision conforming to the minimum design and
development standard of §§
159.06 and
159.07.
   (C)   Modified Minimum Design & Development Standards. If the conditions and
requirements of Subsection (B) are met without exception or variance, then the
subdivision shall conform to the standards of §§
159.06 and
159.07 herein, except that said standards may be modified as follows:
      (1)   (a)   The Plat of Subdivision and the Declaration of Subdivision
shall include a restrictive covenant that the minimum floor area for any
residential dwelling shall be not less than 1,200 square feet exclusive of the
garage area, and the maximum floor area of any residential dwelling shall not
be more than 2,000 square feet exclusive of the garage area, except the
covenant may provide that the restriction governing the maximum floor area
shall expire 24 months from the date that a Certificate of Occupancy is issued
by the City for the residential dwelling. In addition, the minimum floor area
and the maximum floor area during 24 months from the date of the Certificate of
Occupancy provided herein shall be a requirement of this ordinance.
         (b)   Alternatively, if the subdivider desires to construct a
residential dwelling on one or more lots within the subdivision that is 2,000
square feet or greater exclusive of the garage area, then the Plat of
Subdivision and the Declaration of Subdivision shall include a restrictive
covenant that the minimum floor area for any residential dwelling shall not be
less than 1,500 square feet exclusive of a garage area, which restrictive
covenant shall continue without expiration, it being the intent and requirement
of this provision that if any residential unit within the subdivision has a
square footage of 2,000 feet or greater then all of the residential dwelling
units within the subdivision shall have a square footage of at least 1,500
square feet or greater.
      (2)   (a)   The pavement designed for streets shall conform to the
standards specified within Plat 2 of §
159.14 as follows:
            1.   24’ of 3” bituminous over 9” of compacted gravel base.
            2.   24’ of 7 2 A of Portland concrete non-reinforced.
            3.   6’ of 6” compacted gravel shoulder upon each side of the
street.
            4.   An open drainage swale with slopes to be a minimum 4 to 1.
            5.   The bottom of the drainage swale shall be a minimum of 2’
below the edge of the street.
            6.   No utilities shall be located within 10’ of the edge of the
surface of the street.
            7.   Each driveway culvert shall be a minimum of 15” in diameter
RCCP pipe and shall extend 5 feet from the edge of the driveway surface;
driveway culverts shall have flared end sections on each end of the culvert and
the flared end sections shall not be counted as part of the 5 foot extension.
         (b)   The Declaration of Subdivision shall include restrictive
covenants incorporating subparagraph (C)(2)(a)4.; subparagraph (C)(2)(a)5. and
subparagraph (C)(2)(a)6.; in addition, the Declaration of Subdivision shall
include a restrictive covenant that no fill, improvement, or other construction
shall be made at any time so as to cause any drainage swale to fail to meet the
minimum requirements provided herein. Any person who shall make any fill,
construction or improvement so as to cause a drainage swale not to meet the
minimum requirement shall be subject to a fine and shall be liable for all
costs incurred in restoring the drainage swale to the required standards.
         (c)   The minimum right-of-way for local streets, including marginal
access streets shall be seventy feet (70’). All cul-de-sacs shall terminate in
a circular right-of-way with a minimum diameter of one hundred feet (100’) and
with a minimum diameter of seventy-five feet (75’) for the vehicle turn around
(i.e. paved area). The City may require a wider right-of-way in order to comply
with typical street cross section with minimum drainage swale and bank slopes.
      (3)   If the proposed subdivision is contiguous with the corporate limits
of the City of Mt. Vernon, all of the proposed subdivisions shall be annexed to
the City prior to subdivision. If the proposed subdivision is not within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon and if the proposed subdivision is
not contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon the
Declaration of Subdivision shall include a restrictive covenant that the
subdivision is subject to an Agreement to Annex providing for the annexation of
all property within the subdivision to the City of Mt. Vernon upon the property
comprising the subdivision becoming contiguous to the corporate limits of the
City of Mt. Vernon; and said Agreement to Annex shall be executed by all
owners, occupants and necessary parties prior to subdivision approval.
      (4)   (a)   Unless state law otherwise requires, if the cost of
construction for the extension and connection of the municipal sanitary sewer
system to serve all of the lots in the subdivision exceeds the sum of $5,000
per lot or the estimated cost of private sewage disposal as determined by the
City, whichever is greater, then private sewage disposal may be utilized.
Calculation of the costs of sewage disposal shall be determined by the
estimated number of lots based upon the smallest lot within the proposed
subdivision and based upon the area within the subdivision and within all
projected subsequent phases thereof and all contiguous real estate owned in
whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by the Developer and/or Subdivider
and/or Owner including without limitation any developed or undeveloped land and
any non-subdivided and/or subdivided lands. In addition, any tract of real
estate of which the proposed subdivision formed a part as of March 1, 2002
shall be considered in the calculation of the cost of sewage disposal.
         (b)   If each lot within the proposed subdivision is not immediately
connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system, the Declaration of
Subdivision shall include a restrictive covenant that, in the event the City of
Mt. Vernon municipal sanitary sewer is extended to within 100 feet of the
subdivision boundary, the owners of lots in the subdivision will be required to
extend the City of Mt. Vernon municipal sanitary sewer through the subdivision
and that each lot owner shall bear the construction costs, proportioned by lot
frontage, and shall grant at no charge an easement to the City of Mt. Vernon at
such location and in such width as determined by the City of Mt. Vernon for the
construction of the municipal sanitary sewer, unless an easement for the
municipal sanitary sewer is incorporated in the approved and recorded plat of
the subdivision.
         (c)   A plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer for the
municipal sanitary sewer extension shall be submitted to the City for review
within 90 days of the municipal sanitary sewer becoming available and
accessible within 100 feet of the subdivision boundary. Each lot must connect
to the municipal sanitary sewer system during the construction of the
extension, which shall be completed within 180 days of the plan approval by the
City. All required permits shall be acquired prior to commencement of any
municipal sanitary sewer construction activities. If the owners of the lots
fail to construct the municipal sewer or shall fail to comply with any
provision herein, all costs incurred by the City in enforcing this Ordinance,
including but not limited to attorneys’ fees, engineering fees, construction
costs, and all expenses of every kind shall be personally assessed to each lot
owner and a lien shall attach to each lot for said expenses.
      (5)   Sidewalks shall not be required unless the subdivision shall be
immediately adjacent to a subdivision with sidewalks which extend to or would
reasonably be expected to extend to or through the proposed subdivision.
      (6)   If the subdivision consists of 5 acres or more, storm water
management (including both erosion control and storm water detention) shall be
required and detailed upon the subdivision plans and plat.
      (7)   The Subdivider and/or Developer shall immediately grade and seed
all unpaved areas of any publicly dedicated right-of-way and shall maintain
said areas until acceptance of the street by city.
      (8)   Except as expressly and specifically modified within this sub-
section, the subdivision and the Owner and/or Subdivider and/or Developer shall
comply with all other provisions of this Chapter 159 of the Revised Code of
ordinances. With regard to the modifications provided within this sub-section,
there shall be no variance or exceptions therefrom.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.8)
§ 159.09 INSPECTION.
   (A)   All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of
this Article shall be inspected during the course of construction by the City
Engineer or a duly designated representative. All fees and costs connected with
such inspections and in reviewing the plans and specifications for such
improvements shall be paid for by the subdivider.
   (B)   The subdivider shall pay to the City an amount equal to one percent
(1%) of the estimated cost of paving, storm drainage, sanitary sewers and site
grading to defray the cost of processing the subdivision application and for
inspection of improvements during construction.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.9)
§ 159.10 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   When a subdivider can show that a provision of this Article would
cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and when, in the opinion of
the Plan Commission because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to
the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the Plan Commission may recommend a Variance or modification to the
City Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such Variance or
modification. Any Variance thus recommended shall be entered in writing in the
minutes of the Plan Commission and the reasoning on which the departure was
justified shall be set forth. Any variance or modification authorized by the
Council should be made by resolution and a copy thereof shall be attached and
made a part of the Final Plat.
   (B)   An exception may be made from the specifications and procedures in the
case of a subdivision containing not more than three lots fronting on an
existing street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of
municipal facilities, and not adversely affecting the development of the
remainder of the parcel and not in conflict with any provisions or portion of
the Comprehensive Plan, Official Maps, Zoning Ordinance, or this Article.
   (C)   A plat of the proposed minor subdivision shall be submitted to the
Secretary of the Plan Commission at least one week prior to the Planning
Commission meeting, at which consideration is desired with four, black and blue
line prints of the proposed minor subdivision, who in turn will forward their
recommendation and the plat to the Council for action. Action by the Council
shall take place at its next stated meeting. Approval of the Council should be
indicated on the original drawing by affixing of the signatures of the Mayor
and City Clerk and the plat will be returned to the applicant to be filed for
record in the Office of the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.10)
§ 159.11 PLATTING AUTHORITY.
   Wherever the approval, review or action of the Plan Commission is required
by the terms of the written Article, same may be fulfilled by a Platting
Authority appointed by majority vote of the entire Commission, to consist of
the City Engineer and two members of the Plan Commission appointed by its
Chairman. Such action of such authority shall fully satisfy any requirements of
this Article for approval, review or action by the Commission.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.11)
§ 159.12 BUILDING PERMIT - ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   No building permit or zoning certificate shall be issued by any governing
official for the construction of any building, structure, or improvement to the
land or any lot within a subdivision as defined herein and which has been
approved for platting or re-platting until all requirements of this Article
have been complied with, and until a final signed copy of a subdivision plat
shall have been delivered to all City departments affected thereby, including
the Engineering Department, Building Inspector, Superintendent of Sewer Works,
and Superintendent of Public Works. No zoning certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until water lines and any required sewer lines are installed, fire plugs
are installed in an operating condition, and until all public roads required to
be constructed are in usable and passable condition.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.12)
§ 159.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   No plat or any subdivision shall be permitted to be recorded by the County
Clerk or to have any validity until it shall have been approved in the manner
aforementioned, provided by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.13)
§ 159.14 PLATS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2032.png]
 
CROSS SECTION No. of Lanes ROW 1 2 3 4 Full Width  Full Median 6 Parking
                                       5
CROSS   No. of Lanes ROW 1  2  3      4      Full Width  Full Median Parking
SECTION                                      5           6
MAJOR STREETS
A       4422         94�1�4�7’   2’   48’       18’       No
B                    80  1�4�7’   2’   48’       4’        No
C                    68�1�4�7’   1’-6 42’       -           Both Sides
D                    55  1�4�7’   1’-6 28’       -           No
COLLECTOR STREETS
E       222          65�1�4�7’   1’-6 38’       -           Both sides
F                    58�1�4�7’   1’-6 31’       -           One side
G                    50�1�4�6’-6 1’-6 28’       -           No
LOCAL STREETS
H       2            50�1�4�6’-6 1’-6 28’       -
 
Notes: Street trees to be planted in grass area (3) if space is 6’ wide or
wider.
(1)   Maximum distance between ROW & Sidewalk edge (private side).
(2)   Minimum width of sidewalk.
(3)   Minimum distance between sidewalk edge (public side) & edge of curb.
(4)   Minimum width of curb and/or gutter.
(5)   Full width of street surface (measured back of curb to back of curb.)
(6)    Median (if applicable).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2034.png]
 
(Prior Code, Art. 17, § 17.14)
CHAPTER 160: SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY
Section
   
160.01   Definitions
   
160.02   Non-commercial solar energy facility
   
160.03   Commercial solar energy facility
§ 160.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. Any device or assembly of devices that
uses solar energy from the sun for generating electricity for the primary
purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not primarily for consumption on the
specific property on which the device or devices reside (i.e. off-premises
consumption); said COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY was previously described
within the Zoning Code as “Photovoltaic Power Station, Solar Farm, Park or
Plant”. A COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY may be ground installed or non-
ground installed (i.e. building mounted).
      NON-COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. Any device or assembly of devices
that uses solar energy from the sun for generating electricity for the primary
purpose for consumption by a building or other structure requiring a Building
Permit situated on the specific property on which the device or devices reside
(i.e. on-premises consumption). A NON-COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY may be
ground installed or non-ground installed (i.e. building mounted).
      SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY. Any device or assembly of devices that uses solar
energy from the sun for generating electricity; such Facility shall be
classified either as a “Commercial Solar Energy Facility” or a “Non-Commercial
Solar Energy Facility”.
   (B)   A Solar Energy Facility used for generating, electricity for the
primary purpose for consumption by a building or other structure requiring a
Building Permit owned by the Owners of the Solar Energy Facility and not for
the primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale, but not situated on the
specific property on which the device or devices reside, shall be classified as
a “Commercial Solar Energy Facility” and shall be permitted only in the same
Zoning Districts and be subject to the same requirements as a Commercial Solar
Energy Facility.
(Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 160.02 NON-COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY.
   A Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall constitute a structure that
requires a Building Permit and is permitted in all Zoning Districts and shall,
except as hereinafter provided, be subject to the general provisions of the
Zoning District, including setback requirements, in which it is situated. In
addition, a Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall comply with all
applicable local, state and federal regulatory standards, codes, and laws. A
Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility that is ground installed shall have no
component of a solar panel that has a height of more than 10 feet above ground
when the solar energy facility’s arrays are at full tilt; a non-ground
installed (i.e. building mounted) Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall
have no component of a solar panel that has a height of more than 3 feet above
the building roof line or other building installation surface when the solar
energy facility’s arrays are at full tilt and shall not extend beyond the edge
of the roof or surface. A Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility’s power and
communication lines running between banks of solar panels and to electric
substations or interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. A
Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be designed and located so as to
prevent glare from any individual arrays/solar panels toward any inhabited
building on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way. A
Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall have such vegetative ground cover or
other measures as is needed to reduce or prevent stormwater runoff, flooding,
and/or erosion.
(Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 160.03 COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY.
   (A)   (1)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility:
         (a)   shall constitute a structure that requires a Building Permit,
         (b)   shall, except as follows, be subject to the provisions of the
Zoning District in which it is situated, and
         (c)   shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal
regulatory standards, codes, and laws.
      (2)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall only be placed within the
following Zoning Districts: as a Conditional Use within the AG, General
Agriculture District, the I-A, Industrial-Agricultural District, and the IPCA-
PUD, Industrial Park Conservation Area District and as a Permitted Use within
the 1-1, Light Industrial District, and the 1-2, General Industrial District.
   (B)   A non-ground installed Commercial Solar Energy shall have no component
of a solar panel that has a height of more than 3 feet above the building roof
line or other building installation surface when the solar energy facility’s
arrays are at full tilt and shall not extend beyond the edge of the roof or
surface.
   (C)   A ground installed Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   (a)   A ground installed Commercial Solar Energy Facility have
setback distances as hereinafter set forth measured from the nearest edge of
any component of the Facility; the setback requirements set forth within this
subsection may be subject to Variance upon the written consent of all the
owners of each affected nonparticipating property and the written approval
(i.e. Order Granting Variance) of the Zoning and Planning Commission. The
written consent of all the owners of each affected nonparticipating property
must be filed with the Zoning and Plaiming Commission before the Commission may
grant an Order Granting Variance. In addition, the Order Granting Variance and
each Consent shall be filed with the City Clerk prior to issuance of a Building
Permit.
 
Setback Description                Setback Distance
Occupied Community Buildings and   150 feet from the nearest point on the
Residences on Nonparticipating     outside wall of the structure
Properties
Boundary Lines of Participating    None
Property
Public Road Rights-of-Way          50 feet from the nearest edge of the ROW
Boundary Lines of Nonparticipating 50 feet to the nearest point on the
Property                           property line of the nonparticipating
                                   property
 
         (b)   The terms which have been used above and within this Article
shall have the following meanings:
            FACILITY OWNER.
               a.   a person with a direct ownership interest a commercial
solar energy facility, regardless of whether the person is involved in
acquiring the necessary rights, permits, and approvals or otherwise planning
for the construction and operation of the facility, and
               b.   at the time the facility is being developed, a person who
is acting as a developer of the facility by acquiring the necessary rights,
permits, and approvals or by planning for the construction and operation of the
facility, regardless of whether the person will own or operate the facility.
            NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is not a
participating property.
            NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residentially used building that is
located on nonparticipating property and that is existing and occupied on the
date that an application for a Building Permit or Conditional Use Permit
(whichever is earlier) to develop the commercial solar energy facility is filed
with the City.
            OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING. Any one or more of the following
buildings that is existing and occupied on the date that the for a Building
Permit or Conditional Use Permit (whichever is earlier) to develop the
commercial solar energy facility is filed with the City: a school, place of
worship, day care facility, public library, community center, hospital, nursing
home, assisted living facility, or similarly used building as determined by the
City Council.
            PARTICIPATING PROPERTY. Real property that is the subject of a
written agreement between a facility owner and the owner of the real property
that provides the facility owner an easement, option, lease, or license to use
the real property for the purpose of a commercial solar energy facility, or
real property that is owned by a facility owner for the purpose of constructing
a commercial solar energy facility or supporting facilities.
            PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE. A residentially used building that is
located on participating property and that is existing and occupied on the date
that an application for a Building Permit or Conditional Use Permit (whichever
is earlier) to develop the commercial solar energy facility is filed with the
City.
            SUPPORTING FACILITIES. The transmission lines, substations, access
roads, meteorological towers, storage containers, and equipment associated with
the generation and storage of electricity by the commercial solar energy
facility.
      (2)   A ground installed Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall have its
perimeter enclosed by secure fencing having a height of at least 6 feet and no
more than 25 feet.
      (3)   A ground installed Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall have no
component of a solar panel that has a height of more than 20 feet above ground
when the solar energy facility’s arrays are at full tilt. The height
requirement set forth within this subsection may be subject to Variance upon
the written recommendation of the Zoning and Planning Commission, the approval
of the City Council, and the written consent of all the owners of each affected
nonparticipating property; the Recommendation, Approval, and each Consent shall
be filed with the City Clerk prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
   (D)   All Commercial Solar Energy Facilities shall be subject to the
following requirements:
      (1)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be designed and located so
as to prevent glare from any individual arrays/solar panels toward any
inhabited building on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-
way.
      (2)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility’s power and communication lines
running between banks of solar panels and to electric substations or
interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be
granted by the City Council in specific instances where shallow bedrock,
watercourses, other elements of natural landscape, or other conditions not
subject to the facility owner’s control interfere with the ability to bury
lines.
      (3)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall have such vegetative
screening as reasonably needed to protect and shield adjoining properties and
public rights of way. A Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall have such
vegetative ground cover as may be needed to reduce stormwater runoff, flooding,
and erosion. A Commercial Solar Energy Facility, shah in all events comply with
Chapter 53 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City relating to Storm
Drainage and Sediment Control.
      (4)   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility permitted by reason of a
Conditional Use shall provide to City as part of its request for a Conditional
Use any reports, agreements, or recommendations received by the facility owner
and/or agents from consultations or submissions to the Illinois Department of
Natural Resources, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the United
States Department of Agriculture, the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office, or other Illinois or Federal Agency imposing standards or requirements
on the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
      (5)   (a)   The Commercial Solar Energy Facility and the facility owner
shall be responsible for:
            1.   the reasonable cost of improving roads used by the facility
owner to construct the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and
            2.   the reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the Facility
owner during construction of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility so that those
roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the
completion of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility’s construction.
         (b)   Roadways improved in preparation for and during the construction
of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be repaired and restored to the
improved condition at the reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways have
degraded or were damaged as a result of construction-related activities;
However, the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and facility owner shall not be
required to pay costs, fees, or charges for road work that is not specifically
and uniquely attributable to the construction of the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility.
(Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
CHAPTER 161: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
161.001   Statement legislative intent
   
161.002   Short title
   
161.003   Territorial limits of ordinance
   
161.004   Establishments of districts: provision for official zoning map
   
161.005   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries
   
161.006   Schedule of district regulations
   
161.007   Application of regulations
   
161.008   Provisions of ordinance declared to be minimum requirements
   
161.009   Complaints regarding violations
   
161.010   Airport height regulations
   
161.011   Separability clause
   
161.012   Repeal of conflicting ordinances: effective date
Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land, Non-Conforming Structures,
Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises, Non-Conforming Characteristics
of Use
and Non-Conforming Signs
   
161.025   Intent
   
161.026   Non-conforming lots of record
   
161.027   Non-conforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only)
   
161.028   Non-conforming structures
   
161.029   Non-conforming use of structures or of structures and premises in
combination
   
161.030   Repairs and maintenance
   
161.031   Non-conforming signs shall be amortized
   
161.032   Conditional uses shall not be non-conforming uses
Supplementary District Regulations
   
161.045   Visibility at intersections in residential districts
   
161.046   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
161.047   Accessory buildings
   
161.048   Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot
   
161.049   Exceptions to height regulations
   
161.050   Structures to have access
   
161.051   Major recreational equipment
   
161.052   Parking and storage of certain vehicles
Shipping Containers
   
161.065   Definitions
   
161.066   Shipping container use
   
161.067   Building or construction component
   
161.068   Accessory structure
   
161.069   Nonconforming structure permit
   
161.070   Temporary use
   
161.071   Violations
Administration and Enforcement - Building Permits and Certificates Of Zoning
Compliance
   
161.085   Administration and enforcement
   
161.086   Building permits required
   
161.087   Application for building permit
   
161.088   Certificates of zoning compliance for new, altered, or non-conforming
uses
   
161.089   Expiration of building permit
   
161.090   Construction and use to be provided in applications, plans, permits
and certificates of zoning compliance
   
161.091   Storm waster detention plans
Zoning and Planning Commission Board: Establishment and Procedure
   
161.105   Establishment
   
161.106   Membership and terms
   
161.107   Proceedings of the Board of Appeals
   
161.108   Hearings, appeals, decisions, notice
   
161.109   Stay of proceedings
Board of Appeals: Powers and Duties
   
161.120   Powers and duties
Zoning and Planning Commission: Power and Duties for Conditional Use
   
161.135   Generally
   
161.136   Application and procedure
   
161.137   Findings
   
161.138   Final decision
Amendments
   
161.150   Generally
   
161.151   Application and procedure
Appeals from Board of Appeals, Planning Commission and City Council
   
161.165   General provisions
Duties of the City Manager, Board of Appeals, Planning Commission and City
Council
   
161.180   General provisions
Schedule of Fees, Charges, Expenses
   
161.195   General provisions
Definitions and Illustrations
   
161.210   Definitions
   
161.211   Illustrations
Permits for Signs and Fees
   
161.225   Permits
   
161.226   Signs not subject to a permit
   
161.227   Fees for sign permit and sign transfer permit
Sign Regulations
   
161.240   Jurisdiction and scope
   
161.241   Administration
   
161.242   Definitions
   
161.243   Typical on-premise sign types
   
161.244   Sign areas computational methodology/ground signs
   
161.245   Sign face area
   
161.246   Height of signs
   
161.247   Prohibited signs
   
161.248   Removal of prohibited signs
   
161.249   Signs in R-1, R-2, R-M2, R-MH and R-3 Residential Zoning Districts
   
161.250   Standards in A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-PL, I-1, I-2, I-A, IPCA-PUD
Zoning Districts
   
161.251   Additional regulations in all districts
   
161.252   Sign regulations for sexually oriented business
   
161.253   Electronic message centers
   
161.254   Sign illumination standards
   
161.255   Nonconforming signs
   
161.256   Electrical regulations applying to all signs
   
161.257   Maintenance requirements
   
161.258   Off-premise signs
Conditional Sign Permit
   
161.270   Conditional sign
   
161.271   Conditional sign permit
   
161.272   Procedure for conditional sign permit
   
161.273   Application and procedure
   
161.274   Findings
   
161.275   Final decision
Performance Standards
   
161.290   Generally
   
161.291   Low and Medium Density Planned Unit Developments (R-1) and (R-2)
   
161.292   High Density Planned Unit Developments (R-3)
   
161.293   Planned Manufactured Home Developments (R-MH)
   
161.294   Light Industrial uses (I-1)
   
161.295   General Industrial uses (I-2)
Schedule of District Regulations
   
161.310   General provisions
   
161.311   Land use districts listed
   
161.312   A-G General Agriculture
   
161.313   F-P Flood Plain
   
161.314   R-1 Low Density Residential
   
161.315   R-2 Medium Density Residential
   
161.316   R-M2 Medium Density Residential and Mobile Home
   
161.317   R-3 High Density Residential
   
161.318   R-MH Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home
   
161.319   B-1 Primary Business
   
161.320   B-2 Secondary Business
   
161.321   B-3 Interchange Business
   
161.322   B-PL Planned Business
   
161.323   I-1 Light Industrial
   
161.324   I-2 General Industrial
   
161.325   I-A Industrial - Agriculture Land
   
161.326   IPCA-PUD Industrial Park Conservation Area-Planned Unit Development
(Commercial Design Standards for IPCA-PUD)
Development in Flood Plain (Special Flood Hazard) Areas
   
161.340   Purpose
   
161.341   Definitions
   
161.342   Base flood elevation
   
161.343   Duties of the Building Official
   
161.344   Development permit
   
161.345   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
161.346   Protecting buildings
   
161.347   Subdivision requirements
   
161.348   Public health and other standards
   
161.349   Carrying capacity and notification
   
161.350   Variances
   
161.351   Disclaimer of liability
   
161.352   Penalty
   
161.353   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
161.354   Severability
Zoning, Siting Location and Design Regulations for Wireless Communication
Facilities
   
161.365   Purpose and scope
   
161.366   Definitions
   
161.367   Exemptions
   
161.368   General provisions
   
161.369   Wireless communication facility locations
   
161.370   Site development standards
   
161.371   Co-location
   
161.372   Facility removal
   
161.373   Electromagnetic field (EMF) standards compliance
   
161.374   Application requirements
   
161.375   Permit limitations
   
161.376   Fees
   
161.377   Rules and regulations of the city
   
161.378   Severability
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Ordinance Providing for the Regulation of
and
Application for Small Wireless Facilities
   
161.390   Preamble
   
161.391   Purpose and scope
   
161.392   Definitions
   
161.393   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
161.394   Dispute resolution
   
161.395   Indemnification
   
161.396   Insurance
   
161.397   Severability
Zoning Regulations for Bed and Breakfast Establishments
   
161.410   Regulations for bed and breakfast establishments
   
Appendix A:   Commercial Design Handbook
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 161.001 STATEMENT LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   It is the intent of this ordinance to divide the City and the land lying
contiguous to and within one and one half miles beyond the corporate limits,
into zones, or districts, for the purpose of restricting and regulating therein
the location, erection, constriction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, and other
specified uses; to regulate the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the area of open spaces surrounding such buildings; to
establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for specified
industrial business, residential and other uses within such areas; to fix
standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein; to prohibit
uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of such
districts, respectively; to prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling
of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions
and limitations lawfully imposed hereunder; to limit congestion in the public
streets by providing for off-street parking and loading and unloading of
vehicles; providing for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land,
building and structures; to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the over crowding of land; to conserve the taxable value of land and
buildings throughout the City; and to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-101)
§ 161.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This amended ordinance, including the zoning District Maps made a part
hereof shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Mount Vernon, Illinois”.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-102)
§ 161.003 TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF ORDINANCE.
   The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to that land located within the
corporate limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois, and the land lying
contiguous to and within one and one half miles beyond the corporate limits as
they may exist from time to time.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-103)
§ 161.004 ESTABLISHMENTS OF DISTRICTS: PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Official Zoning Map.
      (1)   The territorial limits described in §
161.003 are hereby divided into districts, as shown on the official zoning map
which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this ordinance.
      (2)   The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City of Mt.
Vernon under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official
Zoning Map referred to in §
161.004 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois.
(the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois)”, together with the
date of the adoption of this ordinance. The official zoning map indicating
current zoning district boundaries shall be located in the office of the City
Clerk.
      (3)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the
Illinois Municipal Code, changes are made in district boundaries or other
matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such chances shall be entered on
the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
City Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: “By official
action of the City Council the following (change) changes were made in the
Official Zoning Map:
(Date, Ordinance Number                  , Brief description of Change),” which
entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
      (4)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map
or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or
persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as
provided under Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Annual Updating of Copies of the Official Zoning Map. In the event
there have been changes in the Official Zoning Map in any calendar year, the
Administrative Official hereinafter provided for shall prepare and publish or
print copies of the Official Zoning Map reflecting zoning district boundaries
as of December 31. Such copies shall be printed prior to March 31 of the
succeeding year, and shall bear the following words. “This is a copy of the
Official Zoning Map reflecting zoning district boundaries as of December 31,
20      “. Fees for such copies of Official Zoning Map shall be established in
accordance with §
161.165 of this Ordinance. Regardless of the existence of copies of the
Official Zoning Map, the Official Zoning Map located in the Office of the City
Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and
water areas, buildings, and other structures in the territorial limits.
   (C)   Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
      (1)   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new
Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.
The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the City of Mt. Vernon
under the following words: “This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of
map being replaced) as part of Ordinance No.           of the City of Mt.
Vernon, Illinois”.
      (2)   Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining
shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-104)
§ 161.005 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following such City limits, as they may exist from time to time.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-105)
§ 161.006 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   District regulations shall be as set forth in the Schedule of District
Regulations, §§
161.310 through
161.326, hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
ordinance, and in §§
161.045 through
161.052 of this ordinance, entitled, “Supplementary District Regulations”.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-106)
§ 161.007 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
   (B)   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
to exceed the height or bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number of
families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or
smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein
required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
   (C)   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building or any other lot.
   (D)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance.
   (E)   Any land which shall come within an area within one and one half miles
beyond the corporate limits, by reason of annexation of other lands to the
City, shall be and is hereby classified and zoned as A-G General Agriculture
District, unless and until such classification may be amended by ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-107)
§ 161.008 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
   (B)   Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher
standards, shall govern.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-118)
§ 161.009 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the City Manager or his
designated official. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-119)
§ 161.010 AIRPORT HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Any person seeking a building permit, rezoning, conditional use, or variance
within the jurisdiction of airport height regulations as administered by the
Mt. Vernon Airport Authority shall provide evidence acceptable to the
administrative official; that such height regulations have been complied with
before such building permit, rezoning, conditional use, or variance can be
acted upon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-121)
§ 161.011 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
   Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-122)
§ 161.012 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES: EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Zoning
Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage, approval,
and publication.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-123)
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND,
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES
AND PREMISES, NON-CONFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USE AND
NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
§ 161.025 INTENT.
   (A)   (1)   Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments
that may later be adopted there exist: lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, characteristics of use, and signs which were lawful before this
ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments.
      (2)   It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these non-conformities
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is
further the intent of this ordinance that non-conformities shall not be
enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
   (B)   Non-conforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A non-conforming use of
structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after
passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional
signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other
uses, or a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
   (C)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently.
   (D)   Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner. Where excavating or demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that
work shall be carried on diligently.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.1)
§ 161.026 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a
single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption of amendment of this
ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous
frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even
though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that
are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Board of Appeals.
   (B)   In any district, if two or more lots or combination of lots and
portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at
the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this
ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by
this ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a
lot with width or area below requirements stated in this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.2)
§ 161.027 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND (OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY).
   Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists
which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and
where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost
exceeding $1,000 the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful for a period of five years from the date of adoption of this ordinance,
provided:
   (A)   No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
   (B)   No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
   (C)   If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land
is located.
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
ordinance shall be erected in connection with such non-conforming use of land.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.3)
§ 161.028 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.
   (A)   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its
physical structure, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance.
   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.4)
§ 161.029 NON-CONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION.
   If lawful use involving individual structures, or of structure and premises
in combination, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of
this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful; subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a
structure or structures and premises, may as a conditional use be changed to
another non-conforming use provided the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Planning
Commission may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this ordinance.
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
non- conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district, and the non-conforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
   (E)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three year period (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-
conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection
is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the physical
structure.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.5)
§ 161.030 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non- conforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacement of non- bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that
the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming shall not be
increased.
   (B)   If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (C)   Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.6)
§ 161.031 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS SHALL BE AMORTIZED.
   Any sign which does not conform to the sign provisions of the district in
which it is located shall be eliminated or brought in conformity with such
provisions within ten years from the date of adoption of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.7)
§ 161.032 CONDITIONAL USES SHALL NOT BE NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under the
terms of this ordinance other than a change through Planning Commission and
City Council action from a non- conforming use to another use not generally
permitted in the district shall not be deemed a non- conforming use in such
district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use at
the date of adoption of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-108.8)
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 161.045 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision between a height of two and a half and ten feet above the centerline
grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the lot lines of such
corner lots and a line joining points along said lot lines 15 feet from the
point of the intersection of the lot lines.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.1)
§ 161.046 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, fences, walls and hedges
may be permitted in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided
that no fence, wall or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard
shall conflict with the provisions of §
161.045 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.2)
§ 161.047 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall be erected in any required front or side yard,
and no separate accessory building shall be erected within five feet of any
other building.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.3)
§ 161.048 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT.
   In all districts with the exception of R-1, R-2, and R-M2 residential
districts, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal
use may be erected on a single lot of record, provided that yard and other
requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it
were on an individual lot, and further provided that the owner of a single lot
of record shall not sell or convey off a part of said lot of record without
compliance with Chapter 159 of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of
Mt. Vernon, relating to subdivision of land.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.4)
§ 161.049 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The height limitations contained in the Schedule of District Regulations do
not apply to spires, elevator penthouses, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water
tanks, ventilators, chimneys, farm silos in agricultural districts or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.5)
§ 161.050 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.
   Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street or with access to an approved private street, and all structures
shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for
servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.6)
§ 161.051 MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Parking and Storage of Major Recreational Equipment. For purposes of
these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats
and boat trailers, recreational vehicles of every type, travel trailers, pick
up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles),
motorized dwellings, tent trailers, utility trailers, and the like, and cases
or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such
equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on
any lot in a residential district except in a driveway or parking space
improved for such purpose, a carport or enclosed building, or behind the
nearest portion of a building so as not to be visible from the street, unless
physical barriers or conditions upon the property reasonably prevent otherwise;
provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential
premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. Major
recreational equipment shall not be stored on any public street or alley; nor
shall major recreational equipment, at any time when parked or stored, block or
obstruct a public sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way.
   (B)   Use of Major Recreational Equipment. For purposes of these
regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and
boat trailers, recreational vehicles of every type, travel trailers, pick up
campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized
dwellings, tent trailers, utility trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes
used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such
equipment or not. No such major recreational equipment shall be used for
living, sleeping, housekeeping, dwelling, or occupancy purposes when parked or
stored on a residential lot, or at any location or lot not zoned or approved
for such use. No such major recreational equipment shall be used as a storage
building or as an accessory building upon any lot.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.7)
§ 161.052 PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   Automotive vehicles, trucks or trailers of any kind or type without current
license plates, or trucks over 3/4 ton capacity, with current license plates,
shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in
a carport or closed building.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.8)
SHIPPING CONTAINERS
§ 161.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SHIPPING CONTAINER. A unit originally used for or designed for the
transport, shipping, or hauling of materials or goods by land, sea, or air;
capable of being moved or mounted by rail, truck, or boat. This definition also
includes the terms PORTABLE MOVING/STORAGE UNIT/CONTAINER/POD and CARGO/
OCEANGOING/TRANSPORT CONTAINER and any INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINER or similar
unit. In addition, this definition includes any structure designed to be used
for or designed to imitate a shipping container or having a similar appearance
to and similar characteristics of a shipping container.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.066 SHIPPING CONTAINER USE.
   Except as specifically hereinafter expressly provided, the placement and/or
use of any shipping container as a primary or principal structure, an accessory
building, storage building, living unit, other building, or other similar
purpose are prohibited within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Mt.
Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.067 BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION COMPONENT.
   A shipping container is permitted to be used as a building or construction
component of one primary or principal structure upon a lot only if the
following conditions are met:
   (A)   Each, the use of a shipping container as a building or construction
component and the principal structure of which the shipping container forms a
part, shall comply with all applicable codes, regulations, and laws, including
without limitation, all building, plumbing, electrical, housing, fire, and
energy conservation codes, regulations and laws.
   (B)   A shipping container shall not be used as a building or construction
component of any structure upon property that is zoned A-G, General
Agriculture; F-P, Flood Plain; R-1, Low Density Residential; R-2, Medium
Density Residential; R-M2, Medium Density Residential and Mobile Home; R-3,
High Density Residential; R-MH, Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home; I-A,
Industrial-Agriculture; or IPCA-PUD, Industrial Park Conservation Area, nor
shall a shipping container be used as a building or construction component of
any structure designed or intended for use, or actually used, as a residential
dwelling or for any residential purpose, regardless of the zoning
classification.
   (C)   A shipping container may be used as a building or construction
component of a non-residential structure upon property that is zoned B-1,
Primary Business; B-2, Secondary Business; B-3, Interchange Business; B-PL,
Planned Business; I-1, Light Industrial; or I-2, General Industrial.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.068 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
   A shipping container is permitted as an accessory structure upon property
that is zoned B-2, Secondary Business; B-3 or Interchange Business; B-PL,
Planned Business with a Conditional Use Permit and upon property that is zoned
A-G, General Agriculture; I-1, Light Industrial; I-2 General Industrial; or I
A, Industrial Agricultural if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   A shipping container shall be used as an accessory storage facility
only in relation to a lawfully permitted use.
   (B)   The shipping container shall be placed on concrete, asphalt, or a
level, compacted non-soil hard surface.
   (C)   The shipping container shall be painted so as to blend in with the
building to which it is an accessory; no signage or advertising shall be
present on the shipping container.
   (D)   The shipping container shall be placed on the property so as to
minimize the visibility of shipping container to a road, to a property used for
residential purposes, and/ or to a property used for non-industrial businesses
or non-industrial purposes; screening and landscaping may be required to
obscure the visual presence of a shipping container.
   (E)   Shipping containers may be stacked only to a maximum of two containers
high.
   (F)   The shipping container shall comply with all setback requirements
applicable to the zoning district in which it is located.
   (G)   The shipping container shall comply with all applicable laws,
regulations, and codes.
   (H)   A shipping container shall be placed only after a Building Permit has
first been issued by the Building Inspector; and, if applicable, only after a
Conditional Use Permit has also been obtained.
   (I)   A shipping container shall not be placed within off-street parking,
loading, or landscaping areas; nor shall a shipping container impede access to
public right-of-ways, public utility or drainage easements, adjacent
structures, or any building.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.069 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE PERMIT.
   A shipping container which has been placed upon a property as an accessory
structure prior to the date of adoption of this §§
161.065 through
161.071 and which does not comply with the requirements of §
161.068 may continue to be placed upon the property as a permitted
nonconforming structure if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The location and use of the shipping container as an accessory
structure must not be in violation of City zoning, nuisance, and other
ordinances prior to the date of adoption of this §§
161.065 through
161.071 (August 3, 2020).
   (B)   The shipping container used as an accessory structure must be
registered with the City as a permitted nonconforming structure by applying for
and obtaining a Building Permit prior to December 31, 2020; the Building Permit
shall include the identification information and specific location for the
shipping container. After December 31, 2020, use of a shipping container that
has not been registered as a nonconforming accessory structure shall be
unlawful; and the shipping container must be removed.
   (C)   The shipping container shall comply with the provisions of §
161.068(A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), and (I) of “ACCESSORY STRUCTURE” set forth
above prior to December 31, 2020.
   (D)   (1)   The shipping container shall not be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity, but the shipping container may be altered
to decrease its non- conformity.
      (2)   If the shipping container is destroyed by any means to an extent of
more than 25 percent of its physical structure, it shall not be repaired or
reconstructed, but shall be removed and shall not be replaced. After
registration, if the shipping container is moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall be removed from the property.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.070 TEMPORARY USE.
   (A)   In all Zoning Classification Districts a contractor may use a shipping
container for the temporary housing of equipment and materials during active
and actual construction of an improvement that is subject to and authorized by
a City building permit until the contractor’s construction is completed or a
certificate of occupancy for the improvement is issued, whichever is sooner;
provided that in no event shall a shipping container remain upon a property
without a valid unexpired permit for said shipping container; said temporary
use shall be subject to the following:   
      (1)   The shipping container may be placed only after a temporary permit
has first been issued by the Building Inspector; said Temporary Permit for the
placement of a shipping container may only be issued in conjunction with a
Building Permit for the construction site where the shipping container is to be
placed.
      (2)   The temporary shipping container permit shall be valid for a period
of one calendar year from the date of issuance or until the associated Building
Permit expires or a certificate of occupancy is issued for the improvement
subject of the Building Permit, whichever first occurs.
      (3)   The temporary shipping container shall not be placed within the
public right-of-way, and shall not be placed in such a manner as to obstruct or
impair the free and full use of the sidewalk or street by the public, or
obstruct the view of pedestrians or users of vehicles thereon or interfere with
the wires, poles or fixtures lawfully maintained thereon.
      (4)   The temporary shipping container may only be placed upon the
construction site associated with the active Building Permit.
      (5)   The temporary shipping container must be placed a minimum of five
feet away from all adjacent property lines and public rights-of-way.
      (6)   Temporary shipping containers shall not be stacked.
      (7)   The temporary shipping container must be secured at night time and
maintained in good condition.
   (B)   A shipping container, temporarily upon a property, actively and
actually used for the transport, shipping, or hauling of materials or goods in
relation to a lawful use upon a property within an industrial or business zoned
district shall not be considered an accessory structure; however, no such
temporary period for a shipping container shall exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
§ 161.071 VIOLATIONS.
   Property owners who are in violation of the provisions set forth in §§
161.065 through
161.071 as of the date of its adoption shall have until December 31, 2020 to
bring a property and/or a shipping container into full compliance with the
provision set forth in §§
161.065 through
161.071.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-109.9)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT - BUILDING PERMITS AND
CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
§ 161.085 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager shall administer and assign duties to other persons
in the City’s service at his discretion.
   (B)   If the City Manager or his designated official finds that any of the
provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall provide for notice in
writing to the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures, removal of
illegal buildings or structure or of illegal additions, alterations, structural
changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other
action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.1)
§ 161.086 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without a permit therefore. No building permit shall be
issued by the Building Department except in conformity with provisions of this
ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the City Manager after
approval of the City Council or Board of Appeals in the form of an
administrative review, conditional use or variance as provided by this
ordinance.
   (B)   No premises within the City of Mt. Vernon shall be improved for
parking or parking lot purposes, whether for surface parking or by a parking
structure, unless and until a building permit shall have been issued therefor
as required and provided by §§
161.365 through
161.378 of this Ordinance and the requisite fee paid therefor.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.2)
§ 161.087 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in
triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot
to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already
existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully
may be required by the Building Department, including existing or proposed
building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building or land; the
number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed
to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may
be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of
this ordinance.
   (B)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the
Building Department, marked either as approved or disapproved and attested to
same by his signature. The original and one copy of the plans, similarly
marked, shall be retained by the administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.3)
§ 161.088 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE FOR NEW, ALTERED, OR NON-CONFORMING
USES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy
of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof created, erected,
converted, changed or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued
therefore by the administrative official, stating that the proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. No non-
conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed, or extended
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the
administrative official. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state
specifically wherein the non-conformity differs from the provisions of this
ordinance.
   (B)   No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building
shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of zoning
compliance, and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the
provision of this ordinance upon completion of the work.
   (C)   A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the
administrative official for a period not exceeding six months during
alterations or partial occupancy of a building, pending its completion,
provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions as
safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. The
administrative official shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning
compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person.
   (D)   Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a
violation of this ordinance and punishable under
Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   (E)   No such certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use shall be issued for the use and occupancy of any building or
premises which shall be used for other than single family dwelling purposes
unless and until the applicant shall have provided to the Building Inspector a
plan of storm water detention describing the method for handling storm water in
a manner so that storm water runoff shall not be increased as a result of such
structure without detention and other storm water handling facilities and until
such storm water detention plans shall have been approved by the City Engineer.
   (F)   In the event that the applicant shall desire to use and occupy any
such building or premises prior to completion of all parking lot required by
this
Chapter 161, such certificate may issue only under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Storm water detention shall have been completed according to the
storm water detention plan approved by the City Engineer; and
      (2)   The applicant shall deposit with the City a performance bond in an
amount not less than one and one half times the estimated cost of such parking
lot improvements which remain to be completed, together with the applicant’s
agreement to complete all of such improvements not less than one year after the
date of such bond, and that such bond shall be conditioned to guarantee such
performance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.4)
§ 161.089 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially
completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall
expire and be cancelled by the administrative official, and written notice
thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that
further work as described in the cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and
until a new building permit has been obtained. A building permit may be
extended beyond one year if it is so requested in writing at the time of
issuance of building permit.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.5)
§ 161.090 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS, PERMITS
AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of
plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement,
or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of
this ordinance and punishable as provided by Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.6)
§ 161.091 STORM WASTER DETENTION PLANS.
   No building permit shall issue for any structure other than a single family
structure or for any parking lot unless there shall have been attached to the
application therefor a storm water detention plan describing the method for
handling storm water in a manner so that storm water runoff shall not be
increased as a result of such structure without detention and other storm water
handling facilities, and until such storm water detention plan shall have been
approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-110.7)
ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION BOARD: ESTABLISHMENT AND PROCEDURE
§ 161.105 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Zoning and Planning Commission is hereby established, which Commission
shall perform the duties and have the authority as hereinafter set forth for
the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall perform the duties and have the authority
of the Plan Commission (also called “Planning Commission”) established by
Chapter 155 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. Wherever the term “Zoning Board
of Appeals”, “Plan Commission”, or “Planning Commission” is used within the
Revised Code of Ordinances, said term shall mean the Zoning and Planning
Commission Board.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-111)
§ 161.106 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS.
   The Zoning and Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, all
residents of the City; each member shall be appointed for a 5-year term, with
the terms to be determined from a beginning date of January 1, 2020. Members
shall serve until replaced or reappointed. In the event a vacancy or late
appointment occurs, replacement shall be for the unexpired term only. The
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council shall appoint the
membership and shall designate the Chairman who shall serve in such capacity
until a vacancy in his term of appointment exists. The City Engineer shall
serve as an advisor and as an ex-officio member without a vote. Members of the
Zoning and Planning Commission may be removed for cause after a public hearing;
cause shall include, but shall not be limited to, the failure to attend two
consecutive meetings or four meetings during any 12-month period. The Zoning
and Planning Commission shall perform the duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals
as hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-111.1)
§ 161.107 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Board of Appeals shall adopt written rules necessary to the conduct of
its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. The Chairman,
or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examination and other official actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment
or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall
be a public record. In the performance of its duties, the Board of Appeals may
incur such expenditures as are authorized by the City Council. Meetings shall
be held at the call of the chairman and at such times and places within the
City as the Board of Appeals may determine. All meetings shall be open to the
public.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-111.2)
§ 161.108 HEARINGS, APPEALS, DECISIONS, NOTICE.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Appeals concerning interpretation or
administration of this ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved. Such
appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days or such
lesser period as the Board of Appeals may provide by the rules of the Board of
Appeals, by filing with the City Clerk and with the Board of Appeals a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Clerk shall forthwith
transmit all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal and give the notice thereof to the parties interested and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent, or by attorney. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as
in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the City Manager, or his designated official, from whom the
appeal is taken.
   (C)   The concurring vote of five members of the Board of Appeals is
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
City Manager, or his designated official, or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or
to effect any variation in this ordinance, or to recommend any amendment or
modification to this ordinance to the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-111.3)
§ 161.109 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reasons of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Appeals or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-111.4)
BOARD OF APPEALS: POWERS AND DUTIES
§ 161.120 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is allege
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
officials of the City in the enforcement of this ordinance.
   (B)   Variances: Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures. To authorize
upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. The non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures,
or buildings in the same district, or permitted or nonconforming use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall not be considered grounds for
issuance of a variance. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not
be granted by the Board of Appeals unless and until:
      (1)   A written application for a variance is submitted, on forms
obtained from the City Clerk, demonstrating:
         (a)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to the other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
         (b)   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this ordinance.
         (c)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant.
         (d)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
      (2)   Notice shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in
advance of the public hearing. The petitioner, his agent, or attorney shall
cause such notice to be given in each of the following ways:
         (a)   The owner of the property for which the proposed variance is
sought, or his agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and place
of public hearing, unless said owner is applicant.
         (b)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, the
legal description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed variance is sought, and
nature of the proposed variance shall be printed in a newspaper of general
circulation within Mt. Vernon.
         (c)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place the
legal description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed variance is sought, and
nature of the proposed variance, shall be posted at the City Hall and in a
prominent place on the property for which the proposed variance is sought.
         (d)   The notice required herein to be posted upon the property
affected shall be in the following form:
            1.   The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall
be a metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not less
than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous color. Such a
sign shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner shall pay to the
City in cash or by check a deposit of $50 which shall be refunded after the
hearing and after the petitioner shall return the metal sign to the City. In
the event the petitioner shall not return the metal sign, then the petitioner
shall forfeit the deposit; and in addition, the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or
the City Council may delay its final decision upon the application until return
of the sign.
            2.   The notice shall bear the legend, PROPOSED ZONING CHANGE AND/
OR CONDITIONAL USE THIS PROPERTY and also shall have printed thereon the words,
“FOR INFORMATION PHONE 618/242-5000.” The notice which is published shall be
typed and shall further have a plastic cover to protect such a notice from the
weather.
            3.   The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible
from the road or street nearest the principal structure on the property and if
there is no structure, then from the principal road or street adjacent thereto.
If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Mt. Vernon, then such a notice shall be posted on each side of the
lot facing the street or road. In no event shall the notice be posted more than
10 feet or less than 5 feet from each such street or road.
         (e)   Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given,
shall be provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of
publication of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and
providing a certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices required
herein.
         (f)   Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by
number, but also by common designation for describing the current zoning and
also the description of the variance requested.
      (3)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
      (4)   The Board of Appeals shall make findings that the requirements of
subsection (B)(1) of this ordinance have been met by the applicant for a
variance.
      (5)   The Board of Appeals shall further make a finding that the reason
set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the
variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building, or structure.
      (6)   The Board of Appeals shall further make a finding that the granting
of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
   (C)   Special Conditions for Variance.
      (1)   In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under which
the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
punishable under Chapter 10 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance
to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the
district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this ordinance in said district.
   (D)   Board Has Power of Administrative Official on Appeals.
      (1)   In exercising the above mentioned powers the Board of Appeals may,
so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be appealed and to that end shall have
the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   The concurring vote of five members of the Board of Appeals shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of
the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass this ordinance, or to effect any
variation in the application of this ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-112)
ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION: POWER AND DUTIES FOR
CONDITIONAL USE
§ 161.135 GENERALLY.
   The Zoning and Planning Commission established by §§
161.105 through
161.109 and by §§
155.01 through
155.07 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall perform the duties of the
Planning Commission as hereinafter set forth. The duties of the Planning
Commission shall include hearing and recommending such conditional uses
indicated in the Schedule of District Regulations to the City Council and
deciding such questions as are involved in determining whether conditional uses
should be granted and recommending conditional uses for such conditions and
safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance or recommending denial of
conditional uses when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance. Wherever the term “Planning Commission” is used herein it shall mean
the Zoning and Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-113)
§ 161.136 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.
   A conditional use shall not be recommended by the Planning Commission unless
and until:
   (A)   A written application for a conditional use is submitted, indicating
the section of this ordinance under which the conditional use is sought and
stating the grounds on which it is requested. Application shall be made on
forms obtained from the City Clerk.
   (B)   Notice shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in
advance of the public hearing. Where the petitioner is the City of Mt. Vernon,
the City Manager for the City of Mt. Vernon or the Chairman of the Industrial
Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon and the property affected by the requested
conditional use exceeds 60 acres, notice of such hearing indicating the date,
time, and place, legal description or Real Estate Tax Parcel Index Numbers
(PIN) of the property for which conditional use is sought and nature of the
proposed conditional use shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation
within Mt. Vernon. In all other cases, the petitioner, his agent, or attorney
shall cause such notice to be given in each of the following ways:
      (1)   The owner of the property for which the conditional use is sought,
or his agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and place of
public hearing;
      (2)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, the
legal description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed conditional use is sought,
and nature of the proposed conditional use, shall be printed in a newspaper of
general circulation within Mt. Vernon;
      (3)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, the legal
description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed conditional use is sought,
and nature of the proposed conditional use, shall be posted at the City Hall
and in a prominent place on the property for which the conditional use is
sought;
      (4)   The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected
shall be in the following form:
         (a)   The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall
be a metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not less
than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous color. Such sign
shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner shall pay to the City in
cash or by check a deposit of $50 which shall be refunded after the hearing and
after the petitioner shall return the metal sign to the City. In the event the
petitioner shall not return the metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit
the deposit; and in addition, the City Council may delay its final decision
upon the application until return of the sign.
         (b)   The notice shall bear the legend, “PROPOSED ZONING CHANGE AND/OR
CONDITIONAL USE THIS PROPERTY”, and also shall have printed thereon the words,
“FOR INFORMATION PHONE 618/242-5000”. The notice shall further have affixed
thereto a copy of the notice which is published which shall be typed and shall
further have a plastic cover to protect such notice from the weather.
         (c)   The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible
from the road or street nearest the principle structure on the property and if
there is no structure, then from the principle road or street adjacent thereto.
If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Mt. Vernon, then such notice shall be posted on each side of the
lot facing the street or road. In no event shall the notice be posted more than
10 feet nor less than 5 feet from each such street or road.
      (5)   Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given shall
be provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of
publication of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and
providing a verified certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices
required herein.
      (6)   Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by number,
but also the relief requested. An example is, “To amend the Zoning
Classification from R-1, Low Density Residential District to B-2, Secondary
Business District”.
   (C)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or
by agent or Attorney.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-113.1)
§ 161.137 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall make a finding that is empowered under
the section of this ordinance described in the application, to recommend to the
City Council the conditional use and that the granting of the conditional use
will not adversely affect the public interest.
   (B)   Before any conditional use permit shall be recommended to the City
Council, the Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying
compliance with the specific requirements governing individual conditional
uses, if any, and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made
concerning the following, where applicable:
      (1)   Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with
particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience,
traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe.
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with
particular attention to the items in (B)(1) above and the economic, noise,
glare or odor effects of the conditional use or adjoining properties and
properties generally in the district.
      (3)   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in
(B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
      (4)   Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and
compatibility.
      (5)   Screening and buffering; with reference to type, dimensions, and
character.
      (6)   Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to
glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.
      (7)   Required yards and other open space.
      (8)   General, compatibility with adjacent properties and other property
in the district.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-113.2)
§ 161.138 FINAL DECISION.
   After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council shall grant or deny the application for conditional use.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-113.3)
AMENDMENTS
§ 161.150 GENERALLY.
   The regulations imposed and the districts created by this ordinance may be
amended from time to time by ordinance after this ordinance has gone into
effect.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-114)
§ 161.151 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.
   No amendment of this Ordinance shall be made by the City Council unless and
until:
   (A)   A written application for amendment is submitted indicating the type
of amendment sought. The application for amendment shall be made on form
obtained from the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a fee to defray the
cost of processing the application. The fee less costs incurred by the
administrative official shall be refunded if the legal notice has not been
published.
   (B)   Notice shall be given not less than 15 or more than 30 days in advance
of the public hearing. Where the petitioner is the City of Mt. Vernon, the City
Manager for the City of Mt. Vernon, or the Chairman of the Industrial
Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon and the property affected by the requested
zoning amendment exceeds 60 acres, notice of such hearing, indicating the date,
time, place, legal description or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index Numbers
(PIN) of the property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought, and
nature of the proposed change in zoning shall be printed in a newspaper of
general circulation within Mt. Vernon. In all other cases, the petitioner, his
agent, or attorney shall cause such notice to be given in each of the following
ways:
      (1)   The owner of the property for which the proposed change in zoning
is sought, or his agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date and
place of public hearing.
      (2)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time and place, the
legal description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought
and nature of the proposed change in zoning shall be printed in a newspaper of
general circulation within Mt. Vernon.
      (3)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, the legal
description and common street address or the Real Estate Tax Parcel Index
Number (PIN) of the property for which the proposed change in zoning is sought,
and nature of the proposed change in zoning, shall be posted at the City Hall
and in a prominent place on the property for which the proposed change in
zoning is sought.
      (4)   The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected
shall be in the following form:
         (a)   The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall
be a metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not less
than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous color. Such sign
shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner shall pay to the City in
cash or by check a deposit of $50 which shall be refunded after the hearing and
after the petitioner shall return the metal sign to the City. In the event the
petitioner shall not return the metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit
the deposit; and in addition, the City Council may delay its final decision
upon the application until return of the sign.
         (b)   The notice shall bear the legend, PROPOSED ZONING CHANGE AND/OR
CONDITIONAL USE THIS PROPERTY and also shall have printed thereon the words,
“FOR INFORMATION PHONE 618/242-5000.” The notice shall further have affixed
thereto a copy of the notice which is published which shall be typed and shall
further have a plastic cover to protect such notice from the weather.
         (c)   The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible
from the road or street nearest the principle structure on the property and if
there is no structure, then from the principle road or street adjacent thereto.
If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Mt. Vernon, then such notice shall be posted on each side of the
lot facing the street or road. In no event shall the notice be posted more than
10 feet or less than 5 feet from each such street or road.
      (5)   Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given,
shall be provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of
publication of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and
providing a certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices required
herein.
      (6)   Each notice shall use not only the zoning classification by number,
but also by common designation for describing the current zoning and also the
relief requested. An example is, “To amend the zoning classification from R-1,
Low Density Residential District to B-2, Secondary Business District”.
   (C)   The public hearing shall be held before the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Any part may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
   (D)   In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the
regulations or districts signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the
frontage immediately adjoining, or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners
of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered,
is filed with the City Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed, except by a
favorable vote or 2/3 of the City Council then holding office.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-114.1)
APPEALS FROM BOARD OF APPEALS, PLANNING COMMISSION
AND CITY COUNCIL
§ 161.165 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, or official of the City,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals, the Planning Commission or
the City Council, may seek review by a court of record of such decision in the
manner provided by law, but only after exhaustion of administrative remedies
provided by this Ordinance or by State law.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-115)
DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER, BOARD OF APPEALS, PLANNING
COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL
§ 161.180 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Administrator of
the Zoning Ordinance and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of
Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and
that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be to the Courts
as may be provided by law. It is also the intent of this Ordinance that
conditional uses shall be decided by the City Council and that recourse from
decisions of the City Council shall be to the Courts as provided by law.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the City
Council in connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and
deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The
procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and
this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance the City Council have only the duties:
      (1)   or considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the
repeal of this Ordinance, as provided by law,
      (2)   granting or denying conditional uses based on recommendations of
the Plan Commission and,
      (3)   of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in §
161.195 below.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-116)
SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, EXPENSES
§ 161.195 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of
zoning compliance appeals, conditional uses, variances, and other matters
pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted and may be
altered or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees,
charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-117)
DEFINITIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
§ 161.210 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular
number shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word SHALL
is mandatory and the word MAY is permissive; and the word PERSON includes firm,
association, trust, organization, partnership, company or corporation as well
as an individual. The word LOT includes the words plot or parcel.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or portion of the main building,
the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or to the principal
use of the premises, including garages, fallout shelters.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental to the principal or main use of the
premises.
   ACHROMATIC COLOR. Colorless, zero in saturation, or lacking in hue; for
purposes of this Article, the definition of ACHROMATIC shall include, without
limitation white, black, grays, tans, and light earth tones, but any bold,
vivid, neon, florescent, or extreme coloration that attracts attention shall be
excluded from the definition of ACHROMATIC.
   ACRE(S) GROSS. The Total Acreage of a subdivision, a contiguous zoning
district, or a planned development. Computations shall include all public right
of way except boundary streets of which only one half of the right of way shall
be used in any computation.
   ACRE(S) NET. The Gross Acreage less all public right of way and publicly
owned land utilized for community facilities.
   ADULT DAYCARE. Any individual, person or entity which for compensation
provides care for 3 or more adult persons not related to the caregiver. The
care provided shall be temporary care each day and shall not include any
extended care nor any residential living arrangements. An ADULT DAYCARE CENTER
shall not be situated at the family home or residence of any care giver or
other person.
   AGRICULTURE. Land, including necessary buildings and structures, the
principal uses of which are growing of soil crops or the raising or keeping of
livestock.
   ALLEY. Any public right-of-way twenty feet or under in width providing a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
   ALTERATION. Applied to a building or structure to mean a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities.
   AUTOMOBILE, ABANDONED. All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven
(7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. Notwithstanding the
foregoing definition, a vehicle or portion thereof stored within a permitted
building or structure shall not be considered to be an abandoned automobile.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the sale, or
offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. Uses permissible
at an AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION do not include major mechanical and body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in
operating condition, or other work involving noise, gutter fumes, smoke, or
other characteristic normally found in a repair garage or a body shop.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION does not include any premises meeting the definition
of TRUCK STOP.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING. The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or farm machinery, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
   BASEMENT. Any floor below the first story of a building unless construed to
be a STORY as defined herein.
   BILLBOARD. See SIGN, OFF-SITE.
   BOARDING HOUSE. Any dwelling, not open to transients, which provides
sleeping and/or cooking and/or eating facilities for more than three (3) but
less than ten (10) unrelated individuals. Sleeping rooms shall not be used for
more than two (2) persons per room. A rooming house shall be deemed to be a
BOARDING HOUSE.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization as hereinafter defined established pursuant to and
regulated by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/).
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT does not include cannabis café or cannabis
lounge or any business having on-site consumption of any cannabis product, as
same are prohibited within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon.
      (1)   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (2)   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (3)   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended from
time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (4)   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
      (5)   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
      (6)   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CARPORT. See BASEMENT.
   CHILD CARE PROVIDER. Shall mean any individual who provides care within a
family home of less than four children and shall mean any individual who
provides care within a family home only for children related to the individual
and/or only for children from a single household (excluding the households of
any related child and of the Child Care Provider). RELATED means any of the
following relationships by blood, marriage or adoption: parents, grandparents,
great grandparents, great uncle, great aunt, brother, sister, step parent, step
brother, step sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece or first cousin. No
Conditional Use under this Chapter 161 of the Revised Code is required for a
CHILD CARE PROVIDER.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A group home or specialized residential care home
serving unrelated persons with disabilities which is licensed, certified or
accredited by appropriate local, state or national bodies. COMMUNITY RESIDENCE
does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to
incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for
placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable
disease.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE (SMALL). A Community Residence serving eight (8) or
fewer persons with disabilities in a family-like atmosphere.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE (LARGE). A Community Residence serving 9 to 20 persons
with disabilities in a family like atmosphere.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A special use of land which would not generally be
appropriate within a particular land use district but might be allowable in
certain locations within the district if specific requirements of conditions
are met (as to number, area, location, or relation to neighboring lands or uses
and public facilities). After compliance with appropriate safeguards and
procedures specified herein, the City Council may permit as conditional uses
precise types of uses listed in the land use districts of the Schedule of
District Regulations. A conditional use, as defined herein, is the same type of
use described as a “special use” in § 11-13-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.).
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use,
issued by the administrative official pursuant to authorization by the City
Council and in compliance with procedures specified herein.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Shall mean any individual, person or entity which provides
care for children except a Child Care Provider or a Day Care Home. CHILDREN
means any person under 18 years of age.
   DAY CARE HOME. A family home (residence) satisfying the hereinafter
described conditions which receives more than three up to a maximum of 12
children for less than 24 hours per day. The number of children includes the
family’s natural, foster or adopted children and all persons under the age of
12. The term does not include facilities which receive only children from a
single household. A DAY CARE HOME must meet each of the following conditions:
      (1)   The DAY CARE HOME must be licensed by the Illinois Department of
Children and Family Services and operated in accordance with the Illinois Child
Care Act (225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.) and Regulations of the Department of Children
and Family Services.
      (2)   No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall provide child care, except a DAY CARE HOME may employ one full time
equivalent employee who is not a resident of the family home.
      (3)   The use of the family home for child care shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants.
      (4)   There shall be no sign or other change in the outside appearance of
the residence or premises nor any visible evidence of nonresidential use of the
premises.
      (5)   No DAY CARE HOME shall be situated nor shall any child care be
provided within any accessory building.
      (6)   Only child care services shall be provided and there shall be no
sales of any goods or merchandise by the DAY CARE HOME or upon the premises; no
other home occupation shall be conducted upon the premises.
      (7)   No traffic shall be generated by the DAY CARE HOME in greater
volumes then would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.
      (8)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the DAY CARE HOME
shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard (except
within a garage, carport or upon a graveled, asphalted or other hard surfaced
driveway). The DAY CARE HOME shall not create a need for off-street parking
spaces in addition to that required for the members of the family residing on
the premises.
      (9)   No noise or condition shall be created by the DAY CARE HOME in
greater volume or degree than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
      (10)   Unless waived in writing by the City Council, all areas where any
child or children may reasonably be expected to be present shall be completely
enclosed by properly constructed and well maintained four foot chain link fence
or a six foot privacy fence aesthetically compatible with the neighborhood and
approved by the Building Inspector.
      (11)   The DAY CARE HOME shall comply with such other conditions or
restrictions as determined by the City Council to be necessary because of the
particular character or condition of the neighborhood, the premises or the
proposed DAY CARE HOME.
      (12)   A Conditional Use under this Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of
Ordinances shall be required which Conditional Use shall be subject to all
other terms and provisions of this Chapter 161 relating to a Conditional Use
except that said Conditional Use shall be issued in the name of the operator or
operators of the Day Care Home and shall be non-transferable and shall
immediately terminate upon any conveyance or other transfer of the residence in
whole or in part; and in addition, upon a DAY CARE HOME failing to satisfy any
condition imposed herein, the Conditional Use may be revoked by the City
Council upon notice and an opportunity to be heard, and shall also be subject
to all other remedies provided by law.
   DENSITY. Pertaining to the number of dwelling units per net acre or gross
acre as indicated for the appropriate zoning district in the Schedule of
District Regulations. Residential District density shall not be exceeded for
new subdivisions nor exceeded for re subdivision of existing platted land.
   DISABILITIES, PERSON WITH. Any individual whose disability:
      (1)   is attributable to mental, intellectual, or physical impairment or
a combination of mental, intellectual, or physical impairment; and
      (2)   is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or
indefinitely; and
      (3)   results in functional limitations in three or more of the following
areas of major life activities:
         (a)   Self-care;
         (b)   Receptive or expressive language;
         (c)   Learning;
         (d)   Mobility;
         (e)   Self direction;
         (f)   Capacity for independent living;
         (g)   Economic self sufficiency; and
      (4)   reflects the person’s need for a combination and sequence of
special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment, or other services which
are of a lifelong or extended duration.
   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the exhibition or description of Specified Sexual Activities or Specified
Anatomical area,” the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description “specified anatomical
areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
   DISTRICT. A section or sections of the City of Mt. Vernon and the
territorial limits of this ordinance for which uniform regulations governing
the use, height, area, and intensity of use by buildings and land, and open
spaces about buildings, are herein established.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. A food service establishment, with or without interior
facilities for eating, which caters to and permits the consumption of food
either in customer’s automobile parked on the premises or in any other
designated area on the premises outside the establishment where the food is so
prepared.
   DWELLING. A residential building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME. Any structure placed in accordance with Chapter 156
of the Revised Code of Ordinances that meets the definition of MANUFACTURED
HOME as set forth within the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and the 24 C.F.R. Part 3280, which Act
essentially provides that A MANUFACTURED HOME is a structure that is
transportable in one or more sections. In traveling mode, the home is 8 feet or
more in width and 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320
or more square feet. A MANUFACTURED HOME is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. A MANUFACTURED HOME
is designed and constructed to the Federal Manufactured Construction and Safety
Act Standards and must be so labeled. Calculations used to determine the number
of square feet in a structure shall be based on the structure’s exterior
dimensions measured at the largest horizontal projections when erected on site.
These dimensions will include all extendable rooms, cabinets, and other
projections containing interior space but do not include bay windows. Width of
the MANUFACTURED HOME means its largest overall width in the traveling mode,
including cabinets and other projections which contain interior space; width
does not include bay windows, roof projections, overhangs or eaves under which
there is no interior space. All MANUFACTURED HOMES must have an affixed Housing
and Urban Development seal(s) located on the outside of the home: if the home
is a multi wide unit, each must have a seal.
      (1)   MODULAR UNIT.
         (a)   A structure manufactured in an off site location and transported
to the placement site by a specialized transporting device. When the MODULAR
UNIT arrives at the placement site, it must be removed from the transporting
device onto a basement or permanent foundation.
         (b)   The towing hitch or running gear, which includes axles, brakes,
wheels, and other parts of the chassis that operate only during transportation
must be removed prior to placement or installation on a site built permanent
foundation consisting of a system of supports, including piers, either
partially or entirely below grade which is:
            1.   capable of transferring all design loads imposed by or upon
the structure into soil or bedrock without failure,
            2.   placed in an adequate depth below grade to prevent frost
damage, and
            3.   constructed of concrete, metal, treated lumber or wood or
grouted masonry.
         (c)   A MODULAR UNIT is not designed to be moved once placed or
installed on a site built permanent foundation. A MODULAR UNIT must be designed
and manufactured to comply with all building, dwelling, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical and other construction codes applicable to construction of
residential structures within the City of Mt. Vernon. A MODULAR UNIT must have
affixed thereto a certification under 24 C.F.R. § 3282.12c certifying that the
Unit is not subject to the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing
Construction Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.) which
certification shall substantially state as follows:
The manufacturer of this structure, Name ________________________________
Address                                (location where structure was
manufactured).
Certifies that this structure (Ser. No                            ) is not a
manufactured home subject to the provisions of the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act and is
         (1)   designed only for erection or installation on a site built
permanent foundation,
         (2)   not designed to be moved once so erected or installed,
         (3)   designed and manufactured to comply with
(Here state which code included in paragraph (b) (3) of this section has been
followed), and
         (4)   to the manufacturer’s knowledge is not intended to be used other
than on a site built permanent foundation.
This certification shall be affixed in a permanent manner near the electrical
panel, on the inside of a kitchen cabinet door, or in any other readily
accessible and visible location. As part of the certification, the manufacturer
shall identify each certified structure by a permanent serial number placed on
the structure. No certification except the certification described above shall
be accepted by the City, unless otherwise required by federal law.
      (2)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building other than a mobile home
or a portion thereof containing separate dwelling units for three or more
families living independently of each other. A MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING may be
a Modular Unit as herein defined.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A Dwelling Unit other than a mobile home designed
for or occupied exclusively by one family. A Dwelling Unit includes a Modular
Unit as herein defined.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached residential building other than a mobile
home containing two dwelling units designed for or occupied exclusively by two
families living independently of each other. A TWO-FAMILY DWELLING includes a
Modular Unit as herein after defined.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment, and physically separated from any other
rooms or DWELLING UNITS which may be in the same structure, and containing
independent cooking, bathroom, and sleeping facilities.
   EMPLOYEE(S). In regard to off-street parking requirements, EMPLOYEES mean
all who work in the enterprise, including owners other than purely stock
holders), partners, management and office personnel.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance,
by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distributing
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and
underground water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, traffic signals and signs, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare,
but not including buildings, or Public Utility Substations as hereinafter
defined. Underground use is encouraged, overhead discouraged.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that
unless all members are related by birth, adoption, or marriage, no unrelated
group shall consist of more than three (3) persons.
   FLOOR AREA. The sum of all gross horizontal enclosed area of the several
floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot excluding
basement floor areas and non-enclosed portions of the structure. All dimensions
shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The quotient of the floor area as defined above
of the building divided by its lot area.
F.A.R. =   Floor Area
      Lot Area
(See illustrations in §
161.211 of this Section.)
   GRADE. The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls
of a building. In case building walls are parallel to and within five feet (5)
of sidewalk(s), the grade shall be the average finished elevation of such
sidewalk(s) between side lot lines. (See also HEIGHT and STORY, and
illustrations at §
161.211 of this Section).
   HEIGHT. Building height, as permitted in each district, shall be determined
from GRADE as herein defined. (See also STORY and illustration at §
161.211 of this Section).
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
      (1)   No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation.
      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
      (3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-illuminated and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal building
      (4)   No HOME OCCUPATION shall be conducted in any accessory building.
      (5)   There shall be no sales in connection with such HOME OCCUPATION.
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by such HOME OCCUPATION in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
off the street and other than in a required front yard.
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in such HOME OCCUPATION which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other
than a single family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
      (8)   A medical practitioner, architect, engineer, insurance or real
estate offices shall not be construed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   JUNK YARDS. The use of more than 750 cubic feet of open storage on any lot,
portion of a lot or tract of land for the sale, storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk, scrap metals or salvageable materials, or for the abandonment,
dismantling, or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles, machines, or parts
thereof.
   KENNEL. Any lot, structure, or premises licensed and lawfully operating
under the Illinois Animal Welfare Act (225 ILCS 605) where dogs and/or cats are
kept or maintained for boarding, training or similar purposes for a fee or
compensation or where more than one litter of dogs and/or cats during any
calendar year is born or kept and offered for sale, exchange, or adoption for a
fee, compensation, barter, or charge.
   LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET. Adequate space, logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used such as trucks and tractors, and accessible to such vehicles at all
times. Required OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE is not to be included as off-street
parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
   LOT. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a parcel of land of at least
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and
area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required.
Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record.
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record.
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
records and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance for the zoning district
for which the lot or parcel is located.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under YARDS as
defined herein. (See definition of YARD, FRONT.)
   LOT MEASUREMENTS.
      (1)   DEPTH of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the
midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
      (2)   WIDTH of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that
width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect
with the street lot line), shall not be less than 80 percent of the required
lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul de sac,
where the 80 percent requirement shall not apply.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, or
a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has
been so recorded.
   LOT TYPES. Any lot within the jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be one of
the three following types:
      (1)   CENTER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a
corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street.
      (3)   THROUGH LOT. As a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. THROUGH LOTS abutting two streets may be referred to as DOUBLE
FRONTAGE LOTS. (See illustration at §
161.211 of this section).
   MOBILE HOME. See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
   MODULAR UNIT. A prefabricated sectionalized, panelized or modular unit is a
structure manufactured in an off site location and transported to the job site
by a specialized transporting device. When the modular unit arrives at the job
site, it must be removed from the transporting device onto a basement or
permanent foundation. MODULAR UNITS have no steel chassis attached to the floor
joist.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.
      (1)   For the purposes of this ordinance, an off-street parking space
shall consist of a space within the buildable area of a lot, adequate for
parking an automobile. Any off-street parking space required herein shall be
one of the following types:
         (a)   RESIDENTIAL, ONE AND TWO FAMILY. This space may be in a garage,
carport, or unenclosed area, but not on any public right of way (including
sidewalk). Ingress and egress to such parking space from public right-of-way
may be by forward or backward motion.
         (b)   RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (THREE OR MORE FAMILIES); COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL. This space shall be one of a group of off-street parking spaces (a
parking lot and/or structure containing three or more spaces) consisting of a
space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both
sides. Each parking space shall have maneuvering room and properly related
access to a public right of way (included to mean only forward motion as
opposed to backing out). Required spaces shall be individually marked and shall
be so designed, maintained, and regulated so that no parking or maneuvering
incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so
that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another.
      (2)   Parking spaces shall not be less than 9 feet by 18 feet for any
parking arrangement except parallel type, in which case the minimum size shall
be 8.5 feet by 22 feet. Aisles between parking spaces shall be not less than
twelve feet in width when serving automobiles parked at a forty five degree
angle in one direction nor less than twenty five feet in width when serving
automobiles parked perpendicularly.
      (3)   For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space and
necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at 400 square feet.
Requirements will be considered met only when actual spaces as required in the
Schedule of District Regulations and maneuvering room meeting the
aforementioned requirements are provided. All parking spaces, maneuvering room,
and points of access from public right of way shall be a hard surface, and meet
the following standards:
         (a)   6” of rock and 2” of asphalt, or equivalent in concrete.
         (b)   Provide for disposal of storm water and ensure such water shall
not flow onto adjoining property or sidewalks.
         (c)   Traffic flow direction shall be appropriately marked.
      (4)   If appropriate in the judgment of the Administrative Official:
Curbs (or stops) shall be installed at each off-street parking space to
regulate traffic flow; adequate lighting facilities shall be provided. Layout
of parking spaces in parking lot or parking structure are the responsibility of
the developer, but shall be approved by the Administrative Official in respect
to meeting the intent of this definition.
   PLANNING COMMISSION or PLAN COMMISSION. Shall mean the Zoning and Planning
Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   A means of developing or redeveloping existing larger parcels or
combinations of smaller parcels of land within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance, by allowing more flexibility in design to produce a more aesthetic
and/or efficient environment, and which through safeguards incorporated
elsewhere in this ordinance will assure that any such planned unit development
will be in harmony and compatible with the intent of this ordinance and the
appropriate zoning district of this ordinance.
      (2)   More specifically, a PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT is land which is
under:
         (a)   Single ownership, or
         (b)   Unified control, and wherein such land is to be utilized for
ultimate use by:
            1.   Single ownership, or
            2.   Unified control, or
            3.   Separate ownership and unified control, or
            4.   Separate ownership without unified control, and whereon such
land is designed for use as one building or a group of buildings, and whereon
such land there may be provisions for multiple purpose uses. Standards and
requirements within the various zoning districts permitting a planned unit
development are indicated in the Schedule of District Regulations, and in
Performance Standards, §§
161.290 through
161.295 of this ordinance.
      (3)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT does not prevent conveyance or other
transfer of less than the whole parcel comprising the PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT,
provided the transfer or conveyance does not create or result in a violation of
this Chapter 161 or other Article of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (4)   Any such PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan for the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois. Provided further, if
the proposed development is only for a portion of the contiguous landholdings
of the applicant(s), then a simple, schematic plan showing anticipated uses,
densities, and circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns shall be
submitted with application for any planned unit development.
   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths or similar public land open to the
public within the City of Mt. Vernon which is under the control, operation, or
management of the City or other governmental, charitable, or not-for-profit
authority.
   PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATION. An area where facilities are provided for the
distribution of telephone, radio communications, water, gas, and electricity.
These facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use in the various zoning
districts subject to conditions which will assure their harmony, especially
aesthetically, with the nature of the respective district.
   REGULARLY FEATURES. A consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that
the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the
films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the
establishment.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, regular place
of worship or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. Means the R-1, Low Density Residential; R-2,
Medium Density Residential; R-M2, Medium Density and Mobile Home; R 3, High
Density Residential; and R-MH, Planned Mobile Home Districts described within
this Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. RESIDENTIAL USE means any
dwelling or structure used or occupied for living quarters of any person or
property upon which there is situated a residential structure, dwelling unit or
other living quarters.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS. A specialized residential
multiple dwelling unit having individual rooming units for homeless persons.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS does not include any specialized
residential care home known as a Community Residence, nor does it include a
residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a
criminal offense, or persons whose reason for placement is substance or alcohol
abuse or treatment of a communicable disease. Each RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR
HOMELESS PERSONS shall satisfy the following conditions:
      (1)   No person shall be permitted to reside at the Residential Facility
without first satisfactorily completing a screening process to insure that
persons receiving services at the Residential Facility are entitled to receive
services offered by the Facility and otherwise meet the requirements of this
Ordinance. The screening process may occur on or off of the premises of the
Residential Facility. No person shall be admitted nor remain as a resident of
the Residential Facility who shall be a registered sex offender or who shall
have a recent criminal history of domestic or other violence or who shall have
a recent history of multiple criminal convictions for other serious offenses
against persons or property. No person shall be admitted who is under the
influence of drugs and/or alcohol.
      (2)   The Residential Facility shall provide housing and services,
including ancillary services, only to persons who have been approved and
admitted as residents and who are actual residents of the Residential Facility
at the time a service is provided, except that the counseling service may be
provided to a person who was a prior actual resident of the Residential
Facility and except that meals may be provided to residents of the facility,
staff of the facility, and to persons providing on-site services to residents
of the facility during times that such on-site services are being provided.
Ancillary services may include medical care, meal provision, grooming care,
counseling services, and other such services.
      (3)   Only services for residents of the Residential Facility shall be
provided and there shall be no sales of any goods or merchandise by the
Residential Facility nor any sales or commercial use upon the premises.
      (4)   The Residential Facility shall provide 24 hour security, which
security shall include not less than one on-site security personnel.
      (5)   Any need for parking generated by the operation of the Residential
Facility shall be met off the street and upon the premises of the Residential
Facility.
      (6)   The lot line of a RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS shall
be located not less than 1000 feet from the lot line of another Residential
Facility for Homeless Persons and not less than 1000 feet from the lot line of
a RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS; the lot line of a
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS shall be located not less than 500
feet from the lot line of any pre- existing daycare or pre-school facility or
primary or secondary school or residential care home; and the presence and
operation of the RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS shall not alter the
residential character of the neighborhood, create an institutional setting, or,
by its operation create an adverse effect upon surrounding properties.
      (7)   The Residential Facility shall comply with such other reasonable
conditions or restrictions as determined by the City Council at the time of
granting the conditional use to be reasonably necessary because of the
particular character or condition of the neighborhood, the premises, or the
proposed residential facility.
      (8)   A Conditional Use under this
Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be required, which
Conditional Use shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of
Chapter 161 relating to a Conditional Use, except that said Conditional Use
shall be issued for the specific property and issued in the name of the
operator or operators of the residential facility and shall be non-
transferrable and shall immediately terminate upon any conveyance or other
transfer of the property or of the Facility, in whole or in part. In addition,
upon a residential facility failing to satisfy any condition imposed herein,
the Conditional Use may be revoked by the City Council upon Notice and
opportunity to be heard, and shall also be subject to all other remedies as
provided by law.
   RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS. A residential facility
having group or common sleeping quarters in a single room for unrelated
homeless persons. RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS does not
include any specialized residential care home known as a Community Residence,
nor does it include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to
incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons whose reason for placement is
substance or alcohol abuse or treatment of a communicable disease. Each
RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS shall satisfy the following
conditions:
      (1)   The RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS shall meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   have a separate sleeping room or rooms for adult men and a
separate sleeping room or rooms for adult women and a minor shall only occupy a
separate sleeping room for minors or the sleeping room of a parent;
         (b)   have a separate bed for each homeless person;
         (c)   the square feet of occupancy space for each homeless person and
total square footage of combined square feet required for sleeping rooms shall
be determined by the controlling City or State of Illinois Life Safety Code,
Building Code, or other applicable Code;
         (d)   the maximum number of total beds for the Residential Group
Facility shall be seventy-five beds;
         (e)   the lot line of a RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS
PERSONS shall be located not less than 1000 feet from the lot line of a another
RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS and not less than 1000 feet
from the lot line of a RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR HOMELESS PERSONS;
         (f)   the lot line of a RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR HOMELESS
PERSONS shall be located not less than 500 feet from the lot line of any pre-
existing daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or
residential care home; and
         (g)   the presence and operation of the RESIDENTIAL GROUP FACILITY FOR
HOMELESS PERSONS shall not alter the residential character of the neighborhood,
create an institutional setting, or, by its operation create an adverse effect
upon surrounding properties.
      (2)   No person shall be permitted to reside at the Residential Group
Facility without first satisfactorily completing a screening process to insure
that persons receiving services at the Residential Group Facility are entitled
to receive services offered by the Facility and otherwise meet the requirements
of this Ordinance. The screening process may occur on or off of the premises of
the Residential Group Facility. No person shall be admitted nor remain as a
resident of the Residential Group Facility who shall be a registered sex
offender or who shall have a recent criminal history of domestic or other
violence or who shall have a recent history of multiple criminal convictions
for other serious offenses against persons or property. No person shall be
admitted who is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol.
      (3)   The Residential Group Facility shall only provide housing and
services, including ancillary services, to persons who have been approved and
admitted as residents and who are actual residents of the Residential Group
Facility at the time a service is provided, except that meals may be provided
to residents of the facility, staff of the facility, and to persons providing
on-site services to residents of the facility during times that such on-site
services are being provided. Ancillary services may include medical care, meal
provision, grooming care, counseling services, and other such services.
      (4)   Only services for residents of the Residential Group Facility shall
be provided and there shall be no sales of any goods or merchandise by the
Residential Group Facility nor any sales or commercial use upon the premises.
      (5)   The Residential Group Facility shall provide 24 hour security,
which security shall include not less than one on-site security personnel.
      (6)   Any need for parking generated by the operation of the Residential
Group Facility shall be met off the street and upon the premises of the
Residential Group Facility.
      (7)   The Residential Group Facility shall comply with such other
reasonable conditions or restrictions as determined by the City Council at the
time of granting the conditional use to be reasonably necessary because of the
particular character or condition of the neighborhood, the premises, or the
proposed residential facility.
      (8)   A Residential Group Facility shall only be placed within the R-
3 High Density Residential Zoning Classification District and a Conditional Use
under this Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances shall be required,
which Conditional Use shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of
this Chapter 161 relating to a Conditional Use, except that said Conditional
Use shall be issued for the specific property and issued in the name of the
operator or operators of the Residential Group Facility and shall be non-
transferrable and shall immediately terminate upon any conveyance or other
transfer of the property or of the Facility, in whole or in part. In addition,
upon a Residential Group Facility failing to satisfy any condition imposed
herein, the Conditional Use may be revoked by the City Council upon Notice and
opportunity to be heard, and shall also be subject to all other remedies as
provided by law
   ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including but not limited
to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergarten,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds,
but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.
   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which non-transparent and
opaque clothing covers from view no more than the human buttocks, anus, anal
cleft and cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, vulva and the
female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its
highest point and the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered. This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the human female breasts, but shall not include any portion of
the cleavage of the human breasts exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola and nipple are not
exposed in whole or in part.
   SERVICE STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult theater, sexual encounter center, escort agency, or semi-nude model
studio, each of which are defined as follows:
      (1)   ADULT CABARET. Any commercial establishment, except an adult
theater, semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter center, including but not
limited to a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or gentlemen’s club, which regularly
features any one or more of the following:
         (a)   persons who appear semi nude or in a state of semi nudity;
         (b)   live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon
exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (2)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which offers private accommodations to the public, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” and which advertises the availability of such sexually-
oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-
way, or by means of any off premises advertising including but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, and
         (a)   offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than
ten (10) hours or
         (b)   allows a tenant or occupant to sub rent the sleeping room for a
time period of less than ten (10) hours.
      (3)   ADULT STORE.
         (a)   A commercial establishment that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any
one or more of the following:
            1.   books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by the depicting
or describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;”
or
            2.   instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
            3.   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon matters exhibiting or describing “specified sexual activity” or
“specified anatomical areas” and which are shown within a viewing room as
hereinafter defined on still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or
similar machines or computers or other image producing machines.
         (b)   A principal business purpose exists if the establishment has a
significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or derives a
significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or
substantial section of its sales or display or floor space to the sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the items described
above. A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and
still be categorized as an adult store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult store so long as one of its principal business purposes are characterized
by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
      (4)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which has a room(s) for viewing or viewing areas, each
of which are 150 square feet or greater in size and which for any form of
consideration regularly features any one of the following:
         (a)   films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration;
         (b)   persons who appear semi-nude or in a state of semi nudity or
live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure
of “specific sexual activities” or “specific anatomical areas”.
      (5)   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (6)   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who regularly
appears in a state of semi-nudity is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be viewed or observed or sketched or drawn or painted or
sculptured or photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. SEMI-NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a modeling class operated:
         (a)   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation; or
         (b)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
         (c)   In a structure:
            1.   which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person available for viewing
and
            2.   where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
            3.   where no more than one model is on the premises at any one
time.
      (7)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.
         (a)   A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
            1.   physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
            2.   activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of semi nudity.
         (b)   A principal business purpose exists if the services offered are
intended to generate business income.
   SIGN. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not
on the premises on which the sign is located. (For definitions and restrictions
see §§
161.225 through
161.227 and
161.240 through
161.258 of this ordinance)
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and
opaquely covered;
      (2)   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means and includes any of the following:
      (1)   the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
      (2)   sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
   STORY. That portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and
the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall
be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above
a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is more than six feet above GRADE
as defined herein, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor area shall be
considered as a story.(See also, GRADE and HEIGHT, and illustration at §
161.211 of this Section).
   STREET LINE. The lot line abutting street right-of-way line.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, STRUCTURES include buildings, mobile homes, signs, billboards,
and poster panels, but do not include walls and fences.
   TOWN HOUSE DEVELOPMENT. A group of single family dwelling units, each
dwelling unit structure having the following characteristics:
      (1)   May or may not be part of a planned unit development, but each
zoning lot used for single family town houses shall have a distinct area which
shall be described and recordable as a separate lot.
      (2)   Containing one or more stories.
      (3)   Having at least two exterior entrances.
      (4)   Attached to one or more adjoining town houses by a vertical party
wall extending from the footing(s) to the roof line without passageway or
access between town houses, Or Unattached, but abutting one or more adjoining
town houses and with a separate but complete vertical wall from footing to roof
line without passageway or access between town houses.
      (5)   A minimum of one off-street parking space.
      (6)   Rear yards separated from adjoining rear yards with masonry fences
a minimum of seven feet in height. Such fences may or may not be party walls.
      (7)   Area, yard, height, and F.A.R. requirements as indicated in
schedule of District Regulations.
   TRAILER. See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes.
   TRUCK OR EQUIPMENT TERMINAL. Any lot, structure, or premises use for the
parking or storage of capital equipment such as trucks, trailers, or other like
equipment, over 3/4 ton capacity.
   TRUCK STOP. Any facility with fuel pumps used primarily for the purpose of
dispensing diesel, biodiesel, or other fuel to a commercial vehicle or any
facility or property which provides temporary, daily, overnight, or extended
parking (excluding temporary parking for the immediate loading and unloading of
cargo) for a commercial vehicle or any facility that provides maintenance,
truck wash, or other service for a commercial vehicle or for the operator of a
commercial vehicle requiring or accompanied by any parking or storage of a
commercial vehicle. Commercial vehicle shall mean a commercial motor vehicle as
defined within § 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/18b-
101.
   UNIFIED CONTROL.
      (1)   More than one parcel of land wherein separate owners join for
development purposes, and at a later date may transfer all or part of the land
to another person or persons, but any such transfer shall include the legal
responsibility of being an integral part of the whole development. For example;
a condominium; a cooperative, a land trust; or, private owner ship of a single
parcel, but any such parcel has a legal responsibility to the entire
development through a legally recorded covenant or some other recorded
instrument. It is intended that all owners of such land under unified control
know their limitations and responsibility as previously agreed upon are re
defined from time to time. It is further intended that any such jointly owned
land shall not come under ownership of the City of Mt. Vernon as in the case of
open space, except in special and unique conditions which shall be determined
at the time of authorization.
      (2)   UNIFIED CONTROL may be utilized within planned unit developments or
in conventional developments.
   UTILITY SUBSTATION. See PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATIONS.
   VARIANCE. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a VARIANCE is authorized only
for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces;
establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-
conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining district.
   VIEWING ROOM. A room, booth, or area having less than 150 square feet of
floor space where a patron of a sexually oriented business is positioned or
would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other
video reproduction.
   YARD. A required open space other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the grade of
the lot upward, provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts and other
customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any
yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of
visibility.
   YARD, FRONT.
      (1)   A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot
adjoining a public street.
      (2)   In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard
pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, FRONT YARDS shall be provided on
all frontages. Where one of the FRONT YARDS that would normally be required on
a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the
administrative official may waive the requirement for the normal FRONT YARD and
substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the
average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
      (3)   In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required depth
shall be provided on the frontage facing the street with the greatest traffic
volume as determined by the administrative official, and where possible in
accordance with the prevailing yard pattern; and a second front yard of half
the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided
on the other frontage.
      (4)   In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages, the
administrative official shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to
the following limitations:
         (a)   At least one FRONT YARD shall be provided having the full depth
required generally in the district;
         (b)   No other FRONT YARD on such lot shall have less than half the
full depth required generally.
      (5)   Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to
a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost
point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street
intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot
lines would have met without such rounding. (See illustrations at §
161.211 of this Section.)
   YARD, SIDE.
      (1)   A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to
the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to
the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved
with the public street. In the case of THROUGH LOTS, side yards shall extend
from the rear lines of front yards required. In the case of CORNER LOTS, yards
remaining after full and half depth front yards have been established shall be
considered SIDE YARDS.
      (2)   Width of a required SIDE YARD shall be measured in such a manner
that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. (See
illustrations at §
161.211 of this Section.)
   YARD, REAR.
      (1)   A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard
lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no REAR
YARDS, but only front and side yards.
      (2)   Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner
that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district
regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. (See
illustrations at §
161.211 of this Section.)
   YARD, SPECIAL.
      (1)   A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street,
required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but adjacent to
a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term “side yard” nor the term
“rear yard” clearly applies.
      (2)   In such cases, the administrative official shall require a yard
with minimum dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in
the district, determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of
the lot on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with
due regard to the orientation and location of structures and buildable areas
thereon. (See illustration at §
161.211 of this Section.)
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning and Planning Commission of the City of
Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-124-1) (Ord. 2023-08, passed 2-21-2023)
§ 161.211 ILLUSTRATIONS.
   (A)   FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The following drawings illustrate how Floor
Area Ratio is determined in its most simple form. Setbacks (which will
determine the building area) must be indicated initially prior to application
of F.A.R. for the appropriate district in this ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2036.png]
 
   (B)   LOT TYPES. The following diagram illustrates portions of a
contemporary, conventional subdivision and the various lot types as defined in
this ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2038.png]
 
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. See lots marked A in lot type diagram. A lot abutting on a curved
street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from
the foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot (or
an extension of the lot where it has been rounded by a street radius) at an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. See lots marked A(1) in lot types
diagram.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street other than an alley. See lots marked B in lot types diagram.
      (3)   THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two streets
may be referred to as double frontage lot. See lots marked C in lot type
diagram.
   (C)   YARD MEASUREMENTS. The drawings below illustrate typical yard
requirements of a residential zoning district.
      (1)   YARDS shall be measured in the following sequence:
         (a)   Front,
         (b)   Side,
         (c)   Rear,
         (d)   Special (if applicable)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2040.png]
 
   EXAMPLE OF CURVILINEAR TYPE LOT LAYOUT FOR R-1 DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2042.png]
 
   (D)   GRADE, HEIGHT, AND STORY. Also see definitions at §
161.210 of this Section.
      (1)   GRADE.
         (a)   Average of elevation of finished ground level at center of all
walls of building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2044.png]
 
         (b)   If walls are parallel to and within five feet of sidewalks,
grade shall be the average of finished elevation of sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2048.png]
 
      (2)   HEIGHT. Shall be established from grade as illustrated below.
      (3)   STORY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2046.png]
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-124.2)
PERMITS FOR SIGNS AND FEES
§ 161.225 PERMITS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, before any sign within the sign jurisdiction
of the City is erected, enlarged, altered, rebuilt, or relocated, a Permit
shall be obtained from the Building Department. Routine maintenance or changing
of parts designed for changes shall not be considered an alteration provided
such change does not alter the surface area, height, or otherwise make the sign
nonconforming. Upon transfer of ownership or use of a sign, the transfer shall
be reported to the Building Department and a Sign Transfer Permit for the sign
shall be obtained. Fees for the Permits required herein shall be as provided
below.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-125.1)
§ 161.226 SIGNS NOT SUBJECT TO A PERMIT.
   The following signs shall not be subject to a Permit:
   (A)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property
numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
   (B)   Legal notices, identification, informational, or directional signs
erected by governmental bodies.
   (C)   Signs not exceeding one square foot directing and guiding traffic and
parking on private property, but bearing no information advertising a product
or service of or identifying the property on which it is situated.
   (D)   Decals and/or logos affixed to windows or door glass panels, such as
those indicating membership in a business group or identifying credit cards
accepted at an establishment which do not advertise a product or service of or
identify the property on which it is situated.
   (E)   Physically Disabled Parking Space or Towing Notice signs as permitted
by the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (F)   Private Drive Signs - On-premise private drive sign limited to one per
driveway entrance, not exceeding one square feet in area per sign.
   (G)   Public Signs - Signs erected by government agencies or utilities,
including traffic, utility, safety, railroad crossing and identification signs
for public facilities.
   (H)   Security and Warning Signs - On-premise signs regulating the use of
the premises, such as “no trespassing”, “no hunting” and “no soliciting” signs
that do not exceed one sign per street frontage one square feet in area on
residential properties and one sign per street frontage three square feet in
area on nonresidential properties.
   (I)   Temporary Signs as defined within §
161.251(J).
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-125.2)
§ 161.227 FEES FOR SIGN PERMIT AND SIGN TRANSFER PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall collect the following fees for Permits issued or
transferred, which said fees shall be paid prior to the issuance or transfer of
the Permit.
On-Premise Sign Permit Fees:
Sign without Electronic Message $50.00 per sign plus $.25 per sq. ft. of sign
Center                          face area*
Sign with Electronic Message    $100 per sign plus $.25 per sq. ft. of sign
Center                          face area*
Existing Sign Relocation        $50.00
Existing Sign Alteration        $50.00 plus $.25 per sq. ft. for additional
                                sign face area*, if any
Off-Premise Sign Permit Fees:
                                $50.00 plus $.25 per sq. ft. of sign face
Sign without Electronic Message area* at time of initial Permit and $50.00
Center                          annual Permit Fee thereafter, payable May 1st
                                of each year, except Signs subject to §
                                161.258(C)(11)
                                $100.00 plus $.25 per sq. ft. of sign face
Sign with Electronic Message    area* at time of Initial Permit and $100.00
Center                          Annual Permit Fee thereafter, payable May 1st
                                of each year, except Signs subject to §
                                161.258(C)(11)
*   FOR PURPOSES OF PERMIT FEE CALCULATIONS SIGN FACE AREA SHALL INCLUDE ALL
SIGN FACE AREA, INCLUDING BOTH SIDES OF A DOUBLE SIGN.
Sign Transfer Permit Fee        $50.00 per sign
 
   (B)   The fees for the Permits above described shall not be charged or
collected from an applicant under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The work is being done for the use of a governmental entity; and
      (2)   The applicant shall file a written declaration with the City that
said fees have not and will not be included in any payment to any contractor or
other person; and
      (3)   The applicant shall apply for and obtain all necessary Permits and
otherwise fully comply with the Ordinances of the City, unless exempted
therefrom by any law of the State of Illinois or of the United States.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-125.3)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 161.240 JURISDICTION AND SCOPE.
   The Sign Regulations herein apply to all signs situated within the corporate
limits of the City of Mt. Vernon, Illinois and within one and one-half miles of
said corporate limits as the limits may exist from time to time. The sign
regulations established by this Ordinance include regulations for maximum
surface area of signs, maximum number of signs, permitted sign types, and
maximum height of signs. Standards are established for each Zoning District.
Signs may be erected, altered, and maintained only for a permitted use in the
Zoning District in which the signs are located. Except for permitted off
premises signs, all signs shall be located on the same parcel of land as the
permitted use which they identify or advertise. No variance (including but not
limited to any variance for height, area, size, or setback requirements) of the
Sign Regulations, except as expressly stated within §
161.251(B)(1), shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.1)
§ 161.241 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Sign Regulations herein shall be administered and enforced by the City
Manager as Zoning Administrator and/or staff members designated by the City
Manager or City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.2)
§ 161.242 DEFINITIONS.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing
business, product, location, service, idea, or activity conducted on the
premises on which the sign is located or a sign having no sign copy or a sign
in disrepair or an off-premise sign for which the permit has expired.
   ALTERATION. A change in the size, height, or shape, or type of an existing
sign. A change only to the copy or color of an existing sign is not an
ALTERATION. Changing or replacing a sign face or panel is not an ALTERATION if
no change in size, height, or type accompanies said change or replacement.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or
light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical, or
electronic means. ANIMATED SIGNS, which are differentiated from changeable
signs as defined herein, include the following types:
      (1)   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs or devices motivated by
wind, thermal changes, or other natural environmental input. Said signs include
spinners, streamers, pinwheels, pennants on a string, and/or other devices or
displays that respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
      (2)   MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric
motors or other mechanically induced means.
      (3)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or
illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
         (a)   FLASHING. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination.
For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring
if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four (4)
seconds.
         (b)   PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection from a building that is decorative
and/or functional and not intended for occupancy and that extends beyond the
face of an exterior wall of a building but that does not include a sign, sign
face, or sign copy as defined herein. See also: AWNING; BACK-LIT AWNING; and
CANOPY (ATTACHED AND FREESTANDING).
   AWNING. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported
by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-
rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either
permanent or retractable.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also: WALL OR FASCIA SIGN. An awning that contains a
“sign” section or copy area shall comply with the applicable sign area
requirements for parallel signs (see Table 3) contained in this Code. Only the
sign or copy area displayed on an awning shall be used to determine the
permitted sign area - the entire awning shall not be included in a Sign Area
calculation. Refer also to §§
161.243 and
161.244 for visual reference examples.
   BACK-LIT AWNING. An awning comprised of covering material exhibiting the
characteristic of luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination
contained within its framework.
   BANNER. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
   BILLBOARD. See: OFF-PREMISE SIGN.
   BUILDING FAÇADE. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of a parapet wall or eaves and
horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
   BUILDING SIGN. A sign that is applied or affixed to a building.
   CANDELA. The basic unit of measurement of light in SI (metric) units.
   CANDELA PER SQUARE METER (cd/m²). The SI (metric) unit used to describe the
luminance of a light source or of an illuminated surface that reflects light.
Also referred to as Nits.
   CANDLE or CANDLEPOWER. Synonymous with Candela, but in English, not SI,
terms.
   CANOPY (ATTACHED). A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and
either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at
additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. Similar to a
MARQUEE.
   CANOPY (FREESTANDING). A multi-sided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources
of light.
   CANOPY SIGN. A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy. Such signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
Similar to a Marquee Sign. Refer also to §§
161.243 and
161.244 herein for visual reference examples.
   CHANGEABLE SIGN. A sign with the capability of content change by means of
manual or remote input; changeable signs include the following types:
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a
display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an
external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display.
See also: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER.
      (2)   MANUALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed manually on a display surface.
   CLADDING. A non-structural covering designed to conceal the actual
structural supports of a sign. See also POLE OR PYLON COVER.
   CONFORMING SIGN. A sign that is legally installed in conformance with all
prevailing jurisdictional laws and ordinances.
   COPY. The graphic content or message of a sign.
   COPY AREA OF SIGN. The actual area of the sign copy as applied to any
background. Copy area on any individual background may be expressed as the sum
of the geometrically computed shape or shapes encompassing separate individual
letters, words, or graphic elements on the background. See §§
161.244 and
161.245 for computational methodology.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign that is designed and erected solely for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic; such signs have no copy advertising a product, service, or site.
   DISPLAY TIME. The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an
Electronic Message Sign.
   DISSOLVE. A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign
accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, in which the first
message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility with the gradual
appearance and legibility of the second message.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, back to back.
   DYNAMIC FRAME EFFECT. An Electronic Message Sign frame effect in which the
illusion of motion and/or animation is used.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER OR SIGN (EMC). An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability
can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also known
as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting
source. (See also following terms principally associated with ELECTRONIC
MESSAGE CENTERS: DISPLAY TIME, DISSOLVE, DYNAMIC FRAME EFFECT, FADE, FRAME,
FRAME EFFECT, SCROLL, TRANSITION, TRAVEL.)
   EXTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed outside a building.
   FAÇADE. See BUILDING FAÇADE.
   FADE. A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign
accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually
reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message
gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
   FASCIA SIGN. See WALL SIGN.
   FLASHING SIGN. See ANIMATED SIGN.
   FONT. A set of letters, numerals, symbols, or shapes conforming to a
specific set of design criteria.
   FOOT CANDLE. An English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling
upon a surface (illuminance). One FOOT CANDLE is equal to one lumen per square
foot. Can be measured by means of an illuminance meter.
   FOOT LAMBERT. An English unit of measurement of the amount of light emitted
by or reflecting off a surface (luminance) equivalent to 3.4262591 candelas per
square meter.
   FRAME. A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.
   FRAME EFFECT. A visual effect on an Electronic Message Sign applied to a
single frame. See also DYNAMIC FRAME EFFECT.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign principally supported by one or more columns,
poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground. May also be referenced as a
GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGN. Refer also to §§
161.243 and
161.244 for visual reference examples.
   FRONTAGE (PROPERTY). The length of the property line(s) of any single
premise along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
   FRONTAGE (BUILDING). The length of an exterior building wall or structure of
a single premise along either a public way or other properties that it faces.
   GROUND SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   ILLUMINANCE. The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface,
commonly called LIGHT LEVEL or ILLUMINATION. Measured in foot candles (lumens/
square foot) in the English system and lux (lumens/square meter) in the SI
(metric) system.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) [Internally or trans-illuminated]; or
reflecting off its surface(s) [Externally illuminated].
   LISTED SIGN (LISTING LABEL NUMBER). A sign manufactured and labeled in
accordance with specifications promulgated by a recognized testing laboratory
designed to assure compliance with applicable American National Standards
(ANSI) and/or the National Electric Code (NEC).
   LUMINANCE. The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface.
Measured in units of luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area (square meters
in SI measurement units or square feet in English measurement units.) Expressed
in SI units as cd/m², and in English units as foot lamberts. Sometimes also
expressed as “nits”, a colloquial reference to SI units. Can be measured by
means of a luminance meter.
   LUX. The SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 foot
candles.
   MANSARD. A roof-like façade comparable to an exterior building wall. See §
161.244 for visual reference.
   MARQUEE. See CANOPY (ATTACHED).
   MARQUEE SIGN. See CANOPY SIGN.
   MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN. A sign containing three (3) or more faces.
   Nit. A photometric unit of measurement referring to luminance. One nit is
equal to one cd/m².
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was legally installed by permit in
conformance with all sign regulations and ordinances in effect at the time of
its installation, but which no longer complies with subsequently enacted laws
and ordinances having jurisdiction relative to the sign.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A continued and lawful use of property, including a sign
lawfully installed in accordance with laws or ordinances prevailing at the time
of installation.
   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign advertising or displaying a commercial or
noncommercial message as to a business, service, product, or activity not being
conducted on, sold on, manufactured on, produced on, furnished on, or available
on the same property as the location of the sign.
   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign advertising or displaying a commercial or
noncommercial message as to a business, service, product, or activity being
conducted on, sold on, manufactured on, produced on, furnished on, or available
on the same property as the location of the sign.
   PARALLEL SIGN. See WALL SIGN.
   PARAPET. The extension of a building façade above the line of the structural
roof.
   PERPENDICULAR SIGN. See also FREESTANDING SIGN; see also PROJECTING SIGN;
   POLE COVER or PYLON COVER. An enclosure designed to conceal poles and/or
other structural supports of a sign. See also CLADDING.
   POLE SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause, or candidate for office.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign structure erected for an indefinite period not
permanently attached to the ground that can be removed without the use of
tools. (Temporary Signs as hereinafter defined are erected for a restricted or
fixed period as provided within the Sign Regulations.)
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a Wall Sign that is attached to or
projects more than eighteen (18) inches from a building face or wall or from a
structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. Refer also
to Section 21-126.4 for visual reference example.
   PYLON SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of
the property or premises upon which it is located.
   ROOF LINE. The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the case of
an extended façade or parapet, the uppermost point of said façade or parapet.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on the
uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially
supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard façades, pent eaves, and
architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered
to be ROOF SIGNS. Refer also to §§
161.243 and
161.244 for visual reference examples of ROOF SIGNS, and comparison of
differences between roof and fascia signs.
   SCROLL. A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which
the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
   SI (INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS). The modern metric system of measurement;
abbreviated SI for the French term “Le Systeme International d’Unites.”
   SIGN. Any device whose essential purpose and design is to convey either
commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of
alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations.
   SIGN AREA. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face. (The
area of any double-sided or “V” shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only.) The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a
circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as fifty
(50) percent of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign. See §§
161.244 and
161.245 for computational methodology for various sign area configurations.
   SIGN COPY. The words, letters, numerals, figures, pictures, symbols, logos
and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign.
   SIGN FACE. The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural thematic or decorative
trim, or any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which
the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or
border. Refer to §§
161.244 and
161.245 for sign face computational illustrations.
      (1)   In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the SIGN FACE shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which
the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between separate
panels or cabinets.
      (2)   In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters
or graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the SIGN FACE shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular geometric
figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements
comprising the sign copy, but not the open space between separate groupings of
sign copy on the same building or structure.
      (3)   In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border, or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the SIGN FACE shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure designed for the support of a sign.
   SITE. The ground area legally designated as a zoning lot, which may be
categorized as a permanent parcel (a lot of record), multiple lots of record,
or a portion of a lot of record.
   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. A temporary sign pertaining to any civic, patriotic, or
special event of general public interest.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign erected for a restricted or fixed period that is not
permanently embedded in the ground or not permanently affixed to a building or
not permanently affixed to a sign structure.
   TRANSITION. A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change
from one message to another.
   TRAVEL. A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which
the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN or UNDER MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of
a canopy or marquee.
   V SIGN. A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an interior
angle subtending less than one hundred seventy-nine degrees (179°) at the point
of juncture of the individual faces.
   WALL OR FASCIA SIGN. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior
wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than eighteen (18)
inches from the building or structure wall. Also includes signs affixed to
architectural projections that project from a building provided the copy area
of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building façade or
to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
Refer also to §§
161.243 and
161.244 for visual reference examples, and comparison examples of differences
between WALL OR FASCIA SIGNS and roof signs.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to or placed adjacent to the surface of a window
with its copy visible to the exterior environment.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.3) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.243 TYPICAL ON-PREMISE SIGN TYPES.
   Freestanding signs usually perpendicular to viewer’s line-of-sight. May be
double or multi faced and contain thematic embellishment and integral covers of
cladding to conceal structural supports.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2050.png]
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.4)
§ 161.244 SIGN AREAS COMPUTATIONAL METHODOLOGY/GROUND SIGNS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2052.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2054.png]
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.5)
§ 161.245 SIGN FACE AREA.
   (A)   Sign cabinets. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets
is determined based on the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet
   (B)   Double sided signs. Only one (1) side of a double sided sign is
counted in determining the area of sign faces. Where the two (2) sides are not
of equal size, the larger of the two (2) sides is used for the determination of
sign area. The area of multiple-faced signs in which the interior angle formed
by the faces is greater than ninety-one degrees (91°) shall be expressed as the
sum of the areas of all the faces, except for multiple-faced signs containing
faces that are configured back to back, in which case the area of the faces
configured back to back will be calculated according to the rule for double-
faced signs.
   (C)   Round, Oval & Irregularly shaped signs. To be measured based on the
appropriate mathematical formula to obtain the sign area for a circle, an oval
or irregularly shaped sign.
   (D)   Calculating Sign Area.
      (1)   Signs containing integral background areas: The area of a sign
containing a clearly defined background area shall be calculated based on the
area of the smallest standard geometric shape or combination of geometric
shapes capable of encompassing the perimeter of the background area of the
sign. In the case of signs in which multiple background areas are separated by
open space, sign area shall be calculated based on the sum of the areas of all
separate background areas, calculated as referenced above, but without regard
for any open space between the separate background areas.
      (2)   Signs without integral background areas: In instances in which a
sign consists of individual elements such as letters, symbols, or other graphic
objects or representations that are painted, attached to, or otherwise affixed
to a surface such as a wall, window, canopy, awning, architectural projection,
or to any surface not specifically designed to serve as a sign background, the
sign area shall be based on the sum of the individual areas of the smallest
geometric shape or combination of geometric shapes capable of encompassing the
perimeters of the individual elements comprising the sign.
   (E)   Awnings and marquees.
      (1)   When graphics or sign copy is incorporated into an awning, the sign
area is determined by computing the area of a standard imaginary geometric
shape or combination of shapes drawn around the sign copy area or graphics.
      (2)   When the ends of awnings or marquees are parallel and contain
graphics or sign copy, only one side is counted in addition to the sign face
area on the front.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.6)
§ 161.246 HEIGHT OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The overall height of a freestanding sign or sign structure is
measured from the lowest point of the ground directly below the sign to the
highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure.
   (B)   Exception. Where a freestanding sign or sign structure is mounted
along a roadway that has a higher grade level as compared to the grade level
directly below the freestanding sign or sign structure, then the freestanding
sign or structure’s height will be measured from the roadway grade level to the
highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure. See Figure A.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2056.png]
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.7)
§ 161.247 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs (which term includes sign structures) are prohibited in
all Zoning Districts, except as noted:
   (A)   Signs containing strobe lights, revolving lights, or search lights.
   (B)   Abandoned signs and abandoned sign structures which remain upon a
premises for more than sixty days from date the sign or sign structure becomes
abandoned;
   (C)   Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with
the primary purpose of providing signage not otherwise allowed by the Sign
Regulations; Prohibited is any sign displayed on a parked trailer or truck or
other vehicle where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a
product, service business, or other activity. The use of business logos,
identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily, actively, and regularly
used for business and/or personal transportation is not prohibited.
   (D)   Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs or
signals or signs that interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic
light, sign or signal.
   (E)   Mechanically Moving Signs - An environmentally activated sign or other
display with actual mechanical motion powered by natural, manual, mechanical,
electrical or other means, including but not limited to pennants, streamers,
spinners, propellers, and search lights.
   (F)   Flashing Signs - See Definitions within §
161.242. As provided within said Definitions, a sign that has a change rate or
dwell time of four (4) seconds or longer is not a flashing sign.
   (G)   Animated signs and Roof signs in all Residential Zoning Districts.
Illuminated signs on single family or two family residential sites and on
individual dwelling units of multifamily complexes or manufactured home parks.
   (H)   Posters and Handbills affixed to any structure (except a permitted
sign structure), tree, other natural vegetation, rocks, utility pole or other
pole.
   (I)   Roof signs, except for those permitted by Conditional Use in Non-
Residential Zoning Districts. See §
161.250(B)(3).
   (J)   Simulated Traffic Signs and Obstructions - Any sign or sign structure
which may be confused with, or obstruct the view of, any authorized traffic
sign or signal, or which obstructs the sight-distance triangle at any road
intersection or which unlawfully extends into the public right-of-way.
   (K)   Any portable sign as defined within §
161.242.
   (L)   Signs Adversely Affecting Safety. Signs which prevent free ingress or
egress from any door, window, fire escape, or that prevent free access from one
part of a roof to any other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be
attached to a stand-pipe or fire escape.
   (M)   Sign Emissions- No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, particles,
sound or odor shall be permitted. Open flames used to attract public attention
to a place of business or to an advertising sign shall not be permitted.
   (N)   Mirrors. No mirror device shall be used as part of a sign.
   (O)   Inflatable Signs except as a temporary sign.
   (P)   Projecting Signs and Permanent Banners except within a Business Zoning
District.
   (Q)   Any sign upon or within a public right of way or extending into a
public right of way, unless specifically permitted by §
161.251(B) or (C).
   (R)   Any sign within a Zoning District not allowed as a permitted sign or
as a conditional use sign within said District. Where the Sign Regulations are
silent, or where the Sign Regulations do not provide a basis for concluding
that a sign is allowed, said sign is prohibited.
   (S)   Any sign constructed of plywood, particle board, or similar
construction material and of 2x4, 4x4, 4x6, 6x6 wood support structure or
similar size or type support; the size of which sign is larger than eight (8)
square feet or which has an exposed (i.e. distance between bottom of sign and
ground) support structure greater than twenty four (24) inches in height.
   (T)   Any sign requiring a Permit but for which no Permit has be obtained or
any sign which is not placed and maintained in accordance with the Sign
Regulations.
   (U)   Any sign not legally installed in conformance with all Sign
Regulations and Ordinances in effect at time of installation; any nonconforming
sign for which the nonconformity status ceases as provided within §
161.255.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.8)
§ 161.248 REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Any sign prohibited by the Sign Regulations shall be taken down and removed
by the owner, agent or person having the ownership, possession, or use of the
sign or building, structure or premises upon which the sign may be found upon
written notice from the City Manager or other authorized designee of City to
remove the sign; upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such notice, which time shall not be less than five (5) days
unless public health or safety requires immediate removal, the City Manager or
other authorized designee of City is hereby authorized to cause removal of such
sign by any remedy, including but not limited to injunction; and any expense
incident thereto, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be paid by the
owner, agent or person having the ownership, possession, or use the sign or of
the building, structure or premises to which the sign is attached. Such owner,
agent or person shall also be subject to a fine in the amount of five hundred
dollars by reason of the existence of the prohibited sign. Nothing herein shall
restrict the City from immediately removing without notice any sign that
creates an imminent threat to public health or safety or from immediately
removing without notice any sign placed upon or within any right-of-way of City
or upon any property of City without the written consent of City except a sign
subject to §
161.251(C); in which event City shall have no liability to, nor make any
compensation to, the owner of or to the party placing the sign and said owner
or party shall be subject to all other penalties and remedies as provided
within the Sign Regulations.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.9)
§ 161.249 SIGNS IN R-1, R-2, R-M2, R-MH AND R-3 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Signs in Residential Zoning Districts shall conform to the regulations of
this Section.
   (A)   Single Family or Two Family Residential Sites. Each single family or
two family (each unit) residential site is permitted signs not to exceed eight
(8) square feet in total sign area and no sign shall exceed six (6) feet in
height. Permitted signs include, but are not limited to: home occupation signs
as permitted by this Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, §
161.210 (Definition of Home Occupation), non-commercial lawn signs, real estate
signs, and political signs. The signs shall be only temporary signs, window
signs, or wall signs that project not more than four (4) inches from the
building wall. Trees, rocks or other naturally occurring landscape features may
not be used to support a residential sign. No sign shall be illuminated. No
off-premises sign is permitted. No on-premises sign with commercial copy,
except a home occupation sign, is permitted because no commercial or business
activity except a home occupation is permitted on a single family or a two
family residential property.
   (B)   Multi-family Dwelling Complexes, Manufactured Home Parks, and Legal
Subdivisions. Multi-family dwelling complexes, manufactured home parks, and
legal subdivisions are permitted a freestanding sign not to exceed forty eight
(48) square feet in sign area and not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in height for
each separate street frontage occupied by the multi-family dwelling complex
site, manufactured home park site, or legal subdivision site; directional signs
are also permitted provided that no directional sign shall exceed six (6)
square feet in sign area and eight (8) feet in height (if freestanding). Wall
signs are also permitted upon a permanent building (but not a manufactured
home) within a multi-family dwelling complex or manufactured home park not to
exceed five (5) percent of the area of the façade in elevation view upon which
they are placed. If permitted by the multi-family dwelling complex or
manufactured home park, the occupants of each dwelling unit within the multi-
family dwelling complex or manufactured home park are permitted signs not to
exceed eight (8) square feet in total sign area as provided within paragraph A
above.
   (C)   Permitted Non-residential Use Sites in a Residential District.
Permitted non-residential use sites in a Residential District are permitted a
freestanding sign not to exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in sign area and
not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in height for each separate street frontage
occupied by the permitted use. Wall signs are also permitted not to exceed five
(5) percent of the area of the façade in elevation view upon which they are
placed. In lieu of one or more of the freestanding signs described above, a
permitted non-residential use site in a Residential Zoning District is allowed
one sign on each separate street frontage for a directory of tenants engaged in
professional and/or commercial activity on the site; the area of such sign
shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet and the height shall not exceed
fifteen (15) feet. Directional signs are also permitted provided that no
directional sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in sign area and eight (8)
feet in height (if freestanding). Permitted non-residential uses in a
Residential District are permitted temporary signs as provided within §
161.251(J) “Temporary Signs”.
   (D)   Electronic Message Centers. Electronic Message Centers (EMC) are
prohibited upon all single family and two family sites and upon all multifamily
dwelling complexes, manufactured home parks and legal subdivisions within
Residential Zoning Districts; Electronic Message Centers (subject to size and
height requirements as permitted by conditional use or for type of sign) are
allowed for permitted non-residential use sites only with a Conditional Use
Permit, except that a Conditional Use Permit shall not be required within the
R-3 Zoning District. (Also see §
161.253.) Animated signs are prohibited in all Residential Districts. Roof
signs are prohibited in all Residential Districts. Any sign type not
specifically permitted is prohibited.
TABLE 1 - SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 TYPES OF SIGNS ALLOWED NUMBER OF SIGNS PERMITTED SIGN AREA MAXIMUM HEIGHT (IF
                        ALLOWED                             APPLICABLE)
TABLE 1 - SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
              TYPES OF                                                                         PERMITTED     MAXIMUM
              SIGNS        NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED                                             SIGN AREA     HEIGHT (IF
              ALLOWED                                                                                        APPLICABLE)
SINGLE
FAMILY, TWO
FAMILY, AND
MULTI- FAMILY WINDOW, WALL ANY NUMBER SO LONG AS THE SF OF ALL SIGNS DOES NOT EXCEED 8 SF      8 SF TOTAL    6’0”
DWELLING UNIT OR TEMPORARY
(NO
ILLUMINATED
SIGNS)
MULTI-FAMILY  FREESTANDING ONE PER EACH STREET FRONTAGE                                        48 SF PER     15’0”
COMPLEXES,                                                                                     SIGN
MANUFACTURED               ONE OR MORE PER BUILDING FAÇADE NOT TO EXCEED TOTAL PERMITTED SIGN 5% OF FAÇADE
HOME PARKS,   WALL         AREA                                                                TOTAL PER     —
LEGAL                                                                                          FAÇADE
SUBDIVISIONS,
EXCLUDING
INDIVIDUAL
DWELLING      DIRECTIONAL  UNLIMITED                                                           6 SF PER SIGN 8’0”
UNITS (NO
ELECTRONIC
MESSAGE
CENTERS
                                                                                               75 SF PER
                                                                                               SIGN, EXCEPT
PERMITTED     FREESTANDING ONE PER EACH STREET FRONTAGE                                        ONE 64 SF     15’0”
NON-                                                                                           DIRECTORY
RESIDENTIAL                                                                                    SIGN
USES                                                                                           5% OF FAÇADE
              WALL         ONE OR MORE PER FAÇADE NOT TO EXCEED TOTAL PERMITTED SIGN AREA     TOTAL PER     —
                                                                                               FAÇADE
              DIRECTIONAL  UNLIMITED                                                           6 SF PER SIGN 8’0”
              ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS ARE ALLOWED ONLY BY CONDITIONAL USE ON PERMITTED NON-RESIDENTIAL USE SITES,
              EXCEPT EMC ARE PERMITTED SIGN ON NON-RESIDENTIAL USE SITES IN A R-3 DISTRICT
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.10)
§ 161.250 STANDARDS IN A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-PL, I-1, I-2, I-A, IPCA-PUD
ZONING DISTRICTS.
   Signs in Agricultural, Flood Plain, Business, and Industrial Zoning
Districts hereinafter collectively called “Non-Residential Zoning Districts”
shall conform to the regulations of this Section.
   (A)   Temporary signs are permitted only as provided within §
161.251(J) “Temporary Signs”.
   (B)   Permanent Signs in Non-Residential Zoning Districts are permitted and
regulated by reference to types noted below.
      (1)   Freestanding Signs:
         (a)   Freestanding signs include Pylon, Pole with Cladding, Multi
Panel Pylon, Pole, Monument, Canopy and Monolith (See §
161.243).
         (b)   1.   Freestanding signs, regardless of type or combination of
types, shall be limited to one (1) per site held in single and separate
ownership, plus for a site that has frontage on more than one (1) street, one
(1) such sign shall be permitted for each additional separate street frontage;
and if a site has individual street frontage that exceeds three hundred (300)
lineal feet on said street, one (1) such sign on such frontage shall be
permitted for each multiple of three hundred (300) lineal feet of frontage for
each separate street frontage. Freestanding signs are reduced if a site has
Projecting Signs; see (B)(6) below.
            2.   Unless otherwise regulated by specific reference herein, the
area and height above grade of any freestanding sign shall not exceed the
amounts specified in Table 2 below. A site of ten (10) acres or more, situated
within one and one-half (1.5) miles of the intersection center-point of the I-
64/I-57 Interstate Exchange and having more than nine hundred (900) continuous
lineal feet of street frontage may, in lieu of placing multiple free standing
signs within said nine hundred (900) lineal feet, place a single free standing
sign having an area at twice the applicable size specified in Table 2; provided
that only one such oversized sign shall be permitted for the site. A site that
has street frontage on more than one street may, in lieu of placing a free
standing sign on each street frontage, place a single free standing sign having
an area at one and one-half the applicable size specified in Table 2 on one
street frontage; provided that no free standing sign shall be placed upon the
other street frontage or frontages and not more than one such oversized sign
shall be permitted for the site.
Table 2 – Freestanding Signs in Non-Residential Zoning Districts*
Values indicated are maximum limits on sign size height
A = Sign Area in Square Feet / H = Height in Lineal Feet
A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-PL B-3, ICPA-PUD I-1, I-2, I-A
A H                      A H           A H
Table 2 – Freestanding Signs in Non-Residential Zoning Districts*
Values indicated are maximum limits on sign size height
A = Sign Area in Square Feet / H = Height in Lineal Feet
A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-PL B-3, ICPA-PUD I-1, I-2, I-A
A   H                    A   H         A   H
100 40                   100 40        78  26
                         125 50        112 30
                         200 60        153 36
                         250 70        200 42
                         300 80        253 48
                         350 90        312 54
                         375 100       378 60
                         400 110       450 66
                         450 120
*USE OF PROJECTING SIGNS IN BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICTS WILL REDUCE
ALLOWANCES FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS; SEE §
161.250(B)(6)
 
      (2)   Building Signs:
         (a)   Building signs include wall or fascia signs, roof signs, canopy
signs, awning signs, and projecting signs. Building signs for a site,
regardless of type, or combination of types, are collectively limited in total
area to the percentage as stated within Table 3. A building sign type is also
subject to restrictions forth particular sign type as herein provided;
particular restrictions shall supersede general regulations.
         (b)   The total area of all building signs applied to any given façade
with frontage on a street shall not exceed the area computed as a percentage of
the building façade in elevation view, including window and door areas and
cornices to which they are affixed or applied in accordance with Table 3.
Building signs shall be allowed on all sides of the structure provided that
façades that do not have frontage on a street shall only be permitted 10
percent of the building façade in elevation view.
         (c)   In the case of a shopping center or a group of stores or other
multi-use or multi-tenant uses on a lot held in single and separate ownership,
provisions relating to the total area of building signs permitted on a premises
shall apply with respect to the façade of and for each building, separate
store, separate storefront, or separate use. Only wall signs shall be permitted
for individual establishments within a Shopping Center or for each building,
separate store, separate storefront, or separate use.
 
Table 3 – Building Signs
Distance
of sign
from
street   If façade has street frontage percentage of building elevation façade
frontage permitted for sign area
or
adjacent
Zoning
District
0 to 100 Fifteen (15%)
feet
101 to   Twenty (20%)
300 feet
Over 301 Twenty-Five (25%)
feet
         If façade is not in street frontage then sign is limited to ten percent
         (10%) of façade in elevation view
 
      (3)   Roof Signs, Special Considerations:
         (a)   Roof signs are permitted by Conditional Use in Non-Residential
Zoning Districts and are in lieu of other building signs. For permitted roof
sign area, see Table 3 above for building signs. The height of any roof sign
above the highest architectural point of the building to which it is mounted
shall not exceed the percentage of the vertical dimension of the building
façade parallel to the sign in accord with sections (B)(3)(a)1. and (B)(3)(a)2.
below. Measurements shall be computed from the highest building point to the
top of the sign.
            1.   Business Zoning District - Twenty-five (25) percent.
            2.   Agricultural or Flood Plain Zoning District - Twenty-five (25)
percent.
            3.   Industrial Zoning District - Forty (40) percent.
         (b)   The area calculation for any roof sign whose orientation on a
roof may be other than parallel to an individual building façade shall be
computed with reference to the building façade that most closely parallels the
orientation of such sign.
      (4)   Canopy Signs (Also Marquee Signs and Signs on Architectural
Projections): Special Considerations.
         (a)   Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs and Signs on Architectural
Projections are signs that are mounted to either structures that project off
the face of the building more than eighteen (18) inches or signs that are
mounted to a freestanding structure not attached to a building that creates a
canopy or covering over an area below.
         (b)   Signs affixed or applied in an essentially flat plane to the
face of a building or freestanding canopy, marquee, or architectural projection
provided that the copy area of any such sign, as defined herein, does not
exceed an area equal to forty (40) percent of the product of the height and
length of the face area of the canopy, marquee, or architectural projection to
which such sign is affixed or applied, or fifteen (15) percent of the building
façade to which it is attached, whichever is greater.
      (5)   Awning Signs: Graphics affixed or applied to the face or side
surfaces of an awning or backlit awning are permitted provided that the copy
area of any such sign copy or graphic, as defined herein, does not exceed an
area in accordance with Table 3 for building signs, to which the awning is
attached.
      (6)   Projecting Signs (Prohibited except in Business Zoning Districts).
         (a)   Projecting signs are permitted only within Business Zoning
Districts and only in lieu of any permitted freestanding signs on any given
property frontage; in the case in which a premises is permitted either
freestanding or projecting signs on any one frontage, projecting signs may be
substituted for any of the permitted freestanding signs on such frontage,
provided that the requirements herein specifically relating to size, height,
and extension of projecting signs are met.
         (b)   Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per building façade
on which any such sign is mounted except for a use that fronts on more than one
(1) street, in which case, one (1) such sign shall be permitted per façade for
each separate street frontage. In the case of a building in which any
individual façade exceeds two hundred (200) lineal feet, one (1) such sign
shall be permitted for each two hundred (200) lineal feet of such façade or
multiple thereof on each separate street on which such façade fronts.
         (c)   The area of any projecting sign shall not exceed one (1) square
foot per every two (2) lineal feet of the building façade on which such sign is
mounted, except that no such sign shall be larger in area than one hundred
(100) square feet.
         (d)   No projecting sign shall extend in a vertical dimension above
the highest architectural point of the façade to which it is mounted in excess
of twenty-five (25) percent of the vertical dimension of the façade itself.
         (e)   Projecting signs extending over a public sidewalk shall be
limited to a projection distance not to exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the width of
the sidewalk.
Table 4 – Signs in Non-Residential Districts
ALL USES TYPES OF SIGNS NUMBER OF SIGNS PERMITTED SIGN AREA MAXIMUM HEIGHT (IF
         ALLOWED        ALLOWED                             APPLICABLE)
Table 4 – Signs in Non-Residential Districts
ALL                                                                                                   PERMITTED    MAXIMUM
USES TYPES OF SIGNS ALLOWED          NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED                                          SIGN AREA    HEIGHT (IF
                                                                                                                   APPLICABLE)
     TEMPORARY (SEE §               ANY NUMBER SO LONG AS TOTAL SF FOR ALL SIGNS DO NOT EXCEED 50 SF 50 SF TOTAL  6’0”
     161.251(J) “TEMPORARY SIGNS”
     FREESTANDING (BUT SEE §        ONE FOR EACH SITE OR ONE FOR EACH 300’ OF EACH SEPARATE STREET
     161.250(B)(6) PROJECTING SIGNS  FRONTAGE                                                         SEE TABLE 2  SEE TABLE 2
     IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS)
                                                                                                      See §
     BUILDING SIGNS (which                                                                            161.250(B)   SEE
     collectively includes all       ANY NUMBER SO LONG AS TOTAL COLLECTIVE SIGN SF DOES NOT EXCEED   (2), TABLE 3 REGULATION
     permitted wall, fascia, roof,   PERMITTED SIGN AREA                                              AND          FOR EACH
     canopy, awning, and projecting                                                                   REGULATIONS  SPECIFIC
     signs)                                                                                           FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPE
                                                                                                      SIGN TYPE
                                                                                                      FREESTANDING 8’0”
     DIRECTIONAL                     UNLIMITED                                                        6 SF          
                                                                                                      WALL 16 SF   —
     ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS ARE SUBJECT TO §
     161.253
     Sexually oriented Business - which businesses are permitted only within I-1 Zoning District - are subject to §
     161.252
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.11)
§ 161.251 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Total Square Footage. Unless specifically exempted within express
language of the Sign Regulations, the square footage of any sign placed or
erected upon a property shall be included in the total square footage of
signage allowed upon a property. Any sign requiring a Sign Permit which is not
specifically permitted by the Sign Regulations is prohibited, unless granted by
a Conditional Use as provided within §§
161.270 through
161.275.
   (B)   Sign placement and Setback.
      (1)   No sign not forming part of or attached to a structure, except a
directional sign, shall be placed closer than one-half of the minimum yard
requirement required for structures within the applicable Zoning District,
except that within the B-2 Zoning District the minimum setback from a right-of-
way or adjoining property shall be ten (10) feet and within the B-3 Zoning
District, the minimum setback from the right-of-way or adjoining property shall
be ten (10) feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing setback requirements, the City
Manager may grant a variance in a setback requirement if the required setback
requirement cannot be met under circumstances where a building or other
permanent structure, lawfully placed and meeting setback requirements at time
of construction, no longer has available space to comply with setback
requirements because of the creation, extension, or widening of public right-
of-way or similarly occurring condition after the date of placement of the
building or structure; in that event, upon a written request, the City Manager
may grant by issuance of a written Permit (which Permit shall be filed with the
City Clerk), a reduction in setback up to two-thirds (2/3) of the distance
between the building or structure and the then existing right-of-way; no other
variances shall be granted. In no event shall any sign obstruct the clear view
of vehicular traffic of any street or access or the clear view of any sign
regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   All signs and sign structures must be erected and attached totally
on or within the site or property to which they refer, and no sign shall be
placed upon any property without the written consent of the owner(s) of the
property.
      (3)   No sign, including any part of the support and foundation, shall be
placed within the right-of-way of any street, alley, or public way, nor upon
any public property without the written approval of the City Council, except as
specifically permitted within paragraph (C) below.
      (4)   In addition to the other requirements stated within the Sign
Regulations, placement of a sign shall be subject to review and approval or
disapproval by the City Manager or designee of the City Manager based upon
compliance with the following clearance requirement:
         (a)   Vision clearance areas: Vision clearance areas are triangular-
shaped areas located at the intersection of any combination of rights-of-way,
alleys or driveways. The sides of the triangle extend thirty (30) feet from the
intersection of the right-of-way, alley or driveway in either/each direction.
No sign shall be installed within this clear sight triangle, notwithstanding
any other provision of the Sign Regulations.
         (b)   Vehicle area clearances: In areas outside of rights-of-way, when
a sign or awning extends over an area in which vehicles travel or are parked,
the bottom of the structure must be at least fourteen (14) feet above the
ground. Vehicle areas include driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and
maneuvering areas.
         (c)   Pedestrian area clearances. When a sign or awning extends more
than twelve (12) inches over a sidewalk, walkway, or other space used by
pedestrians, the bottom of the structure must be at least eight (8) feet above
the ground.
         (d)   Clearances from fire escapes means of egress or standpipes.
Signs, sign structures and awnings are prohibited from being erected in any
manner that interferes in any way with the free use of any fire escape, means
of egress or standpipe. Attaching signs, sign structures or awnings to a fire
escape is prohibited.
         (e)   Obstruction of windows and ventilation. Signs, sign structures
and awnings are prohibited from being installed in any way that obstructs any
building openings to such an extent that light, ventilation or exhaust are
reduced to a level below that required by either the Building Code, Plumbing
Regulations, Heating and Ventilating Regulations or Housing and Maintenance
Regulations or other applicable State or local Code.
   (C)   Signs extending into the right-of-way. The following signs are
permitted to extend into the right-of-way:
      (1)   Projecting signs over a public sidewalk are permitted only within
the B-1 Zoning District.
      (2)   Awnings and marquees projecting over a public sidewalk are
permitted only within the B-1 Zoning District.
      (3)   One (1) A-frame sign is permitted for each site only within the B-
1 Zoning District (to be counted within the sign area of permitted freestanding
signs) if it meets the following standards:
         (a)   The sign is entirely outside the surface street or roadway used
or available for use for vehicular traffic;
         (b)   The sign is no larger than ten (10) square feet;
         (c)   The sign does not obstruct a continuous through pedestrian wheel
chair access zone of at least six (6) feet in width.
         (d)   The sign does not obstruct pedestrian or wheelchair access from
the sidewalk to any of the following:
            1.   transit stop areas;
            2.   designated disabled parking spaces;
            3.   disabled access ramps; or
            4.   building exits including fire escapes.
         (e)   A sign described herein which fails to comply with the
provisions of this subsection (C) shall be removed or modified by the owner. In
addition, the City, in its sole determination, may require signs extending into
the right-of-way to be modified or removed if streets are widened, or other
improvements are made in the right-of-way which result in the creation of
unsafe or non-compliant conditions or because of other public need. The
modification, removal, or moving shall be at the owner’s expense. The owner
shall modify or remove or move the sign within 30 days from receipt of written
notice from City if the sign was permitted and lawful at the time of its
placement or upon written 5 day notice if the sign was not permitted or not
lawful at the time of its placement or immediately if a threat to public
safety. If the owner fails to do so then the City may remove the sign with no
compensation or liability to owner and owner shall pay all costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, incurred by City.
   (D)   Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs shall not extend into the
right-of-way.
   (E)   Fascia or Wall Signs.
      (1)   Vertical extensions: Fascia or wall signs may not extend above the
top of the building wall upon which they are mounted.
      (2)   Horizontal extensions: Fascia or wall signs may not extend more
than eighteen (18) inches out from the wall or structure to which they are
attached; provided said signs shall not extend more than four (4) inches on
single family and two family residential sites.
   (F)   Pitched Roof Signs.
      (1)   Vertical extensions: A pitched roof sign may not extend above the
roofline.
      (2)   Placement and angle. Pitched roof signs must be parallel to the
building face. They may not extend beyond the building wall. See illustrations
in §
161.244.
      (3)   Support structures: Support structures must be designed so that
there is no visible support structure above the sign.
   (G)   Projecting Signs; Placement: Projecting signs are not allowed on
rooftops or on pitched roofs. Projecting signs are allowed only within Business
Zoning Districts. No projecting sign shall extend over a right-of-way unless it
is located in the B-1 Zoning District (see (C) above).
   (H)   Directional Signs.
      (1)   General standards: Directional signs that meet the standards of
this subsection are allowed in all Zoning Districts except R-1, R-2, R-3, R-M2,
or R-MH, and are not counted in the total square footage of permanent signage
allowed on any property or site. Directional signs shall be free standing or
fascia (wall). Freestanding directional signs may be up to six (6) square feet
in area and eight (8) feet in height; Fascia directional signs may be up to
sixteen (16) square feet in area.
      (2)   Directional signs within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-M2, and R-MH Zoning
Districts are permitted only as provided within §
161.249 above.
      (3)   Directional signs in any Zoning District may have internal or
external illumination.
   (I)   Banners.
      (1)   Banners used as permanent signs or erected using a sign structure
not meeting the definition of temporary sign are allowed in Non-Residential
Zoning Districts and will be included in the total square footage allowed on
the site. Temporary banners are regulated under (J) below.
      (2)   Permanent banners are subject to the standards for either fascia
signs or projecting signs depending on how the banner is supported or anchored.
   (J)   Temporary Signs.
      (1)   In all Residential Zoning Districts upon sites used for single
family or two family dwellings or on the individual dwelling units within a
multi-family complex or manufactured home park, temporary signs are permitted
as provided within §
161.249 above. Temporary signs are counted in the total square footage of
signage allowed on any particular site. Temporary signs shall not have external
or internal illumination.
      (2)   On properties within a Residential Zoning District having a
Permitted Non-Residential Use or Multi-Family Use (except the individual
dwelling units as described within (J)(1) above) and on properties within a
Non-Residential Zoning District, signs that meet the regulations and
definitions herein for Temporary Signs are not counted in the total square
footage of permitted permanent signage allowed on any particular site. Signs
that do not meet the regulations herein for Temporary Signs are regulated as a
permanent sign. Temporary signs for a site shall be collectively limited to a
total sign area of fifty (50) square feet and no sign shall exceed six (6) feet
in height (if applicable), whether said sign or signs shall be a banner, wall,
fascia, freestanding or combination thereof. Temporary signs may have external
or internal illumination.
      (3)   Temporary sign has reference to sign type, not to the sign copy; a
temporary sign may be a commercial sign, a real estate sign, political sign,
special event sign, or any other copy (except as restricted by the Zoning
District). No temporary sign, except political signs upon residential property
(which are subject to State law pre-emption), shall be displayed longer than
thirty (30) days. A temporary sign must comply with any regulation that applies
to all signs generally (e.g. setback, vision clearance, etc.). A temporary sign
that does not meet the regulations of this subsection (J) is prohibited; such
sign must meet the Sign Regulations and is subject to the restrictions for
permanent signs.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.12)
§ 161.252 SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Sign Regulations of §§
161.240 through
161.258, signs for a sexually oriented business shall also be subject to the
following provisions (which provisions shall supersede any other condition or
similar provisions):
   (A)   Only the following signs are permitted:
      (1)   One freestanding, illuminated or non-illuminated, with one or two
sides permitted having total square footage not exceeding 75 square feet for
one side or 150 square feet for two sides, with a maximum height of 25 feet
measured from top of the sign and minimum ground clearance of 10 feet measured
from bottom of the sign and with a minimum setback from a public right-of-way
and adjoining property of 10 feet.
      (2)   One wall sign, illuminated or non-illuminated, having total square
footage not exceeding 75 square feet and having a maximum height of 25 feet
measured from top of sign.
   (B)   The display surface shall:
      (a)   not contain any flashing light;
      (b)   be a plat plane, square or rectangular in shape;
      (c)   not contain any photographs, silhouettes, drawing or pictorial
representation in any manner;
      (d)   Each letter forming a word shall be of a solid color and each
letter shall be of the same print, type, size and color; the background behind
such lettering on the display surface shall be of a uniform and solid color.
   (C)   No exterior shall have flashing lights, search lights, spot lights,
photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner.
   (D)   No exterior portion of the establishment shall be painted any color
other than an achromatic color.
   (E)   No sign shall be a flashing, moving or constant motion sign.
   (F)   No sexually oriented business shall have an off-premises sign, nor
permit an off-premises sign of another sexually oriented business on its
property.
   (G)   No variance of sign provisions is permitted.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.13)
§ 161.253 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS.
   (A)   Electronic Message Centers (EMC) are permitted in Residential Zoning
Districts as only provided within §
161.249(D); Electronic Message Centers are permitted within all Non-Residential
Zoning Districts.
   (B)   Additional general EMC regulations:
      (1)   An EMC sign may be a portion of a building sign or freestanding
sign, or may comprise the entire sign area.
      (2)   All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by
photocell (hardwired) or via software settings, in order to bring the EMC
lighting level at night into compliance with “Sign Illumination Standards” of §
161.254.
      (3)   In Residential Zoning Districts, where permitted, EMC signs shall
have a minimum display time of eight (8) seconds. The transition time between
messages and/or message frames shall be limited to three (3) seconds and these
transitions may employ fade, dissolve, and/or other transition effects;
however, the following EMC display features and functions are prohibited:
continuous scrolling and/or traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, and
similar moving effects, and all dynamic frame effects or patterns of
illusionary movement or simulating movement.
      (4)   In Non-Residential Zoning Districts, all EMC display features and
functions are permitted, with the exception of
         (a)   flashing, which is prohibited and
         (b)   full motion video or film display via an electronic file
imported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into the EMC. See
Definitions, §
161.242.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.14)
§ 161.254 SIGN ILLUMINATION STANDARDS.
   Signs may be illuminated consistent with the following standards:
   (A)   A sign in any zoning district may be illuminated at night except as
provided within §
161.249 as to single family and two family residential sites and individual
dwelling units of multi-family dwelling complex or of a manufactured home park,
or except as provided by another ordinance or provision of law. Signs that are
illuminated at night may not exceed a maximum luminance level of seven hundred
fifty (750) cd/m² or Nits, regardless of the method of illumination.
   (B)   Signs that have external illumination, whether the lighting is mounted
above or below the sign face or panel, shall have lighting fixtures or
luminaires that are fully shielded.
   (C)   All illuminated signs must comply with the maximum luminance level of
seven hundred fifty (750) cd/m² or Nits at least one-half hour before Apparent
Sunset, as determined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), US Department of Commerce, for the specific geographic location and
date. All illuminated signs must comply with this maximum luminance level
throughout the night, if the sign is energized, until Apparent Sunrise, as
determined by the NOAA, at which time the sign may resume luminance levels
appropriate for daylight conditions, when required or appropriate.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.15)
§ 161.255 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Nonconforming permanent signs are subject to §§
161.025 through
161.032 of the Revised Code of Ordinances in addition to the regulations
herein. Nonconforming temporary signs shall be removed or changed in accordance
with the provisions herein.
   (B)   Permanent signs and sign structures that are moved, removed, replaced,
or structurally altered shall be brought into compliance with the Sign
Regulations of §§
161.240 through
161.258. However, a nonconforming sign required to be moved because of public
right-of-way improvements having an amortized life remaining under §
161.031, of more than five (5) years may be re-established and maintained until
expiration of its remaining amortized life. Removable faces or sign panel
inserts in a cabinet style sign may also be changed, and such change does not
constitute a structural alteration nor trigger loss of nonconforming status.
   (C)   Nonconforming temporary signs must be removed on or before April 30,
2018. Nonconforming permanent signs whose nonconformity (e.g. transition time,
illuminance, display time, etc.) can be remedied without structural alteration
or remedied by adjustment of an existing sign control or mechanism shall be
brought into compliance by April 30, 2018. Failure to remove a sign or remedy a
nonconformity by April 30, 2018 shall constitute a violation of the Sign
Regulations and the sign shall thereafter be a prohibited sign.
   (D)   Ownership. The status of a nonconforming sign is not affected by
changes in ownership.
   (E)   Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with a conforming
sign or the amortized period under §
161.031 expires, the nonconforming rights for that sign are lost and a
nonconforming sign may not be re-established.
   (F)   Nonconforming sign status shall cease:
      (1)   For any sign that meets the definition of abandoned sign.
      (2)   Except as provided within this Section, when a sign or sign
structure is removed or destroyed, the replacement sign and sign structure must
comply with Sign Regulations of §§
161.240 through
161.258, although a nonconforming sign or sign structure may be removed
temporarily to perform only sign maintenance or sign repair.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.16)
§ 161.256 ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL SIGNS.
   (A)   All electric signs, outline lighting systems and skeleton neon
lighting systems shall be manufactured and installed in compliance with NFPA
70: the National Electric Code (NEC) Edition adopted by City and any required
electrical work shall be performed by a licensed electrician.
   (B)   The Listing label number for all signs shall be provided on the Sign
Permit Application, or, if the sign has not been manufactured yet, through
Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) validation: A NRTL file number
from the sign manufacturer shall be provided for all electric signs on the Sign
Permit Application.
   (C)   Any sign which fails to comply with the provisions of this Section
shall not receive, nor continue to receive, electrical power and shall be
disconnected, or may be ordered to be disconnected, as an immediate health and
safety threat; said sign shall also be subject to removal at owner’s expense as
a nuisance if not repaired or removed after a 5 day written notice to the
owner.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.17)
§ 161.257 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Signs, sign structures and awnings, together with their supports,
braces, guys, anchors and electrical components shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with any applicable Code and with the requirements of
the manufacturer of the sign, and shall always be maintained in a proper state
of repair. The City Manager or designee of the City Manager may order the
removal of any sign, sign structure or awning that is not maintained as
required.
   (B)   Dangerous Structures and Equipment.
      (1)   Signs, sign structures or awnings that are dangerous must be taken
down and removed or made safe as the City Manager or designee of the City
Manager deems necessary. Signs may be deemed dangerous for one or more of the
following reasons:
         (a)   Whenever a sign structure or its foundation, a sign’s
attachments to a building, or a building to which a sign is attached is damaged
by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that
the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before the
damage;
         (b)   Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or
awning is likely to fail, or become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or property;
         (c)   Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or
awning is likely to partially or completely collapse as a result of any cause,
including, dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction or
wiring; or removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground or
building necessary for supporting such structure;
         (d)   Whenever a sign, sign structure or awning is structurally or
electrically unsafe or otherwise hazardous to human life or safety by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster,
damage or abandonment;
      (2)   All signs, sign structures and awnings determined after inspection
to be dangerous must be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or
removal.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.18)
§ 161.258 OFF-PREMISE SIGNS.
   (A)   Off-Premise Signs shall be subject to the provisions of this §
161.258; the provisions of this Section shall supersede any conflicting or
inconsistent provisions within other provisions of §§
161.225 through
161.227 and
161.240 through
161.258.
   (B)   “Off-Premise Sign” means a sign advertising or displaying a commercial
or noncommercial message as to a business, service, product, or activity not
being conducted on, sold on, manufactured on, produced on, furnished on, or
available on the same property as the location of the sign. An Off-Premise Sign
shall not advertise or display a message as to a business, service, product, or
activity conducted on, sold on, manufactured on, produced on, furnished on, or
available on the same property as the location of the sign. (i.e. cannot also
be used as an On- Premise Sign); nor shall a Freestanding Sign structure be
used for both an Off-Premise Sign and an On-Premise Sign as the sign face or
faces on a Freestanding Sign structure shall constitute a single sign;
   (C)   Off-Premise Signs are prohibited in all Residential Zoning Districts.
Off-Premise Signs are permitted in Zoning Districts A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-
PL, I-1, I-2, I-A and IPCA-PUD, but no off-premise sign of any type shall be
erected or maintained in Zoning Districts A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-PL, I-1,
I-2, I-A and IPCA-PUD without first obtaining a Conditional Sign Permit,
without paying the initial Sign Permit Fee and each annual Sign Permit Fee, and
without complying with each of the following conditions (C)(1) through (C)(14):
      (1)   An Off-Premise Sign shall only be a Freestanding Sign as defined
within §
161.242, and said Free Standing Off-Premise Sign shall count toward the total
number of Free Standing Signs (On-Premise and Off-Premise Signs) permitted upon
a property; in no event shall a tract leased for the purpose of placing an Off-
Premise or On-Premise Sign be considered a separate property and the property
shall be the entire premises, zoning lot, or real estate tract of which the
leased sign premises forms a part. If an Off-Premise Sign is situated upon a
property with a Freestanding On-Premise Sign, the number of Freestanding On-
Premise Signs permitted for said property shall be reduced by the number of
Off-Premise Signs upon said property.
      (2)   An Off-Premise Sign situated adjacent to a street shall only face
the direction of the traffic flow for said street.
      (3)   Off premise signs on the same street or combination of streets
facing the same traffic flow, including at street intersection locations, shall
not be placed closer together than 300 feet along said street, or a combination
of streets (Figure 6 deleted); also, except as expressly provided within
paragraph (C)(5) below, Off-Premise Signs positioned across a street from each
other shall not be closer than 300 feet.
      (4)   An Off-Premise Sign may be double-faced and each side shall be
considered as facing traffic flowing in the opposite direction. (Figure 7
deleted)
      (5)   At the intersection of two streets, double or single faced signs at
right angles to and, therefore, facing traffic on street A may be situated
closer than 300 feet to a similarly positioned sign across the street at right
angles to and, therefore, facing traffic on street B. (See Figure 8 for an
example illustration at 150 feet); each said Sign shall meet all other
requirements of this Section. Except in such limited case, each Off-Premise
Sign positioned across the street from each other shall not be closer than 300
feet and also the 300 feet restriction within (C)(3) above shall apply to each
sign.
Figure 8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2058.png]
 
      (6)   In all permitted Zoning Districts (i.e. A-G, F-P, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-
PL, I-1, I-2, I-A and ICPA-PUD) an Off-Premise Sign shall not exceed 100 square
ft. per side, with a 30’ maximum height.
      (7)   Structures for Off-Premise Signs shall be of vertical (cantilever)
construction and where the back is visible it shall be suitably painted or
otherwise covered to present a neat and clean appearance.
      (8)   The area around Off-Premise Signs shall be kept clean and all
trees, shrubs, brush, tall grass, etc. shall be cleared away to a distance of
at least five feet to the rear and sides of structure, as well as to the front
property line, and if on a corner property site, to both property lines.
      (9)   Site directional signs shall be subject to and conform to any more
restrictive requirements within §§
161.240 through
161.258 for Directional Signs as defined within §
161.242.
      (10)   No part of any Off-Premise sign structure shall be closer to any
street right of way line than the street-side line of the nearest building
within 100 feet, nor closer than the building setback line in any case (Figure
9); (i.e. whichever is greater).
      (11)   When an Off-Premise Sign is erected between two buildings that are
within 100 feet of the sign structure, no part of said sign structure shall be
erected closer to any street right of way line than a line drawn from the
nearest front corners of the two buildings, nor closer than the building
setback line in any case (Figure 10); (i.e. whichever is greater).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2060.png]
 
      (12)   An Off-Premise Sign, including but not limited to, its location,
size, and proposed exterior lighting shall have general compatibility with
adjacent properties and other properties ans signs in the area; an Off-Premise
Sign shall not create or contribute to any condition that may adversely affect
traffic flow or traffic safety.
      (13)   Any Off-Premise Sign which fails to comply with the conditions as
provided herein or fails to obtain a Conditional Sign Permit shall be a
prohibited sign.
      (14)   Upon failure of a sign to comply with any of the foregoing
conditions at any time, the Conditional Sign Permit for said Sign shall be
subject to revocation and the violator shall be subject to such additional
penalties as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-126.19) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
CONDITIONAL SIGN PERMIT
§ 161.270 CONDITIONAL SIGN.
   (A)   A Conditional Sign is a sign permitted only with a conditional use and
includes off-premise signs, on-premise signs specifically described within the
Sign Regulations as requiring a conditional use, or an additional on-premise
sign not otherwise permitted by the Sign Regulations but which may be
appropriate because of a special circumstance or condition unique to a specific
property.
   (B)   After compliance with appropriate safeguards and these procedures
specified herein and payment of the applicable permit fee, the City Council may
permit as a Conditional Sign within a Zoning District precise sign types which
are not prohibited and which are described within the Sign Regulations (§§
161.240 through 161.258) for the particular Zoning District.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.1) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.271 CONDITIONAL SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   A Conditional Sign Permit is hereby defined to be legal authorization
to erect or place a Conditional Sign pursuant to authorization of the City
Council and in compliance with the procedures specified herein.
   (B)   The Permit shall be restricted to the specific sign (excluding
language content) and to the specific location for which the Conditional Sign
Permit is granted.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.2) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.272 PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL SIGN PERMIT.
   The Board of Appeals established by this Article shall hear and recommend
such Conditional Signs as permitted within the Sign Regulations, shall hear and
decide such questions as are involved in determining whether Conditional Signs
should be granted, and shall recommend Conditional Signs with such conditions
and safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance, or shall recommend
denial of Conditional Signs when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of
this Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.3) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.273 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.
   A Conditional Sign shall not be recommended by the Board of Appeals unless
and until:
   (A)   A written application for a Conditional Sign is submitted, indicating
the section of this Ordinance under which the Conditional Sign is sought and
stating the need or basis on which it is requested and providing a description
of the proposed sign and the location (including a legal description or Real
Estate Tax Property Index Number and street address) of the proposed sign and
indicating the zoning classification of the location. Application shall be made
on forms obtained from the City Clerk.
   (B)   Notice shall be given not less than 15 or more than 30 days in advance
of the public hearing. The petitioner, his agent, or attorney shall cause such
notice to be given in each of the following ways:
      (1)   The owner of the property for which the conditional sign is sought,
or his agent, shall be notified by mail as to the time, date, and place of
public hearing;
      (2)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, legal
description or Real Estate Tax Property Index Number of the property for which
the conditional sign is sought, the common street address, description of the
proposed conditional sign, and the zoning classification of the property shall
be printed in a newspaper of general circulation within Mt. Vernon;
      (3)   Notice of such hearing indicating the date, time, place, legal
description or Real Estate Tax Property Index Number of the property for which
the conditional sign is sought, the common address, description of the proposed
conditional sign, and the zoning classification of the property shall be posted
at the City Hall and in a prominent place on the property for which the
conditional sign is sought;
      (4)   The notice required herein to be posted upon the property affected
shall be in the following form:
         (a)   The basic form of notice shall be furnished by the City, shall
be a metal or other permanent sign with the main panel thereof being not less
than 18 inches by 24 inches in bold black or other conspicuous color. Such sign
shall remain the property of the City. The petitioner shall pay to the City a
deposit of $50, which shall be refunded after the hearing and after the
petitioner shall return the metal sign to the City. In the event that the
petitioner shall not return the metal sign, then the petitioner shall forfeit
the deposit.
         (b)   The notice shall bear the legend “PROPOSED CONDITIONAL SIGN -
THIS PROPERTY,” and shall have printed thereon the words “FOR INFORMATION PHONE
618/242-5000.” The notice shall further have affixed thereto a copy of the
notice which is published which shall be typed and shall further have a plastic
cover to protect such notice from the weather.
         (c)   The notice shall be posted so as to be conspicuous and visible
from the road or street nearest the principle structure on the property; and,
if there is no structure, then from the principle road or street adjacent
thereto.
         (d)   If the lot is a corner lot or through lot as defined by the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon then such notice shall be posted on
each side of the lot facing the street or road. In no event shall the notice be
posted more than 10 feet or less than 5 feet from each such street or road.
      (5)   Proof that each of the notices required herein has been given shall
be provided by the petitioner by delivering an authentic certificate of
publication of the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and
providing a verified certificate of posting and mailing as to the other notices
required herein.
   (C)   A public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by
agent or attorney.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.4) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.274 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall make a finding that it is empowered under
the section of this Ordinance described in the application to recommend to the
City Council the Conditional Sign and that the granting of the Conditional Sign
will not adversely affect the public interest; such finding may be made within
the Minutes of the Board of Appeals or within a separate Resolution or within a
combination of each.
   (B)   Before any conditional sign permit shall be recommended by the City
Council, the Board of Appeals shall make written findings within the Minutes of
the Board of Appeals or within a separate Resolution or within a combination of
each certifying compliance with the specific requirements governing individual
signs and certifying that satisfactory provision and arrangement have been made
concerning the following:
      (1)   The Conditional Sign, including but not limited to, its location,
size, and proposed exterior lighting has general compatibility with adjacent
properties and other properties and signs in the area.
      (2)   The Conditional Sign does not create or contribute to any condition
that may adversely affect traffic flow or traffic safety.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.5) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
§ 161.275 FINAL DECISION.
   After receiving the recommendation of the Board of Appeals, the City Council
shall grant or deny the application for Conditional Sign.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-127.6) (Ord. 2023-13, passed 3-6-2023)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 161.290 GENERALLY.
   The Performance Standards set forth in this ordinance are to provide
guidelines for the administration of this ordinance, and for developers
considering specified types of development permitted by this ordinance. The
Performance Standards herein described are in addition to the requirements set
forth in the Schedule of District Regulations.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-200)
§ 161.291 LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (R-1) AND (R-2).
   Planned unit developments for districts R1 and R2 shall be defined as
building or group of buildings situated on land which is under single ownership
or unified control and which is wholly residential in nature. Planned unit
developments for this district shall further meet the following criteria:
   (A)   Wholly residential development may be permitted a waiver of lot area,
yard requirements and height restrictions, providing: The general intent of the
district is not circumvented; consideration is given to adjoining property;
adequate vehicle circulation and off- street parking meeting the requirements
of the regulations for this district are provided; the density of development
does not exceed the density as indicated in the statement of intent for the
district; covenants to provide maintenance of commonly owned land and any
improvements or facilities thereon are found to be acceptable to the City
Council.
   (B)   Accessory uses including, but not limited to swimming pools, tennis
courts, golf courses, community centers and other recreational uses will be
permitted, but shall be limited to the residents of the planned unit
development and subject to their control. Any such accessory uses shall not be
of a commercial nature which are open to the general public.
   (C)   Planned unit developments shall also meet the requirements or the
intent of the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations. Development may be
staged, permits issued for each stage.
   (D)   The granting of a conditional use permit for a planned unit
development shall be valid for a period of 12 months from date of approval. If
substantial progress has not been made toward exercising the permit it shall
become null and void.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-201)
§ 161.292 HIGH DENSITY PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (R-3).
   Planned unit developments for R-3 district shall be defined as a building or
groups of buildings situated on land which is under single ownership or unified
control and which is either entirely residential in nature, or predominantly
residential in nature, but wherein various compatible uses hereinafter
indicated may be conducted. Planned unit developments for this district shall
further meet the following criteria:
   (A)   A waiver of lot area, yards, height and stories requirements may be
granted providing the total land area for wholly or predominantly residential
uses shall be equal to or more than the sum of the total of minimum lot areas
required per d.u. and minimum lot area per non- residential uses permitted in
this district. To insure that adequate open space is provided, the total land
for residential purposes required may not be infringed upon for parking for
non-residential purposes although common parking areas will be permitted.
   (B)   Adequate vehicular circulation and off-street parking meeting the
requirements of the regulations for this district are provided.
   (C)   The dwelling unit density for this district is not exceeded, and that
such density shall be based upon computations in §
161.291(A) as distinct from non-residential uses.
   (D)   Covenants to provide maintenance of commonly owned land and any
improvements thereon are found to be acceptable to the City Council.
   (E)   At least 250 square foot of recreational area per dwelling unit shall
be provided for recreational and playground purposes including but not limited
to swimming pools, tennis courts, golf putting green, tot lot, badminton,
community centers, and other recreational uses will be permitted, but shall be
limited to the residents of the planned unit development and subject to their
control. Any such accessory uses shall not be of a commercial nature which are
open to the general public. This required recreational area may be part of the
open space computed in (A) above.
   (F)   Planned unit developments shall also meet the requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations. Development may be staged, permits issued for each
stage.
   (G)   Permitted non-residential uses shall be limited to the following, and
shall be situated so as not to conflict with the residential portion(s) of the
development: parking areas for uses in less restricted districts; kindergarten
or day nursery; offices of Physicians, Dentists, Architects, Attorneys,
Accountants, Engineers, Real Estate, Insurance, Urban Planning, Welfare and
Charitable Services, and other offices deemed to be compatible by the Planning
Commission; Music, Art, or Dancing Schools; Barber and Beauty Shops; Museum and
Art Galleries; Laundromat; Coffee Shop or Restaurant; Drug Stores.
   (H)   The granting of a conditional use permit for a planned unit
development shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of approval.
If substantial progress has not been made toward exercising the permit it shall
become null and void.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-202)
§ 161.293 PLANNED MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENTS (R-MH).
   (A)   Planned Manufactured Home Developments are permitted as a matter of
right in districts zoned as Planned Manufactured Home Districts (R-MH).
However, to implement the Statement of Intent for this district in the Schedule
of District Regulations the following standards shall be met by any applicant
for rezoning.
      (1)   The proposed development shall be located so that it shall not be
necessary for excessive traffic movement from the development to pass through
an existing single family residential area or an area designated in the
Comprehensive Plan solely for single family residential development. The
proposed development shall have direct access onto a public road that will
accommodate the projected traffic arising from the development.
      (2)   The property shall be convenient to schools, developments, and
shopping facilities.
      (3)   The property is not within an area used nor planned for industrial
development, nor will the occupants of the proposed development be in any way
adversely affected by nearby existing or planned industrial uses.
   (B)   Site Requirements:
      (1)   Recreation or open sites shall be provided for each manufactured
home development. Open site may be provided in more than one location, but no
location shall contain less than two thousand (2,000) square feet. Each
recreational site shall be accessible to all of the manufactured home sites in
the development, and shall not be used for any other purpose. Each development
should provide a minimum of 8 percent of the gross acreage for such open site
for recreational purposes.
      (2)   Each site for manufactured homes shall have a minimum of 5,000
square feet, except as provided with §
157.09.
      (3)   The minimum distance required for the separation of a manufactured
home from any other manufactured home shall be 15 feet. Front set back
requirement within a manufactured home development shall be a minimum of 10
feet from private road. For entire manufactured home development, set back
requirements shall be a minimum of 15 feet from a public street, or within 5
feet of any side or rear yard line of the manufactured home development. No
accessory building shall be placed within the setback areas described above.
The setback requirement required herein shall not be subject to variance.
   (C)   Access and Street Requirements:
      (1)   All manufactured home sites must be served from internal private
streets within the manufactured home development and there shall be no direct
access from a manufactured home site to a public street or alley.
      (2)   A minimum of two (2) off-street parking sites shall be provided for
each manufactured home site. Guest parking in the ratio of one parking space
per five (5) manufactured home sites shall be interspersed throughout the
manufactured home development; guest off-street parking requirements may be met
by off-street parking sites within the driveway of an individual manufactured
home site (after minimum off-street parking for that site has been met). Each
parking space shall comply with the requirements of §
161.210, Definition of “Parking Space, Off-Street”.
      (3)   All internal private streets shall be a minimum of 24 feet in
width, exclusive of the required parking areas, and shall contain concrete
curbs and gutters or acceptable gutters on both sides of the street. All areas
used by automobiles shall be paved and meet the requirements of the City of Mt.
Vernon.
      (4)   No internal private street access to public streets shall be
located closer than 100 feet to any public street intersection.
      (5)   All interior cul de sac streets shall have a minimum outside
turning radius of 38 feet.
      (6)   All corners shall have a minimum 15 feet radii.
      (7)   All streets shall be lighted in accordance to the standards of the
City of Mt. Vernon and the State of Illinois Department of Public Health Rules
and Regulations for mobile home parks.
      (8)   Stop signs shall be placed at all public street intersections.
Yield signs placed appropriately on internal private streets.
      (9)   Dedication of all necessary rights-of-way to conform to the
requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan shall be offered free of charge to the
proper jurisdiction.
   (D)   Landscaping Required: A landscaping plan of the proposed development
including at least one tree per manufactured home site of at least 1-1/2”
caliper measured 3’ above the ground, shall be submitted for approval by the
Plan Commission. All open sites shall be landscaped and include a permanent
means of maintenance. No more than 30 percent of the landscaped area may be
maintained in ornamental rock or gravel.
   (E)   Sign Requirements. Signs proposed for any manufactured home
development shall be subject to architectural review of the Plan Commission,
and may be indirectly or internally lighted, but shall not be flashing, moving,
or have the illusion of flashing or moving. Incidental signs shall not exceed 1
square foot in area per sign, with a height limit of 4 feet; and one (1) 16
square foot development directory for each manufactured home development.
   (F)   Other Requirements:
      (1)   Applicant shall comply with applicable requirements of the
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Mt. Vernon (Chapter 159 of the Revised
Code of Ordinances).
      (2)   All utilities (including without limitation sewer, water, gas, oil,
telephone, T.V. and internet service lines) within the manufactured home
development shall be placed underground and shall comply with all applicable
laws, codes, and regulations.
      (3)   All manufactured home developments shall comply with Chapter 157 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances.
      (4)   Additional development requirements may be prescribed as conditions
when such requirements are determined by the Planning Department to be
necessary to ensure the protection of the character of the neighboring
properties, the compatibility of land uses, and the health and safety of
manufactured home development occupants.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-203)
§ 161.294 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USES (I-I).
   (A)   SMOKE - A light industrial use shall meet such requirements as are
imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable
state or federal law.
   (B)   ODOR - No light industrial use may release an odor that is detectable
at the lot line.
   (C)   TOXIC MATERIALS - For a light industrial use, the emission of toxic
and noxious materials may not produce any concentration at a residence or
business district boundary line exceeding 3% of the threshold limit values for
toxic material in industry as set forth in “Threshold Limit Values” for the
current year, as adopted at the annual meeting of the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
   (D)   GLARE AND HEAT - No light industrial use may cause heat at the lot
line so intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard. No such use may cause
illumination at or beyond any residence district boundary in excess of 0.1 foot
candle (see footnote (2)).
   (E)   PARTICULATE MATTER (see footnote (3)) - A light industrial use shall
meet such requirements as are imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency or other applicable state or federal law.
      (1)   Footnote (2) The term FOOT CANDLE means a unit of illumination
equal to the illumination at all points that are 1 foot from a uniform point
source of one candle power.
      (2)   Footnote (3) The term PARTICULATE MATTER means a divided liquid or
solid material that is discharged and carried along in the air.
   (F)   VIBRATION - No light industrial use may cause, at the lot in
continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the limits set forth in column I
of the following table. Nor may it cause, at any residence district boundary,
continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the limits set forth in column II.
                              I                      II
Frequency (cycles per second) Displacement4 (inches) Displacement4 (inches)
More than But not more than
                              I                      II
Frequency (cycles per second) Displacement4 (inches) Displacement4 (inches)
More than But not more than
0         10                  0.0008                 0.0004
10        20                  0.0005                 0.0002
20        30                  0.0002                 0.0001
30        40                  0.0002                 0.0001
40        50                  0.0001                 0.0001
50                            0.0001                 0.0001
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce
higher than twice the displacement specified in the table.
Footnote (4) DISPLACEMENT means the maximum amount of motion in any direction
as determined by any three component (simultaneous) measuring system approved
by the Commission; and “three component measuring system” means
instrumentation that can measure earthborne vibrations in a horizontal as
well as a vertical plane.
 
   (G)   Noise (see footnote (5) in the table below) - At no boundary of a
residence or business district may the sound pressure level of any light
industrial use (except for background noises produced by sources not under
control of this ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other
transportation facilities) exceed the following decibel limits:
                              I                       II
Octave Band Frequency (cycles
per second)                   Maximum Permitted Sound Maximum Permitted Sound
                              Level (decibels) Along  Level (decibels) Along
More Than But Not More Than   Residence District      Business District
                              Boundaries              Boundaries
                              I                       II
Octave Band Frequency (cycles
per second)                   Maximum Permitted Sound Maximum Permitted Sound
                              Level (decibels) Along  Level (decibels) Along
More Than But Not More Than   Residence District      Business District
                              Boundaries              Boundaries

20        75                  72                      79
75        150                 67                      74
150       300                 59                      66
300       600                 52                      59
600       1200                46                      53
1200      2400                40                      47
2400      4800                34                      41
4800      -                   32                      39
The prescribed limits of column I apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At
other times, the allowable levels in each octave band are each reduced by 6
decibels.
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave
band filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the Flat
C network of the sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave
band analyzer. Impulsive noises are subject to the performance standards
prescribed by this section if they cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of
the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus 2
decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as irregular and
intermittent noises, shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
Footnote (5) OCTAVE BAND means all the frequencies from one frequency to a
second. In sound octave bands, the second frequency is usually twice the
first one; and “octave band filter” means an electrical device that separates
the sounds in each octave band and presents them to the sound level meter.
 
   (H)   Fire Hazards (see footnote (6).
      (1)   Solid substances ranging from free or active burning may be stored,
used, or manufactured only within completely enclosed buildings having
incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire
extinguishing system.
      (2)   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids or
materials which produce flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshal. A
certificate of compliance, issued by the State Fire Marshal’s Office, stating
that the plan and specifications for a light or general industrial use comply
with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshal shall accompany the
application for a certificate of zoning compliance.
      (2)   Footnote (6) FREE BURNING means a rate of combustion described by a
substance that burns actively and easily supports combustion; and “Intense
burning” means a rate of combustion described by a substance that burns with a
high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
   (I)   Detonation Materials -
      (1)   No activity involving the storage, use, or manufacturing of
materials that decompose by detonation may be carried on except in accordance
with the rules issued by the State Fire Marshal.
      (2)   These materials include primary explosives such as lead azide, lead
styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX,
PETN, and picric acid; propellants and their components, such as
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives;
pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate, and
potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine;
unstable organic compounds, such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and ozonides;
strong oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates,
chlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and
nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as
uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
   (J)   Exceptions -
      (1)   These performance standards do not apply to: Site preparation or
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or improvement of buildings,
structures, equipment, or other improvements on or within the lot line;
      (2)   The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the
transportation of personnel, materials, or products;
      (3)   Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire, explosion,
accident, failure, or breakdown;
      (4)   Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the
protection of life, limb, or property; or
      (5)   Processes for which there are no known means of control.
      (6)   Research shall be promptly conducted to discover methods of control
leading to the installation of protective equipment.
   (K)   Open Storage - Open storage of materials shall be kept in a neat and
orderly manner. Open storage shall be limited to no more than 50% of the open
storage area, and shall not exceed 5’ 0” in height. All open areas shall be
screened from public view by a fence of at least 6’ 0” in height. All open
storage areas shall be paved with a dust free surface.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-204)
§ 161.295 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USES (I-2).
   (A)   Smoke - a general industrial use shall meet such requirements as are
imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable
state or federal law.
   (B)   Odor - No general industrial use may release an odor that is
detectable at the lot line.
   (C)   TOXIC MATERIALS - For general industrial use, the emission of toxic
and noxious materials may not produce any concentration at a residence or
business district boundary line exceeding 10 percent of the threshold limit
values for toxic materials in industry as set forth in “Threshold Limit Values”
for the current year, as adopted at the annual meeting of the American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
   (D)   GLARE AND HEAT - No general industrial use may cause heat at the lot
line so intense as to be a public nuisance or hazard. No such use may cause
illumination at or beyond any residence district boundary in excess of 0.1
footcandle8. (For footnote (8), see footnote (2) in §
161.294.)
   (E)   PARTICULATE MATTER9. A general industrial use shall meet such
requirements as are imposed by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or
other applicable state or federal law. (For footnote (9), see footnote (3) in §
161.294.)
   (F)   VIBRATION - No general industrial: use may cause at any business
district boundary continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the limits set
forth in Column l of the following table. Nor may it cause at any residence or
Mobile Home district boundary continuous earthborne vibrations higher than the
limits set forth in column II.
                              I                       II
Frequency (cycles per second) Displacement10 (inches) Displacement10 (inches)
More than But not more than
                              I                       II
Frequency (cycles per second) Displacement10 (inches) Displacement10 (inches)
More than But not more than
0         10                  0.002                   0.0004
10        20                  0.001                   0.0002
20        30                  0.0006                  0.0001
30        40                  0.0004                  0.0001
40        50                  0.0003                  0.0001
50                            0.0002                  0.0001
Discrete pulses that do not exceed 100 impulses per minute may not produce
higher than twice the displacement specified in the table
10See Footnote Number (4) in §
161.294
 
   (G)   NOISE11 - At no boundary of a residence or business district may the
sound pressure level of any general industrial use (except for background
noises produced by sources not under control of this ordinance, such as the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the
following decibel limits. (For footnote (11), see footnote (5) in §
161.294.)
                              I                       II
Octave Band Frequency (cycles
per second)                   Maximum Permitted Sound Maximum Permitted Sound
                              Level (decibels) Along  Level (decibels) Along
More than But not more than   Residence District      Residence District
                              Boundaries              Boundaries
                              I                       II
Octave Band Frequency (cycles
per second)                   Maximum Permitted Sound Maximum Permitted Sound
                              Level (decibels) Along  Level (decibels) Along
More than But not more than   Residence District      Residence District
                              Boundaries              Boundaries

20        75                  72                      79
75        150                 67                      74
150       300                 59                      66
300       600                 52                      59
600       1200                46                      53
1200      2400                40                      47
2400      4800                34                      41
4800      -                   32                      39
The prescribed limits of column I apply between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. At
other times, the allowable levels in each octave band are each reduced by 6
decibels.
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave
band filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the Flat
C network of the sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave
band analyzer. Impulsive noises are subject to the performance standards
prescribed by this section if they cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of
the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus 2
decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as irregular and
intermittent noises, shall be controlled so as not to be a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
 
   (H)   FIRE HAZARDS12 -
      (1)   Solid substances ranging from free or active burning to intense
burning may be stored, used, or manufactured only within completely enclosed
buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an
automatic fire extinguishing system.
      (2)   The storage utilization, or manufacturing of flammable liquids or
materials which produce flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshal. A
certificate of compliance, issued by the State Fire Marshal’s Office, stating
that the plans and specifications for a light or general industrial use comply
with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshal shall accompany the
application for certificate of zoning compliance.
      (3)   For footnote (12), see footnote (6) in §
161.294.
   (I)   DETONATION MATERIALS - No activity involving the storage, use, or
manufacturing of materials that decompose by detonation may be carried on
except in accordance with the rules issued by the State Fire Marshal. These
materials include primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates, and tetracene; high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and
picric acid; propellants and their components, such as nitrocellulose, black
powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fire
works such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate;
blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine, unstable organic
compounds such as acetylines, tetrazoles, and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents
such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorics, chlorates, and hydrogen
peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as Uranium 235
and Plutonium 239.
   (J)   EXCEPTIONS -
      (1)   These performance standards do not apply to: Site preparation or
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, or improvement of buildings,
structures, equipment or other improvements on or within the lot line;
      (2)   The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for the
transportation of personnel, materials, or products; Conditions beyond the
control of the user such as fire, explosion, accident, failure, or breakdown;
      (3)   Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary for the
protection of life, limb or property;
      (4)   or processes for which there is no known means of control.
      (5)   Research shall be promptly conducted to discover methods of control
leading to the installation of protective equipment.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-205)
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 161.310 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The headings in the following Schedule of District Regulations are
self-explanatory. However, prior to any reference to the Schedule, refer to the
following General Statement of Intent which is to be used as a guide in any
interpretation of the various Statements of Intent and Regulations for Land Use
Districts established by this Ordinance.
   (B)   GENERAL STATEMENT OF INTENT.
      (1)   The zoning districts hereby established are to effect a plan of
land use which will:
         (a)   Create order out of chaos.
         (b)   Be based upon existing land use.
         (c)   Provide a pleasant and economical living environment for
inhabitants of the Community through the establishment of a variety of
districts to meet individual preferences and overall community needs.
         (d)   Utilize governmental and public utilities facilities in the most
economical manner possible which in turn should provide the most service for
the least cost.
         (e)   Preserve and enhance property values throughout the community by
keeping like and compatible uses together, and to separate incompatible uses
from each other by designation on the ZONING DISTRICT MAP which is an integral
part of this Ordinance.
      (2)   Land values are highest in the Central Business District Area
(CBD), and diminish as the distance from the CBO increases. Therefore, it is
the purpose and intent of this Ordinance to conserve, protect, enhance, and
utilize to the fullest extent possible these land values which the community
has created. Consequently, in establishing these districts, the general
objectives are to:
         (a)   utilize the existing CBD as the starting point and allowing
within the CBD only appropriate uses,
         (b)   land adjacent to the CBD should permit high density (more people
per acre) residential uses, and
         (c)   land further out to be utilized for lower density residential
purposes.
      (3)   Existing ownership of land is generally in relatively small lot
sizes and which often will be non-conforming to this ordinance. To implement
the general intent of this ordinance, it is hoped that consolidation of these
smaller parcels will be achieved either through private acquisition or some
type of privately owned but unified control, and that planned developments will
be the rule rather than the exception, especially in non-residential areas.
      (4)   (a)   Portions of the existing thoroughfare network are the logical
place for certain types of commercial uses, but should only be permitted in
certain compact spots not only for their own welfare, but for the welfare of
the entire community and its inhabitants. Land for industrial purposes should
be provided, but location should be determined by
            1.   existing industrial uses,
            2.   relationships to the other land use districts, and
            3.   supporting transportation facilities in the thoroughfare
system of the community.
         (b)   The intent for the remaining variety of land uses are stated in
the individual statement of intent for each district. Perpetuation of non-
conformities to the various Land Use Districts will be discouraged in the
administration and interpretation of this ordinance.
      (5)   It is further intended that in the territorial limits outside the
City limits the General Agriculture district be utilized as far as is practical
until residential, commercial or industrial development is proposed as the case
may be. It is also intended that any development proposed in the territorial
limits outside the City limits be considered in conjunction with annexation
agreements.
   (C)   THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
      (1)   The City of Mt. Vernon officially adopted a Comprehensive Plan on
February 17, 1964. It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that the
Comprehensive Plan and its subsequent officially adopted amendments be the
guide for any development in the jurisdiction of this ordinance.
      (2)   In the event of any proposed amendment to this Zoning Ordinance
which is in contradiction to the Comprehensive Plan, such amendment shall be
preceded by an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300)
§ 161.311 LAND USE DISTRICTS LISTED.
A-G      General Agriculture
F P      Flood Plain
R-1      Low Density Residential
R-2      Medium Density Residential
R-M2     Medium Density Residential & Mobile Home
R-3      High Density Residential
R-MH     Planned Manufactured/Mobile Home
B-1      Primary Business
B-2      Secondary Business
B-3      Interchange Business
B-PL     Planned Business
I-1      Light Industrial
I-2      General Industrial
I-A      Industrial Agricultural
IPCA-PUD Industrial Park Conservation Area
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300)
§ 161.312 A-G GENERAL AGRICULTURE.
   (A)   A-G Land Use District Statement of Intent. It is the intent of this
district to provide land for purposes devoted primarily to the production of
agricultural products such as field crops, livestock, fowl and other
conventional agricultural pursuits. This district is also created to assist in
the conservation of the natural resources within the jurisdiction of this
ordinance by encouraging practices which will conserve soil, soil resources,
water, water resources, and prevent soil erosion and floodwater damages.
Utilities other than electricity and telephone should be provided by the land
user thereby discouraging the uneconomical extension of public water supply and
sewage disposal facilities. Uses not related to Agriculture are discouraged.
When the public interest will be served and only when a contribution will be
made to orderly growth, portions of this district may be rezoned for
alternative uses.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (1)   Building and enclosed pens for livestock, fowl and animals shall
not be closer than 200’ from any adjoining district.
      (2)   Principal and accessory buildings shall not be closer than 100’
from any adjoining parcel.
      (3)   Principal and accessory buildings shall not be closer than 50’ from
any adjoining parcel.
      (4)   Principal, accessory buildings and operations shall not be closer
than 500’ from any adjoining parcel.
      (5)   See State Law.
      (6)   See definition of Home Occupation.
      (7)   Principal, accessory buildings and operations shall not be closer
than 100’ from any adjoining parcel.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Agriculture and Agriculture buildings in connection with a bona
fide farm operation. See Note (1).
         (b)   Cemeteries.
         (c)   Churches. See Note (3).
         (d)   Essential Services.
         (e)   Forest Preserves.
         (f)   Single Family Farm Dwellings.
         (g)   Wireless communication facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (h)   Municipally Owned Parks and Recreational Areas.
         (i)   Public Secondary Schools.
         (j)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same
parcel including:
         (a)   Residential garages.
         (b)   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
         (c)   Home occupations. See Note (6).
         (d)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, but only with a Conditional Use
Permit.
         (e)   Roadside produce stands in conjunction with a bonafide farm.
         (f)   Kennel.
      (3)   Conditional Uses: After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Sale of Greenhouse products grown on premises.
         (b)   Riding Stables. See Note (1).
         (c)   Raising, breeding and boarding of non-farm fowl and animals. See
Note (1).
         (d)   Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun club or related operation.
         (e)   Railroad.
         (f)   Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race track. See Notes (1),
(4).
         (g)   Penal or Correctional Institution. See Note (2).
         (h)   Airport or Heliport. See Note (5).
         (i)   Commercial agricultural storage operations.
         (j)   Public utility substation; Energy Park; Wind Farm, Park or
Plant; for Commercial Solar Energy Facility - see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
         (k)   Public sewage disposal plant or public water plant. See Note
(4).
         (l)   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facility as described within
§§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (m)   Sanitary landfill or other qualified disposal system. See Note
(7).
         (n)   Commercial Radio or Television Station.
         (o)   Mineral extractive operations outside corporate limits,
including but not limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand and the related
processing operations, storing and sale of such materials. (4)
         (p)   Travel Trailer Park.
         (q)   Truck Terminal or Equipment Terminal, but only as an accessory
use to a Permitted Use.
         (r)   Cannabis Cultivation Center or Cannabis Craft Grower (must be
1500 feet distance between each use as measured from each property line).
      (5)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Mobile Homes.
         (b)   Non-farm dwellings.
         (c)   Junk Yard.
         (d)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (e)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (f)   Mineral extractive operations within corporate limits.
         (g)   Truck Stop.
      (6)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 5 acres, except for: churches and cemeteries in
which case 2 acres; and conditional uses as determined by the Planning
Commission.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 80’ along Federal Highway, 60’ along
other public roads.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 100’.
         (e)   100’ MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1000 Sq. Ft.
         (f)   MAX. HEIGHT: 40’ except barns and silos.
         (g)   MAX. STORIES: 3.
         (h)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (7)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use                                      parking spaces loading spaces
Dwelling unit                                 2              0
Home Occupation                               +1             0
Churches per 4 seats in main auditorium       1              0
Sanitary landfill or other qualified disposal 1              0
plant per 3 employees
 
      (8)   All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are
subject to the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.313 F-P FLOOD PLAIN.
   (A)   F-P Land Use District Statement of Intent. It is the intent of this
district to delineate reasonable high water marks within the jurisdiction of
this ordinance. For reasons of health, safety and the general welfare, it is in
the public interest to permit only limited types of uses within these areas
which are subject to flooding and require emergency services. A factor
recognized in determining reasonable high water marks is that as urban land use
increases, storm water runoff will also tend to increase, consequently taxing
the water carrying capacity of certain low lying areas within the jurisdiction
of this ordinance. The development of roads, streets, highways, water and sewer
lines are discouraged in this district, as such improvements would tend to
encourage further developments.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (1)   Building and enclosed pens for livestock, fowl and animals shall
not be closer than 200’ from any adjoining district.
      (2)   Principal, accessory buildings and operations shall not be closer
than 500’ from any adjoining parcel.
      (3)   See State Law.   
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Agriculture and Customary Agricultural buildings and structures.
See Note (1).
         (b)   Parks & Playgrounds.
         (c)   Airport or Heliport. See Note (3).
         (d)   Stadium or Coliseum. See Note (2).
         (e)   Horse or Auto race track. See Note (1).
         (f)   Essential Services.
         (g)   One artificial lake of 3 acres or less.
         (h)   Wireless communication facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (i)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted uses and
structures and on the same parcel.
         (b)   One artificial lake of 3 acres or less.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Accessory uses of permitted principal uses in adjoining
districts (such as parking lots, golf courses, etc.) and which are compatible
with the statement of intent for this district.
         (b)   Freestanding wireless communication facility as described within
§§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (c)   May be used to meet area requirements of adjoining districts if
on the same parcel.
         (d)   Drive In Theater.
         (e)   More than one artificial lake of 3 acres or less.
         (f)   Artificial lake of 3 or more acres depending on recommendation
of qualified agricultural engineer.
         (g)   If it can demonstrated to the City Council that such land is or
may be adequately drained and that the water table elevation will permit
successful utilization of the land, and if a hydraulic study is submitted from
a qualified hydraulic engineer providing the proposed use will not impede the
flow of water nor increase the flow velocity onto downstream properties, a
permit may be granted for a use which is compatible, contiguous and subject to
the regulations governing the adjoining district(s). Adequate drainage and
necessary supporting structures shall be installed prior to the use & occupancy
of the land.
         (h)   Mineral extractive operations outside corporate limits,
including but not limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand and the related
processing operations, storing and sale of such materials. (2)
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limit to:
         (a)   Residential Dwellings farm or non-farm.
         (b)   Commercial structures.
         (c)   Industrial Structures except mineral extractions.
         (d)   Railroads.
         (e)   Mobile Homes.
         (f)   Travel Trailers.
         (g)   Landfills.
         (h)   Filling to raise the area above high water elevation.
         (i)   Mineral extractive operations within corporate limits.
         (j)   Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 4 acres, except for: parks and playgrounds, in
which case 1 acre; Heliports, 2 acres.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 200’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 60’.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 60’ MIN.
         (e)   SIDE YARD WIDTH: 30’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1000 Sq. Ft.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 40’.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: 3.
         (i)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use parking spaces loading spaces
 
      (7)   Permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are subject to the
Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to recommendation of
administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.314 R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   R-1 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   It is the intent of this district to provide land within and in
some cases adjacent to the corporate limits of the community for single family
residential purposes. Persons residing in this district prefer and are entitled
to maximum protection from the encroachment of other types of uses which are
not appropriate to residential areas. Other reasons for the establishment of
this district are: to maintain a quiet atmosphere within the district; to
discourage incompatible uses within the district. Care has been taken and shall
be taken in the delineation and expansion of this district to assure that
adequate public water is available and that individual sewage disposal systems
will not be required.
      (2)   Maximum density: 4.0 D.U. per gross acre.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258.
      (1)   All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed by a four foot
chain link or 6 foot privacy fence approved by the Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.   
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Single family residential units.
         (b)   Parks, public schools and recreation buildings; libraries and
public buildings.
         (c)   Small Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300’ from another Small Community Residence
and that prior to occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
         (d)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through 161.3778.
         (e)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same
parcel.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of 10 acres
provided that any such planned unit development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the Thoroughfare Plan for the City. Provided
further, if the proposed development is only for a portion of contiguous
landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing anticipated uses, densities
and circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns for the entire property
shall be submitted with the application. Planned unit developments shall meet
performance standards of §
161.291 of this ordinance.
         (b)   Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the commercial or
manufacturing zones, when incidental to such permitted uses.
         (c)   Public Utility Facilities.
         (d)   Churches or private schools and subordinate uses related
thereto.
         (e)   Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
         (f)   Fire Stations.
         (g)   Kennel.
         (h)   Historical Museum Park.
         (i)   Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
         (j)   Small Community Residence whose lot line is located less than
300 feet from the lot line of another Small Community Residence, provided that
the Planning Commission for the City finds that the cumulative effect of such
use would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, would not
create an institutional setting, and its operation would not create an adverse
effect upon surrounding properties, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (k)   “Weddings and Private Receptions Venue”; said Conditional Use
shall be subject to the following requirements:
            1.   minimum lot size shall be 25 acres;
            2.   a Site Plan shall be submitted and made part of the
Conditional Use showing exact location, square footage, and usage of all
structures, parking, and other improvements, and thereafter no existing
structure, parking, or improvement shall be increased in size nor shall an
additional structure, parking, or other improvement be placed upon the premises
and no change in use of a structure, parking, or improvement shall be made
without subsequent amendment of the Conditional Use, provided that the
Conditional Use may be abandoned in its entirety whereupon the property may be
used for Permitted Uses within its applicable Zoning Classification without
additional Council action;
            3.   no permanent residency by any person is permitted upon the
premises;
            4.   temporary occupancy, including overnight, by a wedding party
and/or wedding party guests for a wedding upon the premises or for a wedding at
another location corresponding to the duration of the wedding or reception
events is permitted, but no other overnight occupancy is permitted;
            5.   all events upon the premises shall be private gatherings for
invited guests only and shall not be open to the general public;
            6.   the minimum setback from streets for all yards with street
frontage shall be 700 feet and the setback area shall be a green landscaped
area only, except for permitted signage, with no variance permitted, provided
the City Council may increase the setback as necessary to protect adjoining
residential uses;
            7.   the area for parking during an event shall be in the rear yard
upon parking spaces improved for such purpose and shall be situated so as to
reasonably minimize visibility from any public street;
            8.   no building within a side or rear yard shall be placed within
150 feet of the property line of an adjoining owner, with no variance
permitted, provided the City Council may increase said 150 foot setback as
necessary to protect adjoining residential uses;
            9.   no signage shall be permitted except signage permitted within
§
161.249(C) of the Revised Code, provided that in no event shall any
illuminated, animated, or moving sign or electronic message center or temporary
sign be permitted;
            10.   no outdoor event shall be permitted upon the premises except
during the hours from 9 a.m. until 11 p.m.;
            11.   between the hours of 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. no event shall
produce amplified sound which is plainly audible across a property boundary
line of the premises at a distance of more than 200 feet from said property
line, and at all other times no amplified sound shall be audible across a
property boundary line of the premises;
            12.   no strobe, flashing, party, laser, or similar effects
lighting shall be directly visible from any street or from any adjoining
property;
            13.   an employee of the Weddings and Private Receptions Venue must
be upon the premises at all times during an event and all events shall be under
the supervision and responsibility of the employee; and
            14.   such additional conditions as determined by the City Council
to be necessary to protect adjoining residential uses.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses.
         (a)   Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones including, but
not limit to:
         (b)   Mobile Homes (except nonresidential church uses where permitted
by conditional use approval).
         (c)   Commercial uses.
         (d)   Industrial uses.
         (e)   Mineral Extractive Operation.
         (f)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (g)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (h)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop.
         (i)   Sign Off Site.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 10,000 Sq. Ft.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 70’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD: 25’.
         (d)   MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on each side but shall not be
less than 8’ and need not be more than 15’.
         (e)   MIN. REAR YARD: 25’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,200 Sq. Ft. exclusive of garage.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 30’ MAX. STORIES: 2.
         (h)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
Land use                                        parking spaces loading spaces
Residential dwellings on neighborhood streets   2
If lots face on a collector or arterial street  4
Fire station per two employees on maximum shift 1
Schools, per four seats in Main auditorium      1              0
All employees and visitors for a Historical Museum Park shall have off-street
parking.
 
      (7)   All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are
subject to the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.315 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   R-2 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   It is the intent of this district to provide land within and in
some cases adjacent to the corporate limits of the community for single and two
family residential purposes. Persons and families residing in this district are
entitled to protection from the encroachment of other types of uses which are
not appropriate to medium density residential area: In relation to R-
1 Districts (low density residential), R-2 Districts provide for higher traffic
flow; maintain a relatively quiet atmosphere; discourage incompatible uses;
provide less but adequate open space. Care has been taken and shall be taken in
the delineation and expansion of this district to assure that adequate public
water is available and that individual sewage disposal systems will not be
required.
      (2)   Maximum density: 6.5 D.U. per gross acre.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (1)   All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed by a four foot
chain link or 6 foot privacy fence approved by the Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Dwellings, single family.
         (b)   Parks, public schools and recreation buildings; libraries and
public buildings.
         (c)   Small Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300’ from another Small Community Residence
and that prior to occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
         (d)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (e)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same
parcel.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Dwellings: Two-family.
         (b)   Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of 10 acres
provided that any such planned unit development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the Thoroughfare Plan for the City. Provided
further, if the proposed development is only for a portion of contiguous
landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing anticipated uses, densities
and circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns for the entire property
shall be submitted with the application. Planned unit developments shall meet
performance standards of §
161.291 of this ordinance.
         (c)   Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the commercial or
manufacturing zones, when incidental to such permitted uses.
         (d)   Public Utility Facilities.
         (e)   Churches or private schools and subordinate uses related
thereto.
         (f)   Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
         (g)   Fire Stations.
         (h)   Hospital or Nursing Home.
         (i)   Funeral Homes.
         (j)   Public Libraries.
         (k)   Kennel.
         (l)   Historical Museum Park.
         (m)   Small Community Residence whose lot line is located less than
300 feet from the lot line of another Small Community Residence, provided that
the Planning Commission for the City finds that the cumulative effect of such
use would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, would not
create an institutional setting, and its operation would not create an adverse
effect upon surrounding properties, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (n)   Large Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
residence shall be located not less than 300 feet from the lot line of a Small
or Large Community Residence. The spacing requirement may be varied (lessened)
but such variance shall require a finding by the Planning Commission that the
cumulative effect of such uses would not alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional setting, and, by its operation,
would not create an adverse effect upon surrounding properties; and further
provided that prior to admitting residents the operator of such residence shall
demonstrate that the dwelling will comply with all applicable licensing
standards, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is
applied for and received.
         (o)   Adult Day Care.
         (p)   Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
         (q)   “Weddings and Private Receptions Venue”; said Conditional Use
shall be subject to the following requirements:
            1.   minimum lot size shall be 25 acres;
            2.   a Site Plan shall be submitted and made part of the
Conditional Use showing exact location, square footage, and usage of all
structures, parking, and other improvements, and thereafter no existing
structure, parking, or improvement shall be increased in size nor shall an
additional structure, parking, or other improvement be placed upon the premises
and no change in use of a structure, parking, or improvement shall be made
without subsequent amendment of the Conditional Use, provided that the
Conditional Use may be abandoned in its entirety whereupon the property may be
used for Permitted Uses within its applicable Zoning Classification without
additional Council action;
            3.   no permanent residency by any person is permitted upon the
premises;
            4.   temporary occupancy, including overnight, by a wedding party
and/or wedding party guests for a wedding upon the premises or for a wedding at
another location corresponding to the duration of the wedding or reception
events is permitted, but no other overnight occupancy is permitted;
            5.   all events upon the premises shall be private gatherings for
invited guests only and shall not be open to the general public;
            6.   the minimum setback from streets for all yards with street
frontage shall be 700 feet and the setback area shall be a green landscaped
area only, except for permitted signage, with no variance permitted, provided
the City Council may increase the setback as necessary to protect adjoining
residential uses;
            7.   the area for parking during an event shall be in the rear yard
upon parking spaces improved for such purpose and shall be situated so as to
reasonably minimize visibility from any public street;
            8.   no building within a side or rear yard shall be placed within
150 feet of the property line of an adjoining owner, with no variance
permitted, provided the City Council may increase said 150 foot setback as
necessary to protect adjoining residential uses;
            9.   no signage shall be permitted except signage permitted within
§
161.249(C) of the Revised Code, provided that in no event shall any
illuminated, animated, or moving sign or electronic message center or temporary
sign be permitted;
            10.   no outdoor event shall be permitted upon the premises except
during the hours from 9 a.m. until 11 p.m.;
            11.   between the hours of 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. no event shall
produce amplified sound which is plainly audible across a property boundary
line of the premises at a distance of more than 200 feet from said property
line, and at all other times no amplified sound shall be audible across a
property boundary line of the premises;
            12.   no strobe, flashing, party, laser, or similar effects
lighting shall be directly visible from any street or from any adjoining
property;
            13.   an employee of the Weddings and Private Receptions Venue must
be upon the premises at all times during an event and all events shall be under
the supervision and responsibility of the employee; and
            14.   such additional conditions as determined by the City Council
to be necessary to protect adjoining residential uses.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Mobile Homes.
         (b)   Commercial uses.
         (c)   Industrial uses.
         (d)   Mineral Extractive Operation.
         (e)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (f)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (g)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. ft. per single family dwelling unit and
boarding houses; 3,300 sq. ft. per DU in 2-family structures; 7,000 sq. ft. for
uses other than residential.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD: 15’ or the average front yard of parcels where
structures exist in the same block, on the same side of the street at the time
a building permit is issued.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD: 15’.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on each side but shall not be
less than 8’ and need not be more than 15’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per dwelling unit exclusive of
garages: 1 & 2 Family - 800 each. Nonresidential: 1,000 sq. ft.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 35’ MAX. STORIES: 3 MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use                                          parking spaces loading spaces
Each dwelling unit of 900 sq. ft. or more         2
Each dwelling unit under 900 sq. ft.              1.5
Fire station per 2 employees on working shift     1.5
Libraries per 2 employees plus 1 per 6 reading or 1
studying chairs
Schools, per 4 seats in Main auditorium           1              0
All employees and visitors for a Historical Museum Park shall have off-street
parking.
 
      (7)   All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are
subject to the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.316 R-M2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AND MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   R-M2 Land Use District Statement of Intent. 
      (1)   It is the intent of this district to provide land within and in
some cases adjacent to the corporate limits of the community for single and two
family residential purposes. Persons and families residing in this district are
entitled to protection from the encroachment of other types of uses which are
not appropriate to medium density residential area: In relation to R-
1 Districts (low density residential), R-M2 Districts provide for higher
traffic flow; maintain a relatively quiet atmosphere; discourage incompatible
uses; provide less but adequate open space. Care has been taken and shall be
taken in the delineation and expansion of this district to assure that adequate
public water is available and that individual sewage disposal systems will not
be required
      (2)   Maximum density: 6.5 D.U. per gross acre.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (1)   All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed by a four foot
chain link or 6 foot privacy fence approved by the Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Dwellings: Single Family; Two Family.
         (b)   Parks, public schools and recreation buildings; libraries and
public buildings.
         (c)   Small Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300’ from another Small Community Residence
and that prior to occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
         (d)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (e)   Mobile Homes.
         (f)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses and on the same
parcel.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of 10 acres
provided that any such planned unit development shall be compatible to the
Comprehensive Plan especially the Thoroughfare Plan for the City. Provided
further, if the proposed development is only for a portion of contiguous
landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing anticipated uses, densities
and circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns for the entire property
shall be submitted with the application. Planned unit developments shall meet
performance standards of §
161.291 of this ordinance.
         (b)   Parking lots when abutting a permitted use in the commercial or
manufacturing zones, when incidental to such permitted uses.
         (c)   Public Utility Facilities.
         (d)   Churches or private schools and subordinate uses related
thereto.
         (e)   Day Care Center or Day Care Home.
         (f)   Fire Stations.
         (g)   Hospital or Nursing Home.
         (h)   Funeral Homes.
         (i)   Public Libraries.
         (j)   Kennel.
         (k)   Historical Museum Park.
         (l)   Small Community Residence whose lot line is located less than
300 feet from the lot line of another Small Community Residence, provided that
the Planning Commission for the City finds that the cumulative effect of such
use would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, would not
create an institutional setting, and its operation would not create an adverse
effect upon surrounding properties, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (m)   Large Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
residence shall be located not less than 300 feet from the lot line of a Small
or Large Community Residence. The spacing requirement may be varied (lessened)
but such variance shall require a finding by the Planning Commission that the
cumulative effect of such uses would not alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional setting, and, by its operation,
would not create an adverse effect upon surrounding properties; and further
provided that prior to admitting residents the operator of such residence shall
demonstrate that the dwelling will comply with all applicable licensing
standards, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is
applied for and received.
         (n)   Adult Day Care.
         (o)   Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Commercial uses.
         (b)   Industrial uses.
         (c)   Mineral Extractive Operation.
         (d)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (e)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (f)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. ft. per single family dwelling unit and
boarding houses; 3,300 sq. ft. per DU in 2-family structures; 7,000 sq. ft. for
uses other than residential.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD: 15’ or the average front yard of parcels where
structures exist in the same block, on the same side of the street at the time
a building permit is issued.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD: 15’.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YARD: 10% of lot width on each side but shall not be
less than 8’ and need not be more than 15’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per dwelling unit exclusive of
garages: 1 & 2 Family - 800 each. Nonresidential: 1,000 sq. ft.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 35’.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: 3.
         (i)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use                                          parking spaces loading spaces
Each dwelling unit of 900 sq. ft. or more         2
Each dwelling unit under 900 sq. ft.              1.5
Fire station per 2 employees on working shift     1.5
Libraries per 2 employees plus 1 per 6 reading or 1
studying chairs
Schools, per 4 seats in Main auditorium           1              0
All employees and visitors for a Historical Museum Park shall have off-street
parking.
 
      (7)   All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are
subject to the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.317 R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   R-3 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   This district is created to allow the most intensive residential
development in the community, but also to provide for adequate off-street
parking and open space. To permit a larger variety of uses which are not
inconsistent with the aims of this district which shall be dominantly
residential in character. Adequate public water and sewer are available to meet
the needs of this high density residential area, and shall be available in any
additional area proposed for this district.
      (2)   Maximum density: 40 D.U. per gross acre.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (1)   All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed by a four foot
chain link or 6 foot privacy fence approved by the Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Multifamily dwelling units.
         (b)   Public Libraries.
         (c)   Parks and playgrounds.
         (d)   Essential services.
         (e)   Boarding Houses.
         (f)   Business & Professional Offices.
         (g)   Small Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
property is located not less than 300’ from another Small Community Residence
and that prior to occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for
and received.
         (h)   Large Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
residence shall be located not less than 300 feet from the lot line of a Small
or Large Community Residence; and further provided that prior to admitting
residents, the operator of such residence shall demonstrate that the dwelling
will comply with all applicable licensing standards, and that prior to
occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (i)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (j)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses and on the same parcel.
         (b)   Residential garages.
         (c)   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Churches or private schools and subordinate uses related
thereto.
         (b)   Day care center or day care home.
         (c)   Fire Stations.
         (d)   Hospital or Nursing Home.
         (e)   Parking areas for uses in adjoining less restricted district(s).
         (f)   Planned unit developments with minimum tracts of 2 acres in
accordance with the provisions for planned unit developments in §
161.292.
         (g)   Private Clubs & Lodges.
         (h)   Dining or drinking facilities in clubs or lodges restricted to
members and/or bonafide guests of members, and not operated as a public
facility.
         (i)   Funeral Homes.
         (j)   Town house development of 5 or more units.
         (k)   Condominium.
         (l)   Kennel.
         (m)   Small Community Residence whose lot line is located less than
300 feet from the lot line of another Small Community Residence, provided that
the Planning Commission for the City finds that the cumulative effect of such
use would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, would not
create an institutional setting, and its operation would not create an adverse
effect upon surrounding properties, and that prior to occupancy, a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (n)   Large Community Residence, provided that the lot line of such
residence shall be located not less than 300 feet from the lot line of another
Large Community Residence provided that the Planning Commission finds that the
cumulative effect of such uses would not alter the residential character of the
neighborhood, would not create an institutional setting, and, by its operation,
would not create an adverse effect upon surrounding properties, and that prior
to occupancy a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is applied for and received.
         (o)   Adult Day Care.
         (p)   Residential Facility for Homeless Persons.
         (q)   Residential Group Facility for Homeless Persons.
         (r)   Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
         (s)   “Weddings and Private Receptions Venue”; said Conditional Use
shall be subject to the following requirements:
            1.   minimum lot size shall be 25 acres;
            2.   a Site Plan shall be submitted and made part of the
Conditional Use showing exact location, square footage, and usage of all
structures, parking, and other improvements, and thereafter no existing
structure, parking, or improvement shall be increased in size nor shall an
additional structure, parking, or other improvement be placed upon the premises
and no change in use of a structure, parking, or improvement shall be made
without subsequent amendment of the Conditional Use, provided that the
Conditional Use may be abandoned in its entirety whereupon the property may be
used for Permitted Uses within its applicable Zoning Classification without
additional Council action;
            3.   no permanent residency by any person is permitted upon the
premises;
            4.   temporary occupancy, including overnight, by a wedding party
and/or wedding party guests for a wedding upon the premises or for a wedding at
another location corresponding to the duration of the wedding or reception
events is permitted, but no other overnight occupancy is permitted;
            5.   all events upon the premises shall be private gatherings for
invited guests only and shall not be open to the general public;
            6.   the minimum setback from streets for all yards with street
frontage shall be 700 feet and the setback area shall be a green landscaped
area only, except for permitted signage, with no variance permitted, provided
the City Council may increase the setback as necessary to protect adjoining
residential uses;
            7.   the area for parking during an event shall be in the rear yard
upon parking spaces improved for such purpose and shall be situated so as to
reasonably minimize visibility from any public street;
            8.   no building within a side or rear yard shall be placed within
150 feet of the property line of an adjoining owner, with no variance
permitted, provided the City Council may increase said 150 foot setback as
necessary to protect adjoining residential uses;
            9.   no signage shall be permitted except signage permitted within
§
161.249(C) of the Revised Code, provided that in no event shall any
illuminated, animated, or moving sign or electronic message center or temporary
sign be permitted;
            10.   no outdoor event shall be permitted upon the premises except
during the hours from 9 a.m. until 11 p.m.;
            11.   between the hours of 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. no event shall
produce amplified sound which is plainly audible across a property boundary
line of the premises at a distance of more than 200 feet from said property
line, and at all other times no amplified sound shall be audible across a
property boundary line of the premises;
            12.   no strobe, flashing, party, laser, or similar effects
lighting shall be directly visible from any street or from any adjoining
property;
            13.   an employee of the Weddings and Private Receptions Venue must
be upon the premises at all times during an event and all events shall be under
the supervision and responsibility of the employee; and
            14.   such additional conditions as determined by the City Council
to be necessary to protect adjoining residential uses.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Single Family Dwelling Units except town houses.
         (b)   Open Storage of Construction Equipment.
         (c)   Mobile Homes.
         (d)   Industrial Uses.
         (e)   Commercial Uses.
         (f)   Mineral Extractive Operation.
         (g)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (h)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (i)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA:
MIN. LOT AREA:
MIN. LOT AREA:
If parking is not within structure
   Effic.       800 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   1 Bedrm      1100 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   2 Bedrm      1300 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   3 Bedrm      1600 sq. ft. lot area per DU
If parking is within structure:
   Effic.       750 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   1 Bedrm      1000 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   2 Bedrm      1150 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   3 Bedrm      1400 sq. ft. lot area per DU
   Nonresidentia4000 sq. ft.
 
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50’ 25’ for townhouse.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD: 15’.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD: 15’.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YARD: 10’+ 2’ for each story over 3.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: Residential per dwelling unit exclusive of
garages: 2 Family 800 each; 3 or more family 600 each; nonresidential 800.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 200’.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: 20, providing any structure over 3 stories shall
have an integral passenger elevator.
         (i)   MAX F.A.R. per story: .75 for 1; 1.20 for 2; 1.60 for 3; 2.00
for 4; 2.40 for 5; 2.80 for 6; 3.20 for 7; 3.60 for 8; 4.00 for 9; 4.40 for10;
4.80 for 11; 5.20 for 12 & up.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
Land use Parking spaces Loading spaces
Land use                                Parking spaces Loading spaces
Each dwelling unit of 900 sq. f.t. or   2               
more
Each dwelling unit under 900 sq. ft.    1.5             
Boarding House. Plus 1 each per lodging 2               
room or fraction thereof
Fire station per 2 employees on working 1               
shift
Kindergarten or Day Nursery per 5       1              0
students
Hospital or Nursing Home /beds          1              1 up to 200 beds
                                                      2-200—500beds
                                                      3-over 500 beds
Churches, Schools, Funeral Homes per 4  1              0
seats in main auditorium
Libraries per 2 employees plus 1 per    1              0
six reading or studying chairs
Private Clubs or Lodges                 Subject to Planning Commission Approval
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.318 R-MH PLANNED MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   R-MH Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   This district is created to preserve and enhance property values in
the community by providing designated, distinctive areas in which manufactured
homes and mobile homes (which terms are synonymous) may be situated for
residential dwelling purposes. It is the intent that this district be a
desirable permanent area providing adequate open space, and essentially the
same considerations given to residents of R-1 & R-2 Districts. Any land so
designated must necessarily be through the rezoning process, and thus will
require amendment to the Zoning Ordinance Zoning District Map. See Note (1)
below.
      (2)   Maximum density: 12.0 D.U. per gross acre.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance
      (1)   All R-MH Districts shall comply with the performance standards
indicated in §
161.293 of this ordinance.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Manufactured/Mobile Home dwellings.
         (b)   Laundromats including facilities for coin operated dry cleaning
machines.
         (c)   Parks and Playgrounds.
         (d)   Essential Services.
         (e)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (f)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Only those accessory uses
and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures.
       (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses: None.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Agriculture, conventional dwelling units, industrial uses,
mobile homes not having access to public water and sanitary sewers.
         (b)   Commercial uses unless part of a planned development.
         (c)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (d)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (e)   Kennel.
         (f)   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop.
         (g)   Mineral Extractive Operations.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 1 acre.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: Refer to Performance Standards.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: Refer to Performance Standards.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: Refer to Performance Standards.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 800 Sq. Ft.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 20’.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: 1.
         (i)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
Land Use                                      Parking Spaces Loading Spaces
Per mobile home                               2              0
Per total all washing machines & dry cleaning 1              0
machines divided by 3
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.319 B-1 PRIMARY BUSINESS.
   (A)   B-1 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   This district is the location of the most valuable land in the
community, and in its establishment the aims are to protect this community
created value by: restricting uses to primarily pedestrian oriented traffic;
discouraging uses requiring large areas of land in proportion to pedestrian
traffic generated; encouraging intense land development. Uses in this district
should be: predominantly retail; public or private offices; appropriate types
of personal and business services. Residential uses are discouraged in this
district except for hotels.
      (2)   Off-street parking in this district except in conditional uses is
encouraged through the development of private and/or public parking facilities
which are consolidated and/or of adequate size and lend themselves to better
traffic control and more efficient use of land.
      (3)   The provisions for off-street loading facilities are intended to
avoid congestion in the streets which would otherwise hamper the normal flow of
traffic resulting from trucks and delivery vehicles double parking.
Consequently, off-street loading requirements are encouraged but not required
in this district when access to public alley exists.
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance
      (2)   All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center or Day Care Home where any
child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed by a four foot
chain link or 6 foot privacy fence approved by the Building Inspector unless
waived by City Council.   
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following service
establishments or offices wherein or whereat incidental but subordinate sale of
merchandise may or may not be available.
         (a)   Accountants.
         (b)   Advertising Agencies.
         (c)   Appliance Repair.
         (d)   Amusement Centers except Bowling Alleys.
         (e)   Attorneys.
         (f)   Architects.
         (g)   Art Galleries.
         (h)   Auto Parking Lots or Structures.
         (i)   Banks, except Drive In Facilities.
         (j)   Barber.
         (k)   Beauty Shops.
         (l)   Blueprinting & Photocopying.
         (m)   Business & Professional Offices.
         (n)   Catering.
         (o)   Chambers of Commerce.
         (p)   Clothes Cleaning Agency.
         (q)   Clubs or Lodges, Private.
         (r)   Credit Bureaus & Collections.
         (s)   Currency Exchanges.
         (t)   Custom Tailor & Dressmaking.
         (u)   Dentist, Orthodontists, etc.
         (v)   Detectives.
         (w)   Employment Agencies.
         (x)   Engineering Offices, but not outside storage of equipment.
         (y)   Essential Services.
         (z)   Funeral Homes.
         (aa)   Fire Station.
         (bb)   General Loan.
         (cc)   Governmental Offices.
         (dd)   Insurance Agencies.
         (ee)   Insurance Company Offices.
         (ff)   Interior Decorator.
         (gg)   Janitorial Services.
         (hh)   Jewelry Repair.
         (ii)   Labor Unions & Halls.
         (jj)   Laundry Agencies.
         (kk)   Libraries.
         (ll)   Locksmiths.
         (mm)   Motion Picture Theaters.
         (nn)   Museums.
         (oo)   Newspaper Offices but not newspaper plants.
         (pp)   Offices, Business & Professional.
         (qq)   Pawn Brokers.
         (rr)   Physicians, Chiropractor, Osteopaths etc. but not
Veterinarians.
         (ss)   Photographer.
         (tt)   Planners, but not outside storage of equipment.
         (uu)   Police Station.
         (vv)   Pool hall.
         (ww)   Post Office.
         (xx)   Radio Studios.
         (yy)   Savings & Loan Association.
         (zz)   Secretarial.
         (aaa)   Security & Commodity Brokers & Dealers Small Loan.
         (bb)   Title Abstract Offices.
         (ccc)   Travel Agencies.
         (ddd)   Upholstery Shop.
         (eee)   Utility Company Offices, but not outside storage of equipment.
         (fff)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (ggg)   Stores or shops offering the following merchandise primarily
at retail & wherein or whereat incidental but subordinate related services may
or may not be available:
            1.   Candy, but not manufacturing operations.
            2.   Catering.
            3.   Confectionery.
            4.   Delicatessen or Food, but not grocery or supermarket.
            5.   Department.
            6.   Drapery.
            7.   Drug.
            8.   Dry Goods.
            9.   Florist.
            10.   Furniture.
            11.   Gifts.
            12.   Hardware.
            13.   Ice Cream, Ice Milk walk in or walk up but not drive in.
            14.   Jewelry.
            15.   Liquor.
            16.   Locksmith.
            17.   Mail Order.
            18.   Milliner.
            19.   Music.
            20.   Notions.
            21.   Office Supply.
            22.   Optical Merchandise.
            23.   Pawn Brokers.
            24.   Periodicals.
            25.   Pharmacy.
            26.   Ready to wear, Men’s Women’s, Children, Infants Restaurants,
but not drive in.
            27.   Shoes.
            28.   Sporting Goods.
            29.   Stationery.
            30.   Tavern.
            31.   Trading Stamp Redemption.
            32.   Tobacco, News.
            33.   Toys.
            34.   Variety or Dime.
         (hhh)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
         (iii)   The administrative official shall have authority to determine
other uses, in addition to those specifically listed herein, when in his
judgment such other uses are similar to and no more objectionable to the public
welfare than those listed.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Only sale of gas & oil at retail in conjunction with and
subsidiary to a parking garage or parking lot.
         (b)   Offices in conjunction with and subsidiary to principal use.
         (c)   Warehousing or storage in conjunction with and subsidiary to
principal use.
         (d)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses: The following manufacturing operations
providing they are of a limited nature.
         (a)   In conjunction with a permitted use, and in harmony with other
activities in this district.
            1.   Bakery Manufacturing.
            2.   Candy Manufacturing.
            3.   Drapery Manufacturing.
            4.   Jewelry Manufacturing.
            5.   Clothes Cleaning Plant or Laundry.
         (b)   The following uses providing the location, nature and extent of
proposed operations are compatible with other uses in the district, and that
any proposed development plan provides consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood and community:
            1.   Day Care Center.
            2.   Drive In Banking.
            3.   Drive In Restaurants.
            4.   Drive In Operations not otherwise specified or prohibited.
            5.   Paint, Wallpaper Glass.
            6.   Pet Shop.
            7.   Coin Operated Laundromat or Dry Cleaning.
            8.   Church or Temple.
            9.   Crematorium operated in conjunction with Funeral Home.
            10.   Meat, Poultry or Fish Market.
            11.   Post Office.
            12.   Clubs or Lodges (Private).
            13.   Exterminating Services.
            14.   Hospitals.
            15.   Medical Clinics.
            16.   Auto Glass Stores.
            17.   Schools of any kind.
            18.   Hotels or Motels.
            19.   Newspaper Printing Plants.
            20.   Printers.
            21.   Rental Equipment.
            22.   Transportation Terminals (passenger).
            23.   Bowling Alleys.
            24.   TV Studios.
            25.   Chemical Supplies.
            26.   Lumber Yards.
            27.   Automobile Sales & Service.
            28.   Kennel.
            29.   Adult Daycare.
            30.   Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
               a.   must be 1500 feet distance between each use as measured
from each property line and 100 feet distance from any pre-existing church or
daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or residential
care home, as measured from the property line of the Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the closest building line of the church or daycare or pre-
school facility or primary or secondary school or residential care home and
               b.   cannabis café, lounge, or on-site consumption is
prohibited).
            31.   One or more dwelling units above the main floor (i.e. street
level) with each unit having a minimum total floor area per dwelling unit
(which includes a studio or efficiency dwelling) of 600 square feet, plus an
additional total floor space of 150 square feet per each bedroom and with each
dwelling unit being in full compliance with all applicable local, state, and
federal laws and codes.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Truck Sales & Service.
         (b)   Trailer, Mobile Homes.
         (c)   Sales & Service.
         (d)   Drive Ins:
            1.   Ice Cream or Ice Milk.
            2.   Agricultural Products except produce.
         (e)   Manufacturing or industrial operations except those permitted.
         (f)   Single Family Residential Structures.
         (g)   Truck or Equipment Terminals, Truck Stop.
         (h)   Warehouses.
         (i)   Moving & Storage Operations.
         (j)   Agricultural Equipment Stores.
         (k)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (l)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (m)   Automobile Service Station.
         (n)   Mineral Extractive Operations.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: Not applicable.
         (b)   MIN. FRONT, SIDE & REAR YARD: None except as required by the
Planning Commission.
         (c)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A.
         (d)   MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F.A.R.
         (e)   MAX. STORIES: As determined by F.A.R.
         (f)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: Per Story: 1.0 for 1; 2.0 for 2; 3.0 for
3; 3.5 for 4; 4.0 for 5; 4.5 for 6; 5.0 for 7; 5.5 for 8; 6.0 for 9; 6.50 for
10; 7.0 for 11; 7.5 for 12 & up.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
         (a)   Parking: Off-street parking shall not be required for any use
except conditional uses permitted by City Council and shall be provided or not
provided as determined by the City Council.
         (b)   Loading Spaces: Any permitted principal use having access to a
public alley shall not be required to provide off-street loading facilities.
Off-street loading facilities for conditional uses if permitted by City Council
and uses not having access to a public alley, shall be provided as determined
by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.320 B-2 SECONDARY BUSINESS.
   (A)   B-2 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   This zone is created primarily as a result of the ever increasing
space demands of the auto oriented shopper, and to provide space for continued
growth of such commercial facilities adjacent to or near major thoroughfares.
      (2)   The most important factor in this district to promote a more
efficient land use and thoroughfare plan for the community is the provision of
off-street parking and loading space. It is intended that all land uses
(including accessory or supplemental uses) in this district provide an
appropriate amount of off-street parking and loading facilities.
      (3)   This zone discourages further strip type development which tends to
hamper the flow of thoroughfare traffic.
   (B)   NOTES. For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance. All outdoor areas of a Day Care Center, or Day Care
Home where any child may reasonably be expected to be present shall be enclosed
by a four foot chain link or six foot privacy fence approved by Building
Inspector unless waived by City Council.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The following service
establishments or offices wherein or whereat incidental but subordinate sale of
merchandise may or may not be available.
         (a)   Appliance Repair.
         (b)   Amusement Centers, indoor or outdoor.
         (c)   Art Galleries.
         (d)   Auto Parking Lots or Structures.
         (e)   Auto & Truck servicing within buildings.
         (f)   Auto Washing.
         (g)   Banks.
         (h)   Barber.
         (i)   Beauty Shops.
         (j)   Blueprinting & Photocopying.
         (k)   Business & Professional Offices.
         (l)   Bowling Alleys.
         (m)   Catering.
         (n)   Chambers of Commerce.
         (o)   Church or Temple.
         (p)   Clothes.
         (q)   Cleaning Agency.
         (r)   Clubs or Lodges, Private.
         (s)   Coin operated Laundromat.
         (t)   Coin operated Dry Cleaning.
         (u)   Construction Company but not outside storage of equipment.
         (v)   Credit Bureaus & Collections.
         (w)   Currency Exchanges.
         (x)   Custom Tailor & Dressmaking.
         (y)   Employment Agencies.
         (z)   Essential Services.
         (aa)   Exterminators.
         (bb)   Automobile Service Station.
         (cc)   Fire Station.
         (dd)   Funeral Homes.
         (ee)   General Loan.
         (ff)   Governmental Offices.
         (gg)   Hotels & Motels.
         (hh)   Insurance Agencies.
         (ii)   Interior Decorator.
         (jj)   Janitorial Services.
         (kk)   Jewelry Repair.
         (ll)   Labor Unions & Halls.
         (mm)   Laundry Agencies.
         (nn)   Libraries.
         (oo)   Locksmiths.
         (pp)   Motion Picture Theaters.
         (qq)   Museums.
         (rr)   Newspaper Offices but not newspaper plants.
         (ss)   Pawn Brokers.
         (tt)   Photographer.
         (uu)   Police Station.
         (vv)   Poolhall.
         (ww)   Post Office.
         (xx)   Printers.
         (yy)   Radio Studios.
         (zz)   Rental Equipment.
         (aaa)   Savings & Loan Association.
         (bbb)   Secretarial.
         (ccc)   Security & Commodity Brokers & Dealers.
         (ddd)   Small Loan.
         (eee)   TV Studios.
         (fff)   Title Abstract Offices.
         (ggg)   Transportation Terminals (passenger).
         (hhh)   Travel Agencies.
         (iii)   Upholstery Shop.
         (jjj)   Utility Company Offices, but not outside storage of equipment.
         (kkk)   Veterinarians.
         (lll)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (mmm)   Stores or shops offering the following merchandise primarily
at retail & wherein or whereat incidental but subordinate related services may
or may not be available:
            1.   Appliances.
            2.   Autoglass.
            3.   Auto Parks Wholesale or retail.
            4.   Auto & Truck Sales.
            5.   Bakery Good’s.
            6.   Books.
            7.   Camera Shop.
            8.   Candy Shop.
            9.   Catering.
            10.   Chemical Supplies.
            11.   Confectionery.
            12.   Dairy Products.
            13.   Delicatessen or Food Department Store Drapery.
            14.   Drug.
            15.   Dry Goods.
            16.   Farm & Garden Supplies, but not milling or grain storage
operations nor sale of major agricultural implements.
            17.   Automobile Service Station.
            18.   Florist.
            19.   Food.
            20.   Furniture.
            21.   Gifts.
            22.   Grocery & Supermarkets.
            23.   Hardware.
            24.   Ice Cream Ice Milk.
            25.   Liquor.
            26.   Locksmith.
            27.   Mail Order.
            28.   Meat, Poultry or Fish.
            29.   Milliner.
            30.   Music.
            31.   Notions.
            32.   Office Supply.
            33.   Optical Merchandise.
            34.   Paint, Wallpaper, Glass.
            35.   Pawn Brokers.
            36.   Periodicals.
            37.   Pet Shop.
            38.   Pharmacy.
            39.   Ready to wear Men’s, Women’s, Children’s, Infants’.
            40.   Restaurants.
            41.   Shoes.
            42.   Sporting Goods.
            43.   Stationery.
            44.   Tavern.
            45.   Tire Dealers within buildings.
            46.   Trading Stamp Redemption.
            47.   Trailer or Mobile Homes.
            48.   Tobacco, News.
            49.   Toys.
            50.   Variety or Dime.
         (nnn)   Other uses determined by administrative official. The
administrative official shall have authority to determine other uses, in
addition to those specifically listed herein, when in his judgment such other
uses are similar to and no more objectionable to the public welfare than those
listed.
         (ooo)   Ambulance services, except helicopter and air ambulance
services.
         (ppp)   Non-residential sleeping quarters for ambulance services
providing emergency medical first responder services, excluding helicopter and
air ambulance service, when used solely in conjunction with and forming part of
a premises of a provider of emergency medical first responder services. If the
use is situated solely upon real estate owned by a governmental entity then the
sleeping quarters may be situated within a mobile home (notwithstanding §
156.04 of the Revised Code of Ordinances) if the following conditions are met:
            1.   Written variance must be obtained from the Zoning Board of
Appeals permitting use of the mobile home, which variance shall be granted only
if each and every condition set forth herein is met.
            2.   The mobile home shall be an accessory structure only;
            3.   The sleeping quarters must be the primary use within the
mobile home, with any office use being secondary and with storage use being
prohibited;
            4.   The variance permitting use of a mobile home shall immediately
terminate upon any transfer of title to the real estate or to the mobile home
or transfer of the assets of the emergency medical first responder service
provider or cessation of business of same or cessation of use of the mobile
home for sleeping quarters or expiration of any lease or agreement with the
governmental entity, or upon any condition imposed herein not being satisfied;
            5.   The mobile home must be removed within 30-days of termination
of the variance permitting placement of the mobile home.
         (qqq)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Only those accessory uses
and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures,
including: Propane Filling Station with a Conditional Use Permit but only for
the uses specified herein.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   The following manufacturing operations providing they are of a
limited nature, in conjunction with a permitted use, and in harmony with other
activities in this district.
            1.   Bakery Manufacturing.
            2.   Candy Manufacturing.
            3.   Drapery Manufacturing.
            4.   Jewelry Manufacturing.
            5.   Clothes Cleaning Plant or Laundry.
         (b)   The following uses providing the location, nature and extent of
proposed operations are compatible with other uses in the district, and that
any proposed development plan provides consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood and community:
            1.   Day Care Center.
            2.   Kennel.
            3.   Crematorium operated in conjunction with Funeral Home.
            4.   Newspaper Printing Plants.
            5.   Lumber Yards.
            6.   Agricultural Implement Store.
            7.   Warehouses.
            8.   Moving & Storage operations conducted within a building.
            9.   Drive In Theaters.
            10.   Winery.
            11.   Freestanding Wireless Communication as described in §§
161.365 through
161.378.
            12.   Adult Daycare.
            13.   Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
               a.   must be 1500 feet distance between each use as measured
from each property line and 100 feet distance from any pre-existing church or
daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or residential
care home, as measured from the property line of the Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the closest building line of the church or daycare or pre-
school facility or primary or secondary school or residential care home and
               b.   cannabis café, lounge, or on-site consumption is
prohibited).
            14.   One dwelling unit used solely in conjunction with and forming
part of a funeral home.
            15.   One on-premises dwelling unit used solely in conjunction with
Moving & Storage operations conducted within a building for use only by the
security employee of said business; provided the dwelling unit shall have a
floor area of not less than 500 square feet and not more than 800 square feet,
shall have not more than two bedrooms (sleeping rooms), and shall comply with
all Housing, Building, and Safety Codes applicable to a residential dwelling.
            16.   Propane Filling Station (See Notes below).
         (c)   Conditional Use Notes: Propane Filling Station:
            1.   Permitted only as an Accessory Use for a retailer which
primarily engages in sales of and service for travel trailers or for a retailer
which primarily engages in sale of farm, garden, and hardware supplies.
            2.   Must be enclosed by an approved locking security fencing not
less than 6 feet in height.
            3.   Minimum distance of security fencing to residentially zoned
property shall be 330 feet in all directions (with no variance permitted),
measured from the fencing to the property line of the residentially zoned
property.
            4.   Maximum tank size (with no variance permitted) shall be 1000
gallons.
            5.   Only Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) designated UN 1075 shall be
stored or sold upon the premises.
            6.   Must comply with applicable Codes, including Chapter 91 of
Revised Code.
            7.   Shall be subject to such additional conditions as determined
by the City Council to be necessary to protect the public interests.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential Dwelling Units.
         (b)   Mobile Homes.
         (c)   Travel Trailers.
         (d)   Agriculture.
         (e)   Industrial or Manufacture Operations except as permitted by the
Planning Commission.
         (f)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (g)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (h)   Mineral Extractive Operations.
         (i)   Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck Stop (except lawful
non-conforming use existing on October 21, 2019, provided parking area or use
shall not be increased.)
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 Sq. Ft.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 35’.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: None.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YARD: If lot abuts public alley on rear, none
required, otherwise one side yard shall be required a minimum of 20’ to permit
off-street parking.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A MAX. HEIGHT: 35’.
         (g)   MAX. STORIES: 2.
         (h)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .60.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading. Off-street parking shall be
required as follows:
Land use Parking spaces Loading spaces
Land use                        Parking spaces                   Loading spaces
Banks & other financial
institutions & business or      1                                 
professional offices per 400
sq. ft. of gross Floor area
Beauty Shops per hair dryer     2                                 
Barber Shops per chair          2                                 
Hotels per 3 guest sleeping     1                                 
rooms
Motels per guest sleeping room  1                                 
Retail Stores, Supermarkets,
Dept. Stores & Personal Service 1                                 
Shops per 300 sq. ft. of gross
Floor area
Laundromats: per 3 coin         1                                 
operated machines
Automobile Service Station:     1 per 2 employees on maximum      
                                shift
Bowling Alleys per lane         3                                 
Restaurants, night clubs,       1 space for each table or booth,  
taverns, lounges                or 3 seats at counter or bar
Furniture & Appliance Stores    1 per 800 Sq. Ft. of gross area   
                                plus 1 per 2 employees
Theaters, auditoriums & places  1 space for each 6 seats of       
of assembly                     designed capacity
 
         (a)   All remaining uses unclassifiable herein shall be as reasonably
determined by the Administrative Official & based upon number of employees
anticipated and/or gross floor space, of which guides are indicated elsewhere
in this ordinance.
         (b)   Any permitted principal use having access to public alley shall
not be required to provide off-street loading facilities, except that off-
street loading facilities for conditional uses permitted by City Council & uses
not having access to a public alley shall be provided or not provided as
determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.321 B-3 INTERCHANGE BUSINESS.
   (A)   B-3 Land Use District Statement of Intent. This district is created to
serve predominantly the needs of interregional vehicular traffic at
interchanges on limited access arterial thoroughfares. The uses allowed in this
district should be limited to the needs of the interregional traveler which
are: food, service, fuel and lodging. The basic purpose of limiting the land
uses in this district is to preserve and enhance the other business district(s)
of the community (or nearby communities) by preventing the establishment of a
shopping center which would compete with existing or proposed (and justified)
shopping centers which cater or will cater to the needs of the community. The
land for this district should be compact (not strip type). In any development
plan, access points should be limited to minimize hazardous driving conditions.
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (2)   All development plans for B-3 Districts shall be approved by the
Administrative Official; such plans shall show:
         (a)   Access points to public ROW.
         (b)   Building locations.
         (c)   Parking layout.
         (d)   Elevations of buildings.
         (e)   Detail drawings of all signs.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Automobile Service Station.
         (b)   Auto or Truck Repair Shops.
         (c)   Restaurants.
         (d)   Hotels or Motels.
         (e)   Gift Shops.
         (f)   Offices.
         (g)   Funeral Homes.
         (h)   Combinations of above in planned development, provided that any
such planned development shall be compatible to the Comprehensive Plan,
especially the Transportation: Plan. If the proposed development is only for a
portion of contiguous landholdings of the applicant, then a plan showing
anticipated uses and circulation (traffic or thoroughfare) patterns shall be
submitted with application for approval of any planned B-3 development. See
Note (2).
         (i)   Other uses determined by administrative official. The
administrative official shall have authority to determine other uses in
addition to those specifically listed herein when in his judgement such other
uses are similar to and no more objectionable to the public welfare than those
listed.
         (j)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (k)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Only those accessory uses
and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures,
including Propane Filling Station with a Conditional Use Permit but only for
the uses specified herein.
      (3)   Conditional Uses.
         (a)   After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City Council may
permit as Conditional Uses:
            1.   Truck or Equipment Terminal, Truck Stop - see Notes (2019).
            2.   Winery.
            3.   Freestanding wireless communication facility as described
within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
            4.   One dwelling unit used solely in conjunction with and forming
part of a funeral home.
            5.   Crematorium operated in conjunction with Funeral Home.
            6.   Cannabis Dispensing Organization:
               a.   must be 1500 feet distance between each use as measured
from each property line and 100 feet distance from any pre-existing church or
daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or residential
care home, as measured from the property line of the Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the closest building line of the church or daycare or pre-
school facility or primary or secondary school or residential care home and
               b.   cannabis café, lounge, or on-site consumption is
prohibited).
            7.   Propane Filling Station (See Notes).
         (b)   Notes (2019) re Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck Stop:
            1.   Not more than two uses shall be permitted at each of the two
I-57 interstate exchanges (Exit 94 and Exit 95) and at the one I-64 interstate
exchange (Exit 80). Existing nonconforming uses shall be counted as a use.
            2.   The parcel on which the use is situated must have its closest
boundary point to be within at least 1,000 feet of the centerline of the
nearest I-57 or I-64 interstate highway exit ramp at its point of intersection
with a state highway or with Veteran’s Memorial Drive.
            3.   The minimum distance between uses (which includes any existing
non-conforming use) shall be 2000 feet measured along road frontage from the
nearest entry or exit point of each use.
            4.   All entry or exit points for the parcel shall immediately abut
and have access only upon a state highway, upon Veteran’s Memorial Drive, or
upon a street that has been constructed and designated by the City for use by
trucks up to 80,000-pounds; no other street or road shall provide access.
            5.   All access points shall have dedicated left-turn and/or right-
turn lanes, either presently existing or constructed by the parcel owner/
developer with permission of the City.
            6.   The use shall have only the number of spaces dedicated for
truck parking as permitted by the Resolution Granting the Conditional Use and
no truck parking shall be permitted or occur except within such dedicated
spaces.
            7.   Lawful Equipment Terminals, Truck Terminals or Truck Stops
existing on date of adoption of these Notes shall be a nonconforming use and
shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter 161 relating to
nonconforming uses.
            8.   None of the foregoing provisions shall be subject to variance.
         (c)   Propane Filling Station Notes:
            1.   Permitted only as an Accessory Use for a retailer which
primarily engages in sales of and service for travel trailers or for a retailer
which primarily engages in sale of farm, garden, and hardware supplies or for a
Truck Stop.
            2.   Must be enclosed by an approved locking security fencing not
less than 6 feet in height.
            3.   Minimum distance of security fencing to residentially zoned
property shall be 330 feet in all directions (with no variance permitted),
measured from the fencing to the property line of the residentially zoned
property.
            4.   Maximum tank size (with no variance permitted) shall be 1000
gallons.
            5.   Only Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) designated UN 1075 shall be
stored or sold upon the premises.
            6.   Must comply with applicable Codes, including Chapter 91 of
Revised Code.
            7.   Shall be subject to such additional conditions as determined
by the City Council to be necessary to protect the public interests.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses.
         (a)   Storage of wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
         (b)   All uses other than permitted uses.
         (c)   Mineral extractive operations
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 15,000 Sq. Ft.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YARD DEPTH: 60’.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YARD DEPTH: 15’.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YARD WIDTH: 10’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: 50’.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: 4.
         (i)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
land use parking spaces loading spaces
land use                   parking spaces           loading spaces
Parking Spaces:
   Automobile Service   1 per 2 employees on      
Station:                   maximum shift.
   Auto or truck repair 4 per repair bay, grease  
shop:                      rack, wash rack, etc.
                           1 space per table or
   Restaurants:         booth or 3 counter        
                           spaces.
   Hotels or Motels:    1 per guest sleeping      
                           room.
   Gift Shops:          1 per 200 Sq. Ft. of      
                           floor area.
                                                    1 loading space at service
Loading Requirements:                              entrance for hotels
                                                    motels, restaurants & gift
                                                    shops.
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.322 B-PL PLANNED BUSINESS.
   (A)   B-PL Land Use District Statement of Intent. This district is created
to provide for the construction of a planned shopping center offering a wide
variety of goods and services, and which caters to the auto oriented shopper.
This district is similar to the Secondary Business District, but the
differentiation between these districts is primarily in the minimum size tract
of land involved. Any land so designated must necessarily be through the
rezoning process and this will require amendment to the zoning ordinance and
zoning district map.
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (2)   The development plan for a B-PL District shall be approved by the
City Council; such plan shall show:
         (a)   Access points to public ROW.
         (b)   Building locations.
         (c)   Parking layout.
         (d)   Elevations of buildings.
         (e)   Landscaping plan.
         (f)   Lighting plan.
         (g)   Drainage plan.
         (h)   Site utilities plan.
         (i)   Such plan shall be compatible with the comprehensive and
thoroughfare plans.
         (j)   If development is to be staged, phasing shall be indicated.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Planned Developments only, but which may include any use as
permitted in B-2 or B-3 Districts. (2)
         (b)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (c)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Only those accessory uses
and structures customarily incidental to principal uses and structures,
including: Propane Filling Station with a Conditional Use Permit but only for
the uses specified herein
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   The following manufacturing operations providing they are of a
limited nature, in conjunction with a permitted use, and in harmony with other
activities in this district.
            1.   Bakery manufacturing.
            2.   Candy manufacturing Drapery manufacturing Jewelry
manufacturing.
            3.   Clothes cleaning plant or laundry.
         (b)   The following uses providing the location, nature and extent of
proposed operations are compatible with other uses in the district, and that
any proposed development plan provides consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood and community.
            1.   Newspaper printing plants.
            2.   Lumber yards.
            3.   Agricultural implement stores.
            4.   Warehouses.
            5.   Moving and storage operations conducted within a building.
            6.   Drive In theaters.
            7.   Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
               a.   must be 1500 feet distance between each use as measured
from each property line and 100 feet distance from any pre-existing church or
daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or residential
care home, as measured from the property line of the Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the closest building line of the church or daycare or pre-
school facility or primary or secondary school or residential care home and
               b.   cannabis café, lounge, or on-site consumption is
prohibited).
            8.   Propane Filling Station (See Notes).
         (c)   Conditional Use Notes: Propane Filling Station:
            1.   Permitted only as an Accessory Use for a retailer which
primarily engages in sales of and service for travel trailers or for a retailer
which primarily engages in sale of farm, garden, and hardware supplies or for a
Truck Stop.
            2.   Must be enclosed by an approved locking security fencing not
less than 6 feet in height.
            3.   Minimum distance of security fencing to residentially zoned
property shall be 330 feet in all directions (with no variance permitted),
measured from the fencing to the property line of the residentially zoned
property.
            4.   Maximum tank size (with no variance permitted) shall be 1000
gallons.
            5.   Only Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) designated UN 1075 shall be
stored or sold upon the premises.
            6.   Must comply with applicable Codes, including
Chapter 91 of Revised Code.
            7.   Shall be subject to such additional conditions as determined
by the City Council to be necessary to protect the public interests.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential dwelling units.
         (b)   Mobile homes.
         (c)   Travel trailers.
         (d)   Agriculture.
         (e)   Industrial or manufacturing operations except as permitted by
Planning Commission.
         (f)   Abandoned automobile.
         (g)   Automobile wrecking.
         (h)   Kennel.
         (i)   Mineral extractive operations.
         (j)   Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: Min. tract of 5 acres for entire development.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300’ for entire development. For individual uses
as determined by the development plan.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT, REAR & SIDE YARDS: as determined by development
plan.
         (d)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 50,000 sq. ft. for entire development.
         (e)   MAX. HEIGHT: 30’.
         (f)   MAX. STORIES: 3.
         (g)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: N/A.
         (h)   See Note (2).
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use parking spaces loading spaces
Parking: A common parking lot (or lots) is (are) permitted but provisions for
parking spaces per required use shall be governed by the requirements of the
B-2 District.
Loading: Off-street loading facilities and space shall be provided as
distinctly separate from parking lots and designed so as there will be a
minimum or no conflict with parking lots.
 
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.323 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   I-1 Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   This district is established to provide space for certain types of
industrial and/or manufacturing and/or warehousing or storage operations which
are compatible to adjoining districts. Such uses generally require open storage
of materials or goods either before, during or after the manufacturing process,
but are of a low noise or nuisance level. Such uses shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed building of substantial construction. Land designated for
this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the
community as well as rail and air if required, and designated so as to not
disrupt normal traffic flow. Because of increased technological developments,
extensive lists of permitted and prohibited uses is impractical, therefore, to
safeguard the public interests, performance standards are established herein as
criteria for all permitted uses and as guidance for the Planning Commission in
permitting any conditional uses. Planned Industrial Parks are encouraged in
this district.
      (2)   This district also provides space for sexually oriented business so
as to minimize secondary effects of sexually oriented business on residential,
business and other districts
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (2)   See Performance Standards for I-1 District, excluding sexually
oriented businesses.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures and Accessory Uses and
Structures.
         (a)   Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted if the
performance standards for this district (2) are met and certified as being met
by a registered professional engineer of the State of Illinois. Standards of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
         (b)   Accessory Uses and Structures may include a Truck or Equipment
Terminal, but only with a Conditional Use Permit, as an accessory use
customarily incidental to a permitted principal use on the same parcel.
         (c)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (d)   Sexually Oriented Business shall be located as follows:
            1.   a.   If situated within the corporate limits the sexually
oriented business shall not be operated within 400 feet of
                  i.   a religious institution;
                   ii.   a school;
                  iii.   a public park;
                  iv.   the boundary of any residential district;
                  v.   any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized
for residential use, whether zoned residential or not.
               b.   If situated outside the corporate limits the sexually
oriented business shall not be operated within 500 feet of:
                  i.   a religious institution;
                  ii.   a school;
                  iii.   a public park;
                  iv.   the boundary of any residential district;
                  v.   any property actually occupied, devoted to or utilized
for residential use, whether zoned residential or not.
            2.   A sexually oriented business shall not be operated in the same
building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business or containing any premises licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or containing any business or
premises licensed under
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. In addition, a sexually oriented
business shall not be operated within 800 feet of another sexually oriented
business or within 800 feet of any business or premises licensed under
Chapter 111 of the Revised Code of Ordinances or within 800 feet of any
business or premises licensed under
Chapter 116 of the Revised Code of Ordinances. A sexually oriented business
shall be operated only within a single structure situated upon the premises;
two or more buildings connected by an enclosed walkway or hall shall constitute
a single structure.
            3.   Measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard
to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building
or structure used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a business or use
described within (C)(1)(d)1. above.
            4.   The distance between any two businesses described within
subparagraph (C)(1)(d)2. shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
            5.   The distance requirements and provisions of (C)(1)(d)1. and
(C)(1)(d)2. above shall not be subject to variance.
            6.   Notwithstanding any other provision of
Chapter 161 of the Revised Code of Ordinances, a sexually oriented business
lawfully established, lawfully located and lawfully operating on September 2,
2003 that is in violation of the foregoing shall be a non-conforming use and
said non-conforming use will be permitted to continue at its existing location
for a period of 1-year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily
discontinued for a period of 30-days or more.
         (e)   Helicopter or air ambulance services as a principal use,
although land ambulances are permitted as an accessory use to the principal
use.
         (f)   Non-residential sleeping quarters for helicopter or air
ambulance services providing emergency medical first responder services, when
used solely in conjunction with and forming part of a premises of a provider of
emergency medical first responder services. If the use is situated solely upon
real estate owned by a governmental entity then the sleeping quarters may be
situated within a mobile home (notwithstanding §
156.04 of the Revised Code of Ordinances) if the following conditions are met:
            1.   Written variance must be obtained from the Zoning Board of
Appeals permitting use of the mobile home, which variance shall be granted only
if each and every condition set forth herein is met.
            2.   The mobile home shall be an accessory structure only;
            3.   The sleeping quarters must be the primary use within the
mobile home, with any office use being secondary and with storage use being
prohibited;
            4.   The variance permitting use of a mobile home shall immediately
terminate upon any transfer of title to the real estate or to the mobile home
or transfer of the assets of the emergency medical first responder service
provider or cessation of business of same or cessation of use of the mobile
home for sleeping quarters or expiration of any lease or agreement with the
governmental entity, or upon any condition imposed herein not being satisfied;
            5.   The mobile home must be removed within 30-days of termination
of the variance permitting placement of the mobile home.
         (g)   Commercial Solar Energy Facility - see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
         (h)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Wireless Communication Freestanding Wireless Communication
Facility as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378;
         (b)   Cannabis Craft Grower or Cannabis Cultivation Center (must be
1500 feet distance between each use as measured from each property line);
         (c)   Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser; Cannabis Processing
Organization or Processor; Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter;
         (d)   Truck Terminal or Equipment Terminal, but only as an accessory
use to a Permitted Use.
      (3)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential uses of any kind including dwelling units, hotels,
motels, mobile homes, etc.
         (b)   Schools, churches, clubs, lodges, hospitals.
         (c)   Truck Stop.
         (d)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (e)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (f)   Kennel.
         (g)   Mineral Extractive Operations.
      (4)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   All uses except sexually oriented business:
            1.   MIN. LOT AREA: 2 acre.
            2.   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 125’.
            3.   MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 20’.
            4.   MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 20’.
            5.   MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: 20’.
            6.   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
            7.   MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F.A.R.
            8.   MAX. STORIES: As determined by F.A.R.
            9.   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50.
         (b)   Sexually oriented business:
            1.   MIN. LOT AREA: 5,000 sq. feet.
            2.   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 50’.
            3.   MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 35’.
            4.   MIN REAR YD. DEPTH: None.
            5.   MIN. SIDE YD.: If lot abuts public alley on rear, none
required; otherwise one side yard shall be required a minimum of 20’ to permit
off-street parking.
            6.   MIN. FLOOR AREA: N/A.
            7.   MAX. HEIGHT: 35’.
            8.   MAX. STORIES: 2.
            9.   MAX FLOOR AREA RATIO: .60.
      (5)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use parking spaces loading spaces
 
         (a)   Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained off-street parking
and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
            1.   For industrial or manufacturing operations - 1 auto parking
space per (a) two employees of combined employment of two largest successive
shifts, or (b) two employees if only one shift operation; plus 1 auto parking
space equal to 15% of the above for visitors and company vehicles. Minimum of 1
off-street loading space. Additional off-street loading spaces may be required
by the nature and size of anticipated operations.
            2.   For non-industrial or manufacturing operations as required in
more restricted district(s), except sexually oriented business.
            3.   Common parking and loading areas provided parking requirements
for all uses are met.
            4.   Sexually oriented businesses:
         (b)   Off-street Parking:
            1.   Adult store: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area, excluding viewing rooms and one space per viewing room.
            2.   Adult cabaret: one space for each table or booth or three
seats at counter or bar.
            3.   Adult motel: one space per guest sleeping room.
            4.   Adult theater: one space for each six seats of designated
capacity.
            5.   Semi nude studio, Sexual encounter center, Escort agency: one
space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
         (c)   Lighting:
            1.   All off-street parking areas and entrances to the premises of
a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of 5 foot candles of light on surface of the parking
areas and walkways. Illumination of the remaining external surface areas of the
sexually oriented business shall be an average maintained horizontal
illumination of not less than 2 foot candles of light or greater than 5 foot
candles of light. This required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination to the parking areas and walkway areas serving
the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of the patrons and
employees of the sexually oriented business and to reduce the incidents of
vandalism and criminal conduct.
            2.   All lighting shall be shielded and arranged so that
illumination is directed toward the surface areas of the licensed premises and
not onto adjoining properties or into the skyward area above the licensed
premises or the skyward area of a property adjoining the licensed premises, so
that light trespass onto adjoining properties and light pollution (sky glow
and/or glare) will be minimized. No light fixture shall be mounted or placed
higher than 25 feet from the ground surface. Illumination from the sexually
oriented business shall not exceed 1 foot candle 10 feet from the property
boundary line on any property adjoining the premises of the sexually oriented
business.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.324 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   I-2 Land Use District Statement of Intent. This district is
established to provide space for industrial and/or manufacturing and/or
warehousing or storage operations which may require buildings and/or open area
for fabricating, processing, extraction, repairing, dismantling or disposal or
equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes. Land designated for
this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the
community (including primarily streets as well as rail and air if required) and
designed so as to not wholly disrupt normal traffic flow. Because of increasing
technological developments, extensive lists of permitted and prohibited uses is
impractical, therefore, to safeguard the public interest, performance standards
are established herein as criteria for all permitted uses and as guidance for
the City Council in permitting any conditional uses. Planned Industrial Parks
are encouraged in this district.
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (2)   See Performance Standards for I-2 District.
      (3)   The City Council may permit as Conditional Use: Automobile Wrecking
& Storage Yards if the following conditions are met in addition to the
Performance Standards of I-2 District:
         (a)   Use permitted not closer than 300’ to a residential use or
residential zone.
         (b)   Solid wall or solid painted fence eight (8) feet high.
         (c)   Parking not permitted closer than 300’ to a residential use or
residential zone.
         (d)   Two (2) off-street loading spaces required. May not face on
bordering street or highway.
         (e)   One (1) principal entrance only.
         (f)   Outdoor lighting shall be approved by the City Council.
      (4)   Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted if the
performance standards for this district (2) are met and certified as being met
by a registered professional engineer of the State of Illinois. Standards of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures and Accessory Uses and
Structures.
         (a)   Principal and Accessory Uses and Structures are permitted if the
performance standards for this district (2) are met and certified as being met
by a registered professional engineer of the State of Illinois. Standards of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
         (b)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (c)   Accessory Uses and Structures may include a Truck or Equipment
Terminal, but only with a Conditional Use Permit, as an accessory use
customarily incidental to a permitted principal use on the same parcel.
         (d)   Commercial Solar Energy Facility - see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
         (e)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Automobile Wrecking & Storage Yards. See Note (3).
         (b)   Mineral extractive operations outside corporate limits,
including but not limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand, and the related
processing operations, storing, and sale of such materials.
         (c)   Wireless Communication Freestanding Wireless Communication
Facility as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (d)   Truck Terminal or Equipment Terminal, but only as an accessory
use to a Permitted Use.
         (e)   Cannabis Craft Grower or Cannabis Cultivation Center (must be
1500 feet distance between each use as measured from each property line).
         (f)   Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser; Cannabis Processing
Organization or Processor; Cannabis Transporting Organization or
Transporter.   
      (3)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential uses of any kind including dwelling units, hotels,
motels, mobile homes, etc.
         (b)   Schools, churches, clubs, lodges, hospitals.
         (c)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (d)   Kennel.
         (e)   Truck Stop.
         (f)   Mineral Extractive Operations within corporate limits.
      (4)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 1 acre.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 100’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 50’.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 50’.
         (e)   MIN. SIDE YD. WIDTH: 50’.
         (f)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
         (g)   MAX. HEIGHT: As determined by F.A.R.
         (h)   MAX. STORIES: As determined by F.A.R.
         (i)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50.
      (5)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use parking spaces loading spaces
 
         (a)   Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained off-street parking
and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
            1.   a.   For industrial or manufacturing operations - 1 auto
parking space per (a) two employees of combined employment of two largest
successive shifts, or (b) two employees if only one shift operation; plus 1
auto parking space equal to 15% of the above for visitors and company vehicles.
               b.   Minimum of 1 off-street loading space. Additional off-
street loading space may be required by the nature and size of anticipated
operations.
            2.   For non-industrial or manufacturing operations as required in
more restricted district(s).
            3.   Common parking and loading areas provided parking requirements
for all uses are met.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.325 I-A INDUSTRIAL - AGRICULTURE LAND.
   (A)   I-A Land Use District Statement of Intent.
      (1)   It is the intent of this District to provide a transitional zoning
district for land which is undeveloped and agricultural land but which is
projected to become industrial during future years; the desire being that large
tracts of land should be readily available to promote and encourage industrial
development.
      (2)   It is the intent of this District to continue to provide land for
purposes devoted to the production of agricultural products such as field
crops, livestock, fowl, and other conventional agricultural pursuits and to
also assist in the conservation of the natural resources within the
jurisdiction of this Ordinance by encouraging practices which will conserve
soil, soil resources, water, water resources, and prevent soil erosion and
flood water damages.
      (3)   At the same time, it is the intent of this District to provide
space for industrial and/or manufacturing and/or warehousing or storage
operations which may require building and/or open areas for fabricating,
processing, extracting, repairing, dismantling, or disposal of equipment, raw
materials, manufactured products or wastes; land designated for this District
should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the community
(including primary streets as well as rail and air if required) and designed so
as to not wholly disrupt normal traffic flow. Because of increasing
technological developments, extensive lists of permitted and prohibited uses
are impractical; therefore, to safeguard the public interests, performance
standards are established herein as criteria for all permitted uses and as
guidance for the City Council in permitting any conditional uses. Planned
Industrial Parks are encouraged in this District.
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For sign regulations, see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance.
      (2)   Building & enclosed pens for livestock, fowl & animals shall not be
closer than 200’ from any adjoining district.
      (3)   Principal and accessory buildings shall not be closer than 100’
from any adjoining parcel.
      (4)   Principal and accessory buildings shall not be closer than 50’ from
any adjoining parcel.
      (5)   Principal, accessory buildings and operations shall not be closer
than 500’ from any adjoining parcel.
      (6)   See State Law.
      (7)   See definition of Home Occupation.
      (8)   Principal, accessory buildings and operations shall not be closer
than 100’ from any adjoining parcel.
      (9)   See performance standards for I-2 District.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Agriculture and agricultural buildings in connection with a
bonafide farm operation (2).
         (b)   Cemeteries.
         (c)   Essential Services Forest Preserves.
         (d)   Single Family Farm Dwellings.
         (e)   Principal Uses and structures are permitted if the performance
standards for the District I-2, General Industrial District, are met and
certified as being met by a registered professional engineer of the State of
Illinois. Standards for the Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
         (f)   Wireless Communication Facility placed on an existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (g)   Municipally Owned Parks and Recreational Areas.
         (h)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to
permitted principal uses on the same parcel including:
            1.   Residential garages.
            2.   Home Occupations. See Note (7).
            3.   Truck or Equipment Terminal, but only with a Conditional Use
Permit.
            4.   Roadside produce stands in conjunction with a bonafide farm
operation on the premises.
            5.   Kennel.
         (b)   Accessory uses and structures are permitted if the performance
standards for the District I-2, General Industrial District, are met and
certified as being met by a registered professional engineer of the State of
Illinois. Standards for the Environmental Protection Agency must also be met.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   Sale of greenhouse products grown on premises.
         (b)   Riding Stables. See Note (2).
         (c)   Raising, breeding & boarding of non-farm fowl and animals. See
Note (2).
         (d)   Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun club or related operation.
         (e)   Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race track. See Notes (2),
(5).
         (f)   Penal or correctional institution. See Note (3).
         (g)   Airport or heliport. See Note (6).
         (h)   Sanitation Transfer Station.
         (i)   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facility as described within
§§
161.365 through
161.378.
         (j)   Commercial radio or television station.
         (k)   Commercial radio or television towers are exempted from height
regulations.
         (l)   Schools.
         (m)   Churches.
         (n)   Hospitals.
         (o)   Mineral extractive operations outside corporate limits,
including but not limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand and the related
processing operations, storing and sale of such materials (5).
         (p)   Energy Park; Wind Farm, Park, or Plant; for Commercial Solar
Energy Facility - see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
         (q)   Truck Terminal or Equipment Terminal, but only as an accessory
use to a Permitted Use.
         (r)   Cannabis Craft Grower or Cannabis Cultivation Center (must be
1500 feet distance between each use as measured from each property line).
         (s)   Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser; Cannabis Processing
Organization or Processor; Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Mobile Homes.
         (b)   Travel Trailer Parks.
         (c)   Junk Yard.
         (d)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (e)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (f)   Sanitation Landfill or other qualified system (7) except
sanitation transfer station.
         (g)   Residential use of any kind, including dwelling units. hotels,
motels, mobile homes, etc. except bonafide single family farm dwellings.
         (h)   Mineral Extractive Operations within corporate limits.
         (i)   Truck Stop.
      (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor area
(principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area ratio
(all buildings).
         (a)   MIN. LOT AREA: 5 acres, except for cemeteries in which case 2
acres; and conditional uses as determined by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   MIN. LOT WIDTH: 300’.
         (c)   MIN. FRONT YD. DEPTH: 80’ along Federal Highway; 60’ along other
public roads.
         (d)   MIN. REAR YD. DEPTH: 100’.
         (e)   MIN. FLOOR AREA: 1,000 Sq. Ft.
         (f)   MAX. HEIGHT: 40’ except barns & silos; and all except
manufacturing/industrial, etc. buildings which are to be determined by F.A.R.
         (g)   MAX. STORIES: 3, except for manufacturing/industrial, etc.
buildings which are to be determined by F.A.R.
         (h)   MAX. FLOOR AREA RATIO: .50 for manufacturing/ industrial, etc.
buildings; otherwise N/A.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
 
land use                                parking spaces loading spaces
Dwelling Unit                           2              0
Home Occupation                         +1             0
Churches per 4 seats in main auditorium 1              0
 
         (a)   Industrial, manufacturing, etc.
         (b)   Graded, paved, marked, lighted, and drained off-street parking
and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
            1.   a.   For industrial or manufacturing operation: 1 auto parking
space per (a) two employees of combined employment of two largest successive
shifts, or (b) two employees if only one shift operation; plus 1 auto parking
space equal to 15% of the above for visitors and company vehicles.
               b.   Minimum of 1 off-street loading space. Additional off-
street loading space may be required by the nature and size of anticipated
operations.
            2.   For non-industrial or manufacturing operations as required in
more restricted district(s).
            3.   Common parking and loading areas provided parking requirements
for all uses are met.
      (7)   All remaining permitted uses and conditional uses if permitted are
subject to the Planning Commission. Consideration shall be given to
recommendation of administrative official.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
§ 161.326 IPCA-PUD INDUSTRIAL PARK CONSERVATION AREA-PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
(COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS FOR IPCA-PUD).
   (A)   IPCA-PUD Land Use District Statement of Intent. IPCA-PUD Industrial
Park Conservation Area
   (B)   NOTES.
      (1)   For Sign Regulations see §§
161.240 through
161.258 of this Ordinance - B-3.
      (2)   The development plan for a IPCA-PUD District shall be approved by
the City Council; such plan shall show:
         (a)   Access points to public ROW.
         (b)   Building locations.
         (c)   Parking layout.
         (d)   Elevations of buildings.
         (e)   Landscaping plan.
         (f)   Lighting plan.
         (g)   Drainage plan.
         (h)   Site utilities plan.
         (i)   Such plan shall be compatible with the comprehensive and
thoroughfare plans.
         (j)   If development is to be staged, phasing shall be indicated.
      (3)   Commercial and Industrial uses are encouraged to follow guidelines
as described in the Commercial Design Standards Section.
   (C)   Schedule of District Regulations.
      (1)   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures.
         (a)   Industrial and warehouse uses in facilities where the primary
building exceeds 100,000 sq. ft.
         (b)   Non-Commercial Solar Energy Facility- see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code.
      (2)   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and
structures customarily incidental to permitted principal uses on the same
parcel including: Propane Filling Station with a Conditional Use Permit but
only for the uses specified herein.
      (3)   Conditional Uses. After notice & appropriate safeguards, the City
Council may permit as Conditional Uses:
         (a)   The following uses providing the location, nature and extent of
proposed operations are compatible with other uses in the district, and that
any proposed development plan provides consideration for integration with the
thoroughfare system of the neighborhood and community.
            1.   Adult Daycare.
            2.   Appliance Repair.
            3.   Amusement Centers, indoor or outdoor.
            4.   Art Galleries.
            5.   Auto Glass Stores.
            6.   Auto Parking Lots or Structures.
            7.   Automobile Sales & Service.
            8.   Banks.
            9.   Barbers.
            10.   Business & Professional Offices.
            11.   Bowling Alleys.
            12.   Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
               a.   must be 1500 feet distance between each use as measured
from each property line and 100 feet distance from any pre-existing church or
daycare or pre-school facility or primary or secondary school or residential
care home, as measured from the property line of the Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the closest building line of the church or daycare or pre-
school facility or primary or secondary school or residential care home and
               b.   cannabis café, lounge, or on-site consumption is
prohibited).
            13.   Cannabis Craft Grower or Cannabis Cultivation Center (must be
1500 feet distance between each use as measured from each property line).
            14.   Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser; Cannabis Processing
Organization or Processor; Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter.
            15.   Chambers of Commerce.
            16.   Chemical Supplies.
            17.   Clothes Cleaning Agency.
            18.   Clubs or Lodges (Private).
            19.   Construction Company - but not outside storage of equipment.
            20.   Convenience Stores with fuel, without facilities for semi
trucks.
            21.   Credit Bureaus & Collections.
            22.   Currency Exchanges.
            23.   Custom Tailor & Dressmaking.
            24.   Day Care Center.
            25.   Drive-In Banking.
            26.   Drive-In Restaurants.
            27.   Drive-In Operations not otherwise specified or prohibited.
            28.   Drive-In Theaters.
            29.   Employment Agencies.
            30.   Essential Services.
            31.   Exterminators.
            32.   Governmental Offices.
            33.   Hotels & Motels.
            34.   Insurance Agencies.
            35.   Interior Decorator.
            36.   Fire Station.
            37.   General Loan.
            38.   Janitorial Services.
            39.   Jewelry Repair.
            40.   Libraries.
            41.   Locksmiths.
            42.   Lumber Yards.
            43.   Meat, Poultry or Fish Market.
            44.   Medical Clinics.
            45.   Motion Picture Theaters.
            46.   Museums.
            47.   Newspaper Offices but not newspaper plants.
            48.   One or more dwelling units above the main floor.
            49.   One dwelling unit used solely in conjunction with and forming
part of a funeral home.
            50.   Paint, Wallpaper-Glass.
            51.   Pet Shop.
            52.   Photographer.
            53.   Police Station.
            54.   Post Office.
            55.   Printers.
            56.   Propane Filling Station (See Notes).
            57.   Rental Equipment.
            58.   Savings & Loan Association.
            59.   TV Studios.
            60.   Title Abstract Offices.
            61.   Transportation Terminals (passenger).
            62.   Travel Agencies.
            63.   Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck Stop-- see Notes
(2019).
            64.   Upholstery Shop.
            65.   Utility Company Offices, but not outside storage of
equipment.
            66.   Veterinarians.
            67.   Warehouses.
            68.   Winery.
            69.   Wireless Communication Facility placed on existing
nonresidential structure as described within §§
161.365 through
161.378.
            70.   Stores or shops offering the following merchandise primarily
at retail & wherein or whereat incidental but subordinate related services may
or may not be available.
            71.   Appliance.
            72.   Auto glass.
            73.   Auto Parts - Wholesale or retail.
            74.   Auto & Truck Sales.
            75.   Bakery Goods.
            76.   Books.
            77.   Camera Shop.
            78.   Candy, but not manufacturing operations.
            79.   Catering.
            80.   Confectionery.
            81.   Dairy Products.
            82.   Delicatessen or Food, but not grocery or supermarket.
            83.   Department.
            84.   Drapery.
            85.   Drug.
            86.   Dry Goods.
            87.   Farm & Garden Supplies, but not milling or grain storage
operations nor sale of major agricultural implements.
            88.   Florist.
            89.   Food.
            90.   Furniture.
            91.   Gifts.
            92.   Grocery & Supermarkets.
            93.   Hardware.
            94.   Ice Cream, Ice Milk-walk-in or walk-up but not drive-in.
            95.   Jewelry.
            96.   Liquor.
            97.   Locksmith.
            98.   Mail Order.
            99.   Meat, Poultry or Fish.
            100.   Milliner.
            101.   Music.
            102.   Notions.
            103.   Office Supply.
            104.   Optical Merchandise.
            105.   Paint, Wallpaper, Glass.
            106.   Pawn Brokers.
            107.   Periodicals.
            108.   Pet Shop.
            109.   Pharmacy.
            110.   Ready to wear, Men’s, Women’s, Children, Infants.
            111.   Restaurants, but not drive-in.
            112.   Shoes.
            113.   Sporting goods.
            114.   Stationery.
            115.   Tobacco, News.
            116.   Toys.
            117.   Variety or Dime.
            118.   Commercial Solar Energy Facility (see
Chapter 160 of the Revised Code of Ordinances).
         (b)   The administrative official shall have authority to determine
other uses, in addition to those specifically listed herein, when in his
judgment such other uses are similar to and no more objectionable to the public
welfare than those listed.
         (c)   Conditional Use Notes
            1.   Notes (2019) re Equipment Terminal, Truck Terminal, Truck
Stop:
               a.   Not more than two uses shall be permitted at each of the
two I-57 interstate exchanges (Exit 94 and Exit 95) and at the one I-64
interstate exchange (Exit 80). Existing nonconforming uses shall be counted as
a use.
               b.   The parcel on which the use is situated must have its
closest boundary point to be within at least 1,000 feet of the centerline of
the nearest I-57 or I-64 interstate highway exit ramp at its point of
intersection with a state highway or with Veteran’s Memorial Drive.
               c.   The minimum distance between uses (which includes any
existing non-conforming use) shall be 2000 feet measured along road frontage
from the nearest entry or exit point of each use.
               d.   All entry or exit points for the parcel shall immediately
abut and have access only upon a state highway, upon Veteran’s Memorial Drive,
or upon a street that has been constructed and designated by the City for use
by trucks up to 80,000-pounds; no other street or road shall provide access.
               e.   All access points shall have dedicated left-turn and/or
right-turn lanes, either presently existing or constructed by the parcel owner/
developer with permission of the City.
               f.   The use shall have only the number of spaces dedicated for
truck parking as permitted by the Resolution Granting the Conditional Use and
no truck parking shall be permitted or occur except within such dedicated
spaces.
               g.   Lawful Equipment Terminals, Truck Terminals, or Truck Stops
existing on date of adoption of these Notes shall be a nonconforming use and
shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter 161 relating to
nonconforming uses.
               h.   None of the foregoing provisions shall be subject to
variance.
            2.   Propane Filling Station:
               a.   Permitted only as an Accessory Use for a retailer which
primarily engages in sales of and service for travel trailers, or for a
retailer which primarily engages in sale of farm, garden, and hardware
supplies, or for a Truck Stop.
               b.   Must be enclosed by an approved locking security fencing
not less than 6 feet in height.
               c.   Minimum distance of security fencing to residentially zoned
property shall be 330 feet in all directions (with no variance permitted),
measured from the fencing to the property line of the residentially zoned
property.
               d.   Maximum tank size (with no variance permitted) shall be
1000 gallons.
               e.   Only Liquid Propane Gas (LPG) designated UN 1075 shall be
stored or sold upon the premises.
               f.   Must comply with applicable Codes, including
Chapter 91 of Revised Code.
               g.   Shall be subject to such additional conditions as
determined by the City Council to be necessary to protect the public interests.
      (4)   Prohibited Uses. Any use more appropriate to another zone or zones
including, but not limited to:
          (a)   Abandoned Automobile.
         (b)   Automobile Wrecking.
         (c)   Automobile Service Station.
         (d)   Agriculture.
         (e)   Agricultural Equipment Stores.
         (f)   Agricultural Products except produce.
         (g)   Churches.
         (h)   Commercial Radio or Television Station.
         (i)   Commercial Radio or Television Towers are exempted from height
regulations.
         (j)   Drive-Ins:
            1.   Ice Cream or Ice Milk.
            2.   Auto Washing.
         (k)   Hospitals.
         (l)   Junk Yards.
         (m)   Kennel.
         (n)   Manufacturing or industrial operations except those permitted.
         (o)   Mineral Extractive Operations.
         (p)   Mineral Extractive Operations within corporate limits.
         (q)   Mineral Extractive Operations outside corporate limits,
including but not limited to: coal, oil, rock, gravel, sand and the related
processing operations, storing and sale of such materials.
         (r)   Mobile Homes.
         (s)   Moving & Storage Operations.
         (t)   Penal or correction institution.
         (u)   Raising, breeding & boarding of non-farm fowl and animals.
         (v)   Residential Dwelling Units.
         (w)   Residential use of any kind, including dwelling units, hotels,
motels, mobile homes, etc. except bonafide single family farm dwellings.
         (x)   Riding Stables.
         (y)   Sales & Service.
         (z)   Sale of greenhouse products grown on premises.
         (aa)   Sanitation Landfill or other qualified system except sanitation
transfer station.
         (bb)   Sanitation Transfer Station.
         (cc)   Schools.
         (dd)   Seasonal fishing, hunting lodge, gun club or related operation.
         (ee)   Sexually Oriented Businesses.
         (ff)   Single Family Residential Structures.
         (gg)   Stadium or coliseum, horse or auto race track.
         (hh)   Storage Facilities.
         (ii)   Trailers.
         (jj)   Travel Trailers.
         (kk)   Travel Trailer Parks.
         (ll)   Truck Sales & Service.
         (mm)   Warehouses except where permitted.
         (nn)   Wireless Communication Facility-freestanding as described with
§§
161.365 through
161.378.
       (5)   Minimum lot area; Minimum yards (all buildings); Minimum floor
area (principal buildings); Maximum height (all buildings); Maximum floor area
ratio (all buildings). Minimum lot areas and setback requirements shall comply
with those required in the I-2 District for Industrial Uses and B-3 District
for all other uses.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking & loading.
         (a)   Industrial uses shall comply with parking regulations in the I-
2 District.
         (b)   All other uses shall comply with parking regulations in the B-
3 District.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-300) (Ord. 2023-30, passed 8-21-2023)
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOOD PLAIN (SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD) AREAS
§ 161.340 PURPOSE.
   All new development proposals in the Flood Plain (Special Flood Hazard)
Areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Building Officials so as to
accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   to lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
   (G)   to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.1)
§ 161.341 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
161.342 of this ordinance.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;   
         (b)   substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days per year;
         (d)   installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;   
         (e)   construction or erection of levees, dams walls or fences;   
         (f)   drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filing, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the City of Mt. Vernon, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Mt.
Vernon, or that may be annexed into the City of Mt. Vernon, that are subject to
inundation by the base flood.
      (2)   The floodplains of the City of Mt. Vernon are generally identified
as such on panel numbers (0179C, 0180C, 0183C, 0184C, 0185C, 0190C, 0191C,
0192C, 0195C, and 0225C) of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Jefferson County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
September 17, 2010. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the community.
      (3)   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Jefferson County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon or
that may be annexed into the City of Mt. Vernon are generally identified as
such on the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared for Jefferson County by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
management agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Church Tributary, West
Tributary, East Fork Botch’s Ditch, Botch’s Ditch, Casey Fork, Bell Street
Ditch, Brickyard Creek, and Bishop Creek shall be as delineated on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson prepared by FEMA and dated
September 17, 2010. The FLOODWAYS for each of the remaining floodplains of the
City of Mt. Vernon shall be according to the best data available from the
Federal, State, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
161.346 of this ordinance.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   built on a single chassis;
      (2)   four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
      (3)   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty-five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. (see BUILDING.)
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this
ordinance equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work
performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes “Repetitive Loss Buildings” (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance in which
the cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
         (b)   increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION.
      (1)   The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
      (2)   A structure or other development without the required federal,
state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in
violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.2)
§ 161.342 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This ordinance’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Church Tributary, West
Tributary, East Fork Botch’s Ditch, Botch’s Ditch, Casey Fork, Bell Street
Ditch, Brickyard Creek, and Bishop Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Jefferson prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 17, 2010.   
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county
wide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jefferson County.   
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as a “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Jefferson County shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.3)
§ 161.343 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official of the City of Mt. Vernon shall be responsible for the
general administration of this ordinance and ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City of Mt.
Vernon meet the requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Building
Official shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with §
161.344;
   (B)   ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
161.345;
   (C)   ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
161.346 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
161.347;
   (E)   ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public
Health standards of §
161.348;
   (F)   if a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
161.350 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in §
161.352 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
   (H)   assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
   (L)   maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this ordinance;
   (M)   perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain,
and
   (N)   maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.4)
§ 161.344 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Official. The Building Official shall not
issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this ordinance.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
161.346 of this ordinance, and
      (5)   cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Building Official shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
      (2)   The Building Official shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate
Map identification.
      (3)   The Building Official shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Official shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and
local permits have been obtained.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.5)
§ 161.345 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in (B) of this ordinance, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public
health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet, and
         (b)   the crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one half (0.5) feet at a point one thousand
(1,000) feet upstream of the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   (a)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 3:
         (b)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4;
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty (50) feet into a
waterway and no more than one quarter (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and
Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten (10) feet.
         (c)   For L-Shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner’s shoreline frontage nor fifty (50) feet.
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten (10) feet of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers
      (5)   (a)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6:
         (b)   the following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            1.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            2.   The construction of light poles, sign posts, and similar
structures.
            3.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            4.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            5.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            6.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:   
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three (3) feet of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   1.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban
areas: stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-
formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled
bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber.
            2.   Urban areas are defined as: areas of the State where
residential, commercial, or industrial development currently exists or, based
on land use plans or controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The
Department should be consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area
is considered urban).
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in (A)(8)(a), other
materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided all
other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5).
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
(1000) feet.
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   1.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-
width and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            2.   For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along
the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent
(10%) nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal
foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a
flatter slope and to lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            1.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
            2.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty (50)
feet of the bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand (1000) feet.
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and down stream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   removed from the floodway;
            2.   used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten percent
(10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per lineal
foot of streambank;
            3.   used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            5.   placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval, or
            6.   used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure, and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR).
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term TEMPORARY shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number (A)(12)(c) of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include,
at a minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by
the backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).   
      (13)   Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in (A) may be permitted only
if:
      (1)   permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      (2)   sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.6)
§ 161.346 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
161.345 of this ordinance, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000) or seventy (70) square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
161.341.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   1.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
            2.   Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or by having a minimum of one (1) permanent opening on each wall no
more than one (1) foot above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch
for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the
base flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.   
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch per one (1) square foot of
enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four (4)
feet at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with (B), and
      (2)   anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of (D)
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model, and
      (10)   must either:
         (a)   entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage of shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000)
in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five
hundred (500) square feet.
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.7)
§ 161.347 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The City of Mt. Vernon shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
161.345 and
161.346 of this ordinance. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   the boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      (3)   a signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.8)
§ 161.348 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
161.345 and
161.346 of this ordinance the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
161.346 of this ordinance.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.9)
§ 161.349 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the City of Mt. Vernon shall notify adjacent
communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for
the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.10)
§ 161.350 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning and Planning
Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon for a variance. The Zoning and Planning
Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this ordinance.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      (7)   all other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The Zoning and Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon shall
notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the
building protections standards of §
161.346 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-
five dollars ($25) per one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage;
      (2)   increase the risk to life and property, and
      (3)   require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
161.346 of this ordinance which are requested in connection with
reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure
as defined in “Historic Structures”, may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of §§
161.346 and
161.347 of this ordinance subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.11)
§ 161.351 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability on the part
of the City of Mt. Vernon or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.12)
§ 161.352 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the Building Official may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this ordinance exists.
The Building Official shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the
violation:
      (1)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the ordinance.
      (2)   Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven hundred
fifty ($750) for each offense.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      (4)   The City of Mt. Vernon shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Official shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
      (2)   The Building Official is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Zoning and Planning Commission of the
City of Mt. Vernon. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the
permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation, and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning
and Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Vernon shall determine whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Mt. Vernon from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.13)
§ 161.353 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinances,
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.14)
§ 161.354 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-400.15)
ZONING, SITING LOCATION AND DESIGN REGULATIONS FOR
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
§ 161.365 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish guidelines for the
siting of towers and antennas within the jurisdiction of the City of Mt.
Vernon. The goals of this Ordinance are to:
      (1)   encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the community,
      (2)   encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites,
      (3)   encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal,
      (4)   encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas,
      (5)   protect the public health and safety, and
      (6)   enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently.
   (B)   (1)   The Illinois General Assembly enacted Public Act 100-0585, known
as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (50 ILCS 840/) and effective on
June 1, 2018, preempting some authority of the City of Mt. Vernon to regulate
small wireless facilities.
      (2)   Provisions of the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act
are incorporated within the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Vernon as §§
161.390 through
161.397 Small Wireless Facilities as defined herein are subject to §§
161.390 through
161.397.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.1)
§ 161.366 DEFINITIONS.
   ABANDONMENT or ABANDONED. Means:
      (1)   to cease operation for a period of sixty (60) or more consecutive
days;
      (2)   to reduce the effective radiated power of an antenna by seventy-
five percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive days;
      (3)   to relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty (80) percent of
the height of an antenna support structure; or
      (4)   (a)   to reduce the number of transmissions from an antenna by
seventy-five percent for sixty (60) or more consecutive days.
         (b)   If there are two or more users of a single Wireless
Communication Facility then this provision shall not be applicable to the
supporting structure until all users have met the definition.
   ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL. Successful completion of application process and
issuance of a Building Permit.
   ANTENNA. Any system of electromagnetically tuned wires, poles, rods,
reflecting discs or similar devices used to transmit or receive electromagnetic
waves between terrestrial and/or orbital based points, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   ANCILLARY ANTENNA: An antenna that is less than twelve (12) inches
in its largest dimension and that is not directly used to provide personal
wireless communications services. An example would be a global positioning
satellite (GPS) antenna.
      (2)   PANEL ANTENNA: A directional antenna which transmits and receives
radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of up to 120-degrees,
and which is typically thin and rectangular in shape.
      (3)   PARABOLIC (OR DISH) ANTENNA: A bowl-shaped device for the reception
and/or transmission of communications signals in a narrow and specific
direction.
      (4)   TUBULAR ANTENNA: A tube typically twelve (12) inches in diameter
containing either omni-directional or directional antenna, depending on the
specific site requirement. This is often used as a means to mitigate the
appearance of antennae on top of light standards and power poles.
      (5)   WHIP ANTENNA: An Omni-directional antenna, which transmits and
receives radio frequency signals in a 360-degree radial pattern. Typically four
inches or less in diameter.
   CO-LOCATION. The placement and arrangement of multiple providers’ antennae
and equipment on a single support structure or equipment pad area.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this §§
161.365 through
161.378, §§
161.135 through
161.138 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
   ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD. The field produced by the operation of equipment used
in transmitting and receiving radio frequency signals.
   EQUIPMENT SHELTER. The structure associated with a Wireless Communication
Facility that is used to house electronic switching equipment, cooling systems,
and back-up power systems.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FREESTANDING WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A wireless communication
facility utilizing a monopole support structure.
   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure even if
the highest point is an antenna.
   MICROCELL. A Wireless Communication Facility consisting of a single antenna
that is either:
      (1)   a panel antenna not more than four (4) feet in height and with an
area of not more than five-hundred eighty (580) square inches; or
      (2)   a whip antenna, no more than four (4) inches in diameter and no
more than six (6) feet in height; or
      (3)   a tubular antenna no more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and
six (6) feet in height; except Microcell shall not include a Small Wireless
Facility defined within and subject to §§
161.390 through
161.397.
   MINOR FACILITY. A Wireless Communication Facility consisting of up to three
(3) antennae, each of which is either
      (1)   not more than four (4) feet in height and with an area of not more
than five-hundred eighty (580) square inches; or
      (2)   a whip antenna, no more than four (4) inches in diameter and no
more than six (6) feet in height;
      (3)   a tubular antenna no more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter and
six (6) feet in height; and an associated equipment cabinet that is six (6)
feet or less in height and no more than forty-eight (48) square feet in floor
area; except Minor Facility shall not include a Small Wireless Facility defined
within and subject to §§
161.390 through
161.397.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services, unlicenced wireless
services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332 (c)(7)(C).
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility or micro wireless
facility defined within and subject to §§
161.390 through
161.397.
   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any built structure, including any guy wires and anchors,
to which antenna and other necessary associated hardware is mounted. SUPPORT
STRUCTURES include the following:
      (1)   EXISTING NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Existing structures identified
in this Ordinance to which wireless facility components may be attached with
certain mitigating conditions.
      (2)   GUY TOWER. A support structure such as a pole or narrow metal
framework which is held erect by the use of guy wires and anchors.
      (3)   LATTICE TOWER. A support structure which consists of a network of
crossed metal braces, forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in
cross-section.
      (4)   MONOPOLE. A support structure that consists of a single steel or
wood pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a concrete pad.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A Wireless Communication Facility,
including a microcell, that is a facility for the transmission and/or reception
of radio (television) frequency signals, and which may include antennas,
equipment shelter or cabinet, transmission cables, a support structure to
achieve the necessary elevation, and reception and transmission devices and
antennas.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.2)
§ 161.367 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be
permitted in all zones:
   (A)   Industrial processing equipment and scientific or medical equipment
using frequencies regulated by the FCC:
   (B)   Antennas and related equipment not more than three (3) feet in height
that are being stored, shipped, or displayed for sale;
   (C)   Facilities used for purposes of public safety, such as, but not
limited to, police and the regional 911 system;
   (D)   Wireless radio utilized for temporary emergency communications in the
event of a disaster;
   (E)   Licensed amateur (ham) radio stations not greater than 75-feet in
total height including any support or other existing structure.
   (F)   Wireless Data Communications antenna for Internet single end user
(i.e. consumer) not greater than 75-feet in total height including any support
or other existing structure.
   (G)   Satellite dish antennas one meter in diameter or less, including
direct to home satellite services, when used as a secondary use of the property
in all zoning districts, except within business and industrial districts
satellite dish antennas two meters in diameter or less;
   (H)   Freestanding residential television or private radio reception antenna
stations not exceeding 60-feet in height or residential television or private
radio reception antennas mounted on existing residential structures not more
than 60-feet in height including the height of the roof line of the structures.
   (I)   Wireless Communication Facilities which legally existed prior to
August 7, 2000; except that this exemption does not apply to modifications of
such existing facilities;
   (J)   Maintenance or repair of a Wireless Communication Facility and related
equipment, (excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of
antennas, towers, or buildings) provided that compliance with the standards of
this Ordinance are maintained.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.3)
§ 161.368 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Principal or Accessory Use. A Wireless Communication Facility will be
considered either principal or accessory uses. A different use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a Wireless
Communication Facility on that lot except as specifically provided within this
Ordinance.
   (B)   Not Essential Services. Wireless telecommunications facilities are not
considered essential public facilities and shall not be regulated or permitted
as essential public facilities.
   (C)   FCC Licensing. The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by
the FCC if it is required to be licensed under FCC regulations. The applicant
if not the telecommunications service provider shall submit proof of lease
agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider if they are
required to be licensed by the FCC.
   (D)   Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
wireless telecommunications facility complies with zoning and development
standards, such as, but not limited to, setback and lot coverage requirements,
only the dimensions of the parcel upon which the wireless telecommunications
facility is located shall be considered. If the Wireless Communication Facility
is located upon a leased parcel of a larger lot, then only the leased area
shall be considered.
   (E)   Signs. No wireless telecommunications equipment shall be used for the
purpose of mounting signs or message displays of any kind.
   (F)   Lighting. Wireless Communication Facilities shall not be artificially
lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
   (G)   Permanent Mounting Required. All commercial wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be installed, erected, or mounted in a
manner that is intended to be permanent. Temporary and mobile commercial
facilities are not allowed except for testing purposes, or emergency or display
purposes not to exceed a 24-hour period except with the written permission of
the Chief Building Inspector of the City, which permission shall be granted
only upon good cause not within the control of the permittee.
   (H)   Cumulative Effects. The City shall consider the cumulative visual
effects of Wireless Communication Facilities mounted on existing structures
and/or located on a given permitted site in determining whether the additional
administrative approval can be granted so as to not adversely affect the visual
character of the City.
   (I)   Change of Ownership Notification. Upon transfer of ownership of any
Wireless Communication Facility or the lot or parcel upon which such facility
has been erected the owner of the Wireless Communication Facility shall notify
in writing the City of Mt. Vernon, Building Inspector, within thirty (30) days
of the transfer. No transfer of ownership shall release said owner-transferor
from the owner’s existing obligations under this Ordinance; in addition, all
transfers of ownership in whole or part shall obligate and subject the new
owner-transferee to any obligations of the transferor existing under this
Ordinance at time of transfer.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.4)
§ 161.369 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Freestanding.
      (1)   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities may be located in
the following Agriculture, Flood Plain, Business or Industrial zoning districts
subject to administrative approval at the following heights; provided in all
cases a Conditional Use Permit must be obtained in accordance with §§
161.135 through
161.138 of the Revised Code of Ordinances:
         (a)   A-G, General Agriculture District and F-P, Flood Plain District:
200 feet.
         (b)   I-1, Light Industrial District, 1-2, General Industrial
District, and I-A, Industrial-Agriculture District: 200 feet.
         (c)   B-2, Secondary Business District, B-3, and Interchange Business
District: 120 feet.
      (2)   No freestanding Wireless Communication Facility shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City
that no existing Wireless Communication Facility, freestanding or located on
existing structures, nor any available structure can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing Wireless Communication Facility or structure can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
         (a)   No existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures are
located within the geographic area required to meet applicant’s engineering
requirements.
         (b)   Existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures are not
sufficient height to meet applicant’s engineering requirements.
         (c)   Existing Wireless Communication Facility or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and
related equipment.
         (d)   The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing Wireless Communication Facility
or structures, or the antenna on the existing Wireless Communication Facility
or structures would cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.
         (e)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure to adapt an existing Wireless
Communication Facility or to use an existing structure for sharing or use are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new Wireless Communication Facility development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
         (f)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing Wireless Communication Facility and structures unsuitable.
   (B)   Existing Structures. Wireless Communication Facilities may be placed
in any zoning district on the following existing structures subject to
administrative approval of the facility. No Conditional Use Permit is required.
The height of the wireless facility must not exceed the height requirements of
§
161.370(B) herein:
      (1)   Any free standing support structure currently used by a permitted
Wireless Communication Facility;
      (2)   Non-residential buildings including, but not limited to, office
buildings, retail buildings, industrial buildings, and clubhouses; but not
including structures considered accessory structures to a residential use; and
      (3)   Minor facilities located on non-residential buildings and
structures including, but not limited to, water towers, government buildings,
churches, light standards in parking lots and sports fields, bridges, power
poles and towers, and flag poles.
   (C)   Rights-of-Way. 
      (1)   Subject to administrative approval, Wireless Communication
Facilities may be placed in the public right-of-way or utility right-of-way
provided the Wireless Communication Facility is a microcell consisting of a
whip or tubular antenna placed on a light standard or power pole and the
equipment cabinet is placed in the ground; provided the written agreement of
the right-of-way owner is first obtained and the right-of-way permits same.
      (2)   No such pole and microcell shall have a combined height which
exceeds 40 feet; no minimum setback requirement shall be required for the
antenna.
   (D)   Residential Districts. Except as provided in subsection (B) above,
Wireless Communication Facilities are not permitted in any residential
district.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.5)
§ 161.370 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be constructed, erected or built
in accordance with the following site development standards:
   (A)   (1)   Wireless Communication Facilities shall be screened or
camouflaged by employing the best available technology.
      (2)   This may be accomplished by use of compatible materials, location,
color, stealth technologies, and/or other tactics to achieve minimum visibility
of the facility as viewed from public streets or residential properties. All
screening and camouflaging is subject to the approval of the City when possible
facilities should be camouflaged to resemble trees.
   (B)   Wireless Communication Facilities may be mounted on certain
nonresidential buildings and structures in accordance with the limitations in §
161.369(B) with administrative approval, provided that the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The Wireless Communication Facility is co-located on an existing
wireless communication facility and conforms to §
161.369(A); or
      (2)   The Wireless Communication Facility consists of a microcell or a
minor facility as follows:
         (a)   The combined antenna(e) and supporting hardware shall not extend
more than 15 feet above the existing or proposed roof structure. Antenna(e) may
be mounted to rooftop appurtenances provided they do not extend beyond 15 feet
above the roof proper; and
         (b)   The antenna(e) and supporting hardware shall be mounted on the
building upon which they are located and designed to minimize visual and
aesthetic impacts to surrounding land uses and structures and shall, to the
greatest extent practical, blend into the existing environment.
         (c)   The minimum setback in each direction from the edge of the
building or structure shall be one and one-half feet of setback for each foot
of combined antenna and supporting hardware height, which minimum setback shall
not be subject to variance.
   (C)   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities shall conform to all of
the following site development standards:
      (1)   Monopoles shall be the only freestanding support structures allowed
in the City; no lattice towers or guy towers shall be permitted;
      (2)   Installation of a freestanding facility shall be denied if
placement of the antennae on an existing structure can meet the applicant’s
technical and network location requirements;
      (3)   (a)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the Wireless
Communication Facility is the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily.
         (b)   No freestanding facility that is taller than the maximum allowed
height shall be approved. Height shall be measured to the top of the antenna
(e);
      (4)   A freestanding Wireless Communication Facility, including the
support structure and associated electronic equipment, shall have a minimum
setback requirement from all adjoining property lines equal to one foot of
setback for each foot of height; except, however, when on a parcel adjacent to
a residential use or adjacent to a lot zoned residential, then the minimum
setback from the property line(s) of the adjacent residential use or lot shall
be one and one-half feet of setback for each foot of height. Minimum setback
requirements shall not be subject to variance;
      (5)   Freestanding Wireless Communication Facilities shall be designed
and placed on the site in a manner that takes maximum advantage of existing
trees, mature vegetation, and structures so as to:
         (a)   Use existing site features to screen as much of the total
facility as possible from prevalent views; and/or
         (b)   Use existing site features as a background so that the total
facility blends into the background with increased sight distances;
      (6)   In reviewing the proposed placement of a wireless facility on the
site and any associated landscaping, the City may make a condition of the
permit that the applicant supplement existing trees and mature vegetation to
more effectively screen the facility; and
      (7)   Support structures, antennae, and any associated hardware shall be
painted a nonreflective color or color scheme appropriate to the background
against which the facility would be viewed from a majority of points within its
viewshed. A proposed color or color scheme shall be approved by the City.
      (8)   (a)   Separation distances between freestanding Wireless
Communication Facilities is required and shall measured between the proposed
Wireless Communication Facility and those Wireless Communication Facilities
that are existing, or have received approval on the effective date of this
Ordinance from any governmental entity, regardless of whether situated within
or outside the corporate limits of the City.
         (b)   The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the existing Wireless
Communication Facility and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the
proposed Wireless Communication Facility.
         (c)   No freestanding Wireless Communication Facility shall be erected
within 1500 feet of another freestanding Wireless Communication Facility.
   (D)   Electronics equipment enclosures shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Screening of Wireless Communication Facility equipment enclosures
shall be provided with one or a combination of the following: underground,
fencing, walls, landscaping, structures, or topography which will block the
view of the equipment shelter as much as practicable from any street and/or
adjacent properties. Screening may be located anywhere between the enclosure
and the above mentioned viewpoints. Landscaping for the purposes of screening
shall be maintained in a healthy condition; and
      (2)   No wireless equipment reviewed under this section shall be located
within required building setback areas.
   (E)   Security fencing, if used, shall conform to the following:
      (1)   No fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height or be less than six
(6) feet in height;
      (2)   Security fencing shall be effectively screened from view through
the use of appropriate landscaping materials; and
      (3)   Chain-link fences shall be painted or coated with a nonreflective
color, and shall have a minimum three (3) foot deep area to be planted with
approved plant species in a manner that will completely screen the fencing.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.6)
§ 161.371 CO-LOCATION.
   The intent of co-location is to encourage several providers to use the same
structure or site to keep the number of Wireless Communication Facilities sites
to a minimum as a means of reducing the overall visual effects throughout the
community. The following procedures are required to further the intent of
Wireless Communication Facility co-location:
   (A)   A permittee shall cooperate with other Wireless Communication Facility
providers in co-locating additional antennae on support structures and/or on
existing buildings and sites provided said proposed co-locatees have received a
permit for such use at said site from the City. A permittee shall allow other
providers to co-locate and share the permitted site, provided such shared use
does not give rise to a substantial technical level impairment of the permitted
use (as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden).
   (B)   A signed statement indicating that the applicant agrees to allow for
the potential co-location of additional Wireless Communication Facility
equipment by other providers on the applicant’s structure or within the same
site location shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the permit
application. If an applicant contends that future co-location is not possible
on its site, the applicant must submit a technical study documenting that such
co-location is not possible.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.7)
§ 161.372 FACILITY REMOVAL.
   In instances where a Wireless Communication Facility is to be removed, the
removal shall be in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a Wireless Communication Facility shall notify
the City upon the discontinued use of a particular facility.
      (2)   The Wireless Communication Facility shall be removed by the
facility owner within ninety (90) days of the date the site’s use is
discontinued, it ceases to be operational, the permit is revoked, or if the
facility falls into disrepair or is abandoned. Disrepair includes structural
features, paint, landscaping, or general lack of maintenance which could result
in safety or visual impacts; and
   (B)   If the provider fails to remove the facility upon ninety (90) days of
its discontinued use or abandonment or disrepair, the responsibility for
removal falls upon the landowner on which the facility has been located. If any
facility is not removed within said ninety (90) days same shall constitute a
nuisance and shall be subject to removal by the City in accordance with §
90.11 of the Revised Code of Ordinances.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.8)
§ 161.373 ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD (EMF) STANDARDS COMPLIANCE.
   All Wireless Communication Facilities shall be operated in compliance with
the following standards:
   (A)   (1)   The applicant shall comply with Federal standards for EMF
emissions. Within six (6) months after the issuance of its operational permit,
the applicant shall submit a project implementation report which provides
cumulative field measurements of radio frequency (EMF) power densities of all
antennas installed at the subject site. The report shall quantify the EMF
emissions and compare the results with established Federal standards. Said
report shall be subject to review and approval by the City for established
Federal standards. Said report shall be subject to review and approval by the
City for consistency with the project proposal report and the adopted Federal
standards. If on review the City finds that the Wireless Communication Facility
does not meet Federal standards, the City may revoke or modify the permit. The
applicant shall be given a reasonable time based on the nature of the problem
to comply with the Federal standards. If the permit is revoked, then the
facility shall be removed pursuant to §
161.372.
      (2)   If said Federal standards are met, no administrative approval or
conditional use may be denied on grounds that radio frequency admissions are
harmful to the environment or to the health of residents.
   (B)   The applicant shall ensure that the Wireless Communication Facility
will not cause localized interference with the reception of area television or
radio or data broadcasts. If on review of a registered complaint the City finds
that the Wireless Communication Facility interferes with such reception, the
City may revoke or modify the permit. The applicant shall be given a reasonable
time based on the nature of the problem to correct the interference. If the
permit is revoked, then the facility shall be removed pursuant to §
161.372.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.9)
§ 161.374 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Applications for administrative approval and/or Conditional Use Permit shall
be in the form prescribed by the City of Mt. Vernon and shall include such
information as required for all such permits and shall also include the
information described below. The Chief Building Inspector shall issue a
Building Permit when an application for administrative approval has been deemed
to be complete. The City Council shall make final determination with regard to
Conditional Use Permits. Applications shall be processed in accordance with the
City’s ordinances and regulations as presently constituted or hereafter
amended. Application for a Wireless Communication Facility shall contain the
following information. In addition to the information required within other
Articles or provisions of the Revised Code of Ordinances, the Applicant must
provide any combination of site plans, maps, surveys, technical reports, or
written narratives that operate to convey all of the following information:
   (A)   Photo simulations of the proposed facility as viewed from affected
residential properties and public rights-of-way at varying distances;
   (B)   A signed statement indicating that:
      (1)   the applicant and landowner agree they will diligently negotiate in
good faith to facilitate co-location of additional Wireless Communication
facilities by other providers on the applicant’s structure or within the same
site location and
      (2)   the applicant and/or landlord agree to remove the facility within
ninety (90) days after abandonment;
   (C)   Copies of any environmental documents required by any federal agency,
if applicable. These shall include the environmental assessment required by FCC
Para. 1.1307, or in the event that a FCC environmental assessment is not
required, a statement that described the specific factors that obviate the
requirement for an environmental assessment;
   (D)   (1)   A full site plan shall be required for all sites, showing the
tower, antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering,
access, and all other items required in this Ordinance.
      (2)   The site plan shall clearly indicate the location, the specific
placement of the facility on the site, the type and height of the proposed
Wireless Communication Facility, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land
uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed facility, the location of
existing structures, trees, and other significant site features, the type and
location of plant materials used to screen the facility, fencing, proposed
color(s), and other proposed structures.
      (3)   The site plan shall not be required if the antenna is to be mounted
on an existing structure;
   (E)   A current map showing the location and service area of the proposed
Wireless Communication Facility, and a map showing the locations and service
areas of other Wireless Communication Facilities operated by the applicant and
those proposed by the applicant that are close enough to impact service within
the City;
   (F)   A legal description of the parcel, if applicable;
   (G)   The approximate distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties;
   (H)   The method of fencing, the finished color, and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination, if required;
   (I)   A letter signed by the applicant stating the Wireless Communication
Facility will comply with all FAA regulations and EIA (Electronic Industries
Association) Standards and all other applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations;
   (J)   A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the
Wireless Communication Facility will accommodate co-location of additional
antennas for future users;
   (K)   Certification that the antenna usage will not interfere with other
adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions.
   (L)   (1)   An inventory of its existing towers that are either within the
jurisdiction of the City of Mt. Vernon or within 1-1/2 miles of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design
of each tower.
      (2)   The City may share such information with other applicants applying
for administrative approvals or Conditional Use Permits under this Ordinance or
other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
City; provided, however, that the City is not, by sharing such information, in
any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
   (M)   At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how
the proposed site fits into its overall network within the City. This shall
include a service area coverage chart for the proposed facility that depicts
the extent of coverage and corresponding signal quality at the proposed
facility height and at least one height lower than that proposed.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.10)
§ 161.375 PERMIT LIMITATIONS.
   Construction of a Wireless Communication Facility shall commence within one
(1) year from the date of the City’s approval, which approval shall be the
earlier of date of issuance of a Building Permit or granting of a Conditional
Use. If not used within one year, the applicable permit shall become null and
void.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.11)
§ 161.376 FEES.
   In Addition to any other applicable fees, prior to administrative approval,
the applicant shall reimburse the City for costs of professional engineers and
other consultants hired by the City to review and inspect the applicant’s
proposal. By way of illustration and not limitation, these professional
services may include engineering and technical review, legal review, planning
review, Hearing Examiner services, environmental review, critical areas review,
financial and accounting review, soils review, and mechanical and structural
engineering review.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.12)
§ 161.377 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CITY.
   Nothing in this Ordinance shall operate to restrict or limit the City’s
ability to adopt and enforce all appropriate ordinances requirements for
telecommunications carriers’ and provider’s use of the rights-of-way and public
property, procedures for application and approval of telecommunication business
registrations, telecommunications rights-of-way use authorizations, franchises
and facilities leases, and describing violations and establishing penalties.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall operate to release in whole or in part any
applicant for a Wireless Communication Facility from the obligation to comply
with such ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.13)
§ 161.378 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance should be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500.14)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT ORDINANCE PROVIDING
FOR THE REGULATION OF AND APPLICATION FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 161.390 PREAMBLE.
   (A)   WHEREAS, the Illinois General Assembly enacted Public Act 100-0585,
known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (50 ILCS 835), having an
effective date of June 1, 2018, which has been moved to 50 ILCS 840/; and
   (B)   WHEREAS, the City of Mount Vernon, Illinois (the City) is an Illinois
municipality in accordance with the Constitution of the State of Illinois of
1970; and
   (C)   WHEREAS, the City is authorized, under existing State and federal law,
to enact appropriate regulations and restrictions relative to small wireless
facilities, distributed antenna systems and other personal wireless
telecommunication facility installations in the public right-of-way as long as
it does not conflict with State and federal law; and
   (D)   WHEREAS, the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act
preempts home rule authority and sets forth the requirements for the
collocation of small wireless facilities by local authorities; and
   (E)   WHEREAS, this §§
161.390 through
161.397 implements the requirements of the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A)
§ 161.391 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act, being 50 ILCS 840/.
   (B)   Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all
Ordinances or parts of Ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, but only to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Ordinance, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State
laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.1)
§ 161.392 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either
      (1)   listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with §§ VI.D.1.a.i through VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter A, Part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where
such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the City in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include City-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and
         (b)   all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
      (2)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures,
grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities.
      (3)   Wireless facility does not include:
         (a)   the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.2)
§ 161.393 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in (C)
(9) regarding Height Exceptions or Variances, but not subject to zoning review
or approval if they are collocated:
      (1)   in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or
      (2)   outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City’s Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, being 225 ILCS 340/4, for each proposed small wireless facility covered
by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application Process. The City shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
         (d)   1.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this Ordinance.
            2.   If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and
Conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            3.   The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
City denies an application.
            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City
and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial
is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City’s review period.
            5.   The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
City and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement,
provided by the City for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by
the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall
enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of Application.
         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the City shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the City’s permit application
form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City;
or
         (b)   A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated Applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the City may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of Permits.
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this Ordinance.
         (b)   If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as
provided in Section 90 (50 ILCS 840/90) therein, renewals of permits shall be
subject to the applicable City code provisions or regulations in effect at the
time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal
delivery at the City’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation Requirements and Conditions.
      (1)   Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
Ordinance. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 C.F.R. 22.970 through 47 C.F.R. 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. 90.672
through 47 C.F.R. 90.675.
         (e)   The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         (c)   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms COMMUNICATIONS
SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a City
ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate Placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements and
Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility
poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that
the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
      (8)   Height Limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
City, provided the City may designate which intersecting right-of-way within
300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   45 feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a Variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in §
161.120.
      (10)   Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   routine maintenance;
         (b)   the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the City at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with subsection (B)(1)(d) titled Application Requirements; or
         (c)   the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the City or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   (a)   property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any
other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-
102 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the consent of the
rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions
of this Ordinance do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such
utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of § 16-108.5 of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)).
         (b)   For the purposes of this subsection, PUBLIC UTILITY has the
meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/
3-105).
         (c)   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to relieve any
person from any requirement:
            1.   to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service or
            2.   to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain,
or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this Ordinance.
   (F)   Pre-Existing Agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this Ordinance.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
City makes available under this Ordinance for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms.
      (3)   The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider
has collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted
to the City before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this paragraph.
   (G)   Annual Recurring Rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals:
         (a)   $200 per year or
         (b)   the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the City utility pole.
      (2)   If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and
on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (3)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
City. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.3)
§ 161.394 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Jefferson County, Illinois shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its
poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.4)
§ 161.395 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.5)
§ 161.396 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; OR
      (3)   commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the City improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of City
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   (1)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the City.
      (2)   A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of
additional insureds under this Section.
      (3)   A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the City.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.6)
§ 161.397 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-500A.7)
ZONING REGULATIONS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 161.410 REGULATIONS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment may be allowed as a Conditional Use
in the R-1, Low Density Residential District; R-2, Medium Density Residential
District; R-M2, Medium Density Residential District and Mobile Home; R-3, High
Density Residential District.
   (B)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall at all times comply with the
regulations set forth herein.
   (C)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be located within a single-
family residence and shall maintain the appearance of a single-family
residence. No mobile home shall be used as a Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
   (D)   No expansion of the residence shall be allowed to accommodate a Bed
and Breakfast Establishment and all guest rooms shall be located in the
principal residential structure on the lot.
   (E)   Not more than fifty percent of the floor area of the residence nor
more than five bedrooms shall be devoted to rooms rented as overnight
accommodations; each bedroom shall serve no more than two guests.
   (F)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be an operator-occupied
residence at all times a guest is registered. “Operator” shall mean the owner
of the Bed and Breakfast Establishment or the owner’s agent who is required by
this Ordinance to reside in the Bed and Breakfast Establishment or upon
contiguous property.
   (G)   The operator of a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall maintain a
guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy; such register
shall be open to inspection by the appropriate City officials.
   (H)   Meals served by a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall only include
breakfast and shall only be served to overnight guests. A Bed and Breakfast
Establishment which serves breakfast shall comply with the following minimum
standards:
      (1)   Food shall be clean, wholesome, free from spillage, free from
adulteration and misbranding and safe for human consumption. Containers of food
shall be stored above the floor, on clean racks, shelves or other clean
surfaces in such a manner as to be protected from splash or other
contamination. Milk of only pasteurized Grade A may be used. Use of home canned
food is prohibited except for jams and jellies.
      (2)   Food shall be protected from contamination while being stored,
prepared, and served, and during transportation. Perishable foods shall be
stored at temperatures that will protect them against spoilage. Potentially
hazardous food shall be maintained at safe temperatures of 45 degrees F. or
below, or 140 degrees F. or above, as appropriate, except during necessary
periods of preparation and serving. Frozen food shall be kept at temperatures
that will keep it frozen, except when being thawed for preparation. Potentially
hazardous frozen food shall be thawed at refrigeration temperatures or below,
quick thawed as part of the cooking process, or thawed by another method
approved by the local Health Department. An indicating thermometer shall be
located in each refrigerator. Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed
thoroughly before use. Stuffings, poultry, and pork products shall be cooked to
heat all parts of the food at least 165 degrees F. before being served. Salads
made of meat, poultry, potatoes, fish, shellfish, or eggs and other potentially
hazardous prepared food, shall be prepared from chilled products with a minimum
of manual contact. Portions of food once served to an individual may not be
served again. Laundry facilities shall be separated from food preparation
areas. Live animals shall be excluded from food preparation areas.
      (3)   No person knowingly infected with a communicable disease that may
be transmitted by food handling may work in a Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
      (4)   If the Bed or Breakfast operator suspects that any employee, family
member or the operator himself or herself has a communicable disease, the
operator shall notify the local Health Department immediately.
      (5)   All operators shall be certified. Certification shall be achieved
by successfully completing an examination offered by the local Health
Department as described in the current edition of the State of Illinois Food
Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations.
      (6)   Persons preparing or serving food or washing utensils shall wear
clean outer garments and maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness. They
shall wash their hands thoroughly before starting work and as often as
necessary while working to remove soil and contaminants. After visiting a
toilet room, persons shall wash their hands thoroughly in a lavatory but never
in the kitchen sink.
      (7)   No one, while preparing or serving food, may use tobacco in any
form.
      (8)   Utensils shall be kept clean and in good repair.
      (9)   Multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned
after each use. Facilities needed for the operations of washing, rinsing and
sanitizing shall be provided.
      (10)   Pots, pans and other utensils used in the preparation or serving
of food or drink and all food storage utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned
after each use. Cooking surfaces of equipment, if any, shall be cleaned at
least once each day. Non-food contact surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at
intervals that will keep them in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (11)   Residential sinks and home -style mechanical dishwashing machines
are acceptable facilities for washing multi-use eating and drinking utensils.
Utensils shall be air dried.
       (12)   Immediately following either manual or mechanical washing of
eating or drinking utensils, and pots, pans and other cooking utensils, these
utensils shall be effectively sanitized by being submerged in a hypochlorite
solution with a chlorine concentration continuously maintained in one hundred
parts per million, or another approved sanitizing solution which shall be used
at the concentration tested and approved by the local Health Department.
Dishpans may be used to accomplish the final sanitizing rinse.
      (13)   The reuse of single-service utensils is prohibited.
   (I)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall comply with all Building
Codes, Fire Codes, and other Codes of the City of Mt. Vernon; in addition, a
Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Manual extinguishing equipment shall be provided on each floor in
accordance with NFPA 10 - Standards for the Installation of Portable Fire
Extinguishers.
      (2)   All combustibles or flammable liquids shall be stored in approved
metal containers. No combustible storage in or under stairways.
      (3)   All trash containers shall be metal.
      (4)   No cooking facilities nor storage facilities shall be permitted in
guest rooms.
      (5)   All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted.
      (6)   No portable heating devices shall be permitted in guest rooms.
      (7)   The operator shall submit a floor plan of the Bed and Breakfast
Establishment to the Fire Department of the City of Mt. Vernon; in addition if
the Bed and Breakfast Establishment is not situated within the corporate limits
of the City, the floor plan shall also be submitted to the Jefferson Fire
Protection District.
      (8)   Smoke detectors shall be provided in each guest room.
   (J)   No guest shall remain in a Bed and Breakfast Establishment for more
than fourteen consecutive days and no guest shall reside within the Bed and
Breakfast Establishment for more than a total of sixty days in any calendar
year.
   (K)   (1)   There shall be one off-street parking space provided on the lot
for each bedroom for rent, in addition to the parking requirements for a
single-family residence in the applicable Land Use District.
      (2)   Off-street parking shall not be met by parking within any required
front yard.
   (L)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the residence or
premises nor other visible evidence of the conduct of a Bed and Breakfast
Establishment other than one sign, not exceeding two square foot in area, non-
illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the residence, or one free
standing, non-illuminated sign not exceeding two square feet in area, mounted
on a single pole or lamppost, not exceeding eight feet in height.
   (M)   There shall be no retail sales in connection with a Bed and Breakfast
Establishment nor any commercial activity conducted other than a Bed and
Breakfast Establishment. No Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall sell or serve
alcoholic liquor upon its premises.
   (N)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall maintain liability insurance
to protect its guests and others at all times that the residence is operated,
maintained, or advertised as a Bed and Breakfast Establishment.
   (O)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be subject to all hotel taxes
imposed by the State of Illinois or the City of Mt. Vernon.
   (P)   Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be subject to additional
reasonable requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare as determined by the City Council of the City of Mt. Vernon.
(Prior Code, Art. 21, § 21-600)
APPENDIX A: COMMERCIAL DESIGN HANDBOOK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2062.png]
 
Section
   
1   Introduction and instructions
   
2   Architectural design guidelines
      
2.1   Architectural Scale, Mass & Proportion
      
2.2   360° Architecture
      
2.3   Windows & Entryways
      
2.4   Awnings & Canopies
      
2.5   Building Materials & Detail
      
2.6   Cornices & Parapets
      
2.7   Roofs and Eaves
      
3.1   Retail
      
3.2   Office
      
3.3   Hotel/Assisted Living
   
3   Case studies
      
3.1   Retail
      
3.2   Office
      
3.3   Hotel/Assisted Living
      
3.4   Commercial Warehouse
§ 1 INTRODUCTION AND INSTRUCTIONS.
Intent:
The intent of the design review process is to identify the City’s expectations
with regard to the design of commercial buildings and to provide a consistent
framework that facilitates the review and approval of commercial buildings in a
cost-effective and timely manner. The Commercial Design Handbook promotes
architecture that fits within and contributes to the character and context of
the City’s existing commercial districts. The guidelines are meant to help
achieve good design, not a certain stylistic result. The Commercial Design
Handbook establishes criteria for building design and the established site plan
review process. The Handbook breaks commercial architecture into seven (7)
general elements. Each of the elements includes an intent and architectural
design guidelines. Sketches, photographs and descriptive captions are used to
aid in the understanding of the preferred design solutions and illustrate
design solutions to avoid.
The Handbook does not dictate solutions, but rather provides general guidelines
and examples intended to help guide developers in making decisions for a
variety of specific design issues. The guidelines should be interpreted with a
degree of flexibility to better respond to the varying conditions and
constraints inherent to individual sites and complexities of commercial
development. The Handbook is intended to assist designers, developers and
owners in the preparation of development proposals and assist the City’s
elected and appointed decision-makers in the review and consideration of
commercial applications. The Commercial Design Handbook is based on the City’s
Comprehensive Plan commercial design goals and objectives. There is no intent
to create an architectural review board or additional layer of review.
Key Objectives:
The goal of the Commercial Design Handbook is to enhance the visual character
of the City’s commercial districts by promoting better architecture. The
objectives of the Commercial Design Handbook are to:
   1.   Serve as a predictable guide for change that provides the needed
flexibility to respond to conditions and constraints inherent to specific sites
and evolving trends in commercial development.
   2.   Balance the economic requirements of the development with aesthetic
concerns of the community.
   3.   Create an attractive physical environment for businesses that
encourages sustainable building practices.
   4.   Promote architectural continuity and building designs that are
adaptable to multiple uses for extended building lifecycles.
    5.   Convey a sense of human scale by strengthening the pedestrian
environment through the use of pedestrian features, landscaping and meaningful
outdoor spaces that relate to one another.
When Required:
Commercial developments that require site plan review, particularly as part of
a planned use or special use permit, would be subject to these general
guidelines. Please note that other city regulations and ordinances may also
influence the proposed design of future projects, such as:
   1.   City building codes
   2.   Americans with Disabilities Act & Illinois Accessibility Code
   3.   NPDS Phase I & Phase II Requirements
   4.   Scott Air Force Base Joint Land Use Study Recommendations
   5.   Use of Economic Incentives
Procedures:
The design review process starts with a pre-application meeting with City
staff. The intent of the pre-application meeting is to inform the petitioner of
the City’s site plan and building design review procedures and familiarize the
City with the proposed development. As part of the preliminary review, the
petitioner should provide a conceptual sketch of the proposed building(s) and a
general description of the development including the proposed use or uses,
furnished floor area, building height, number of stories, proposed construction
type and proposed building materials.
After the pre-application meeting, the petitioner may submit the necessary
items for review pursuant to the City’s Site Development Plan review
procedures. The review of a proposed building’s design would typically occur
during the general site plan review rather than through a separate track to
help expedite the project in a timely manner. Applications should include the
following:
   1.   A site plan containing the information required pursuant to the City’s
Zoning Code.
   2.   Architectural elevations showing the proposed exterior building design
and materials, including dimensions.
   3.   Sections of the site showing the existing and proposed grade elevations
and building heights.
   4.   Boards showing samples of exterior building material samples, building
colors, finishes and materials may be provided to better illustrate proposed
design concepts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2064.png]
 
§ 2 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES.
§ 2.1 ARCHITECTURAL SCALE, MASS, & PROPORTION.
Intent:
The intent of the architectural scale and mass guidelines is to utilize a
building’s massing, façade, windows and entryways to create an identifiable
order of horizontal and vertical elements. Negative visual impacts arising from
the scale, bulk and mass inherent to large buildings and shopping centers
should be mitigated through the application of these guidelines.
Guidelines:
Massing should relate to the site and be consistent or compatible with the
scale, form and proportion of existing development in the immediate area by
addressing the following guidelines:
1.   Break up the Façade. The use of recesses and projections should be used to
create articulations and shadow lines that help break up the massing of large
buildings. The minimum depth of a recessed or projected surface should be one
foot and the minimum width should be five feet.
2.   Integration. Large buildings should integrate features along façades
visible from the public right-of-way and pedestrian routes and entries to
reduce the apparent building mass and achieve an architectural scale consistent
with other nearby structures.
3.   Base, Middle & Top Proportions: The vertical mass in multi-story buildings
should be divided into smaller scale components that include a base, middle and
top to reduce the perceived height and create architectural interest. First
floors should be taller than upper floors and differentiated architecturally to
create a sense of human scale.
4.    Window & Entryway Treatments. Provide window and entryway treatments in
façades visible from streets to reinforce the human scale and create
architectural interest. Windows and doors should include decorative mullions,
lintels, sills, glazing, and framing details. (See also Section 2.3.)
5.   Architectural Elements: The mass of large buildings can be made more
visually interesting by incorporating architectural components such as awnings,
balconies, bay windows, dormers, building-mounted lighting fixtures or sconces,
cornices and parapets.
6.   Rooflines: A distinctive roofline can reduce perceived building height and
mass, increase compatibility with smaller scale and/or residential development,
and add interest to the overall design of the building. (See also Section 2.7.)
7.   Materials: When there is a change in the building plane, consider a change
in the building materials, colors, or patterns. (See also Section 2.5.)
8.   Landscaping: Provide trees complimented with low lying bushes and
perennials that relate to the architectural massing of the façade and provide
seasonal color, contrast and texture.
9.   Tenant Liners: In shopping centers with anchor tenants, the use of smaller
tenant spaces lining the entrances of street-facing façades should be used to
reduce the apparent bulk by breaking-up the overall building façade. (See also
Section 2.3.)
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2066.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2068.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2070.png]
 
§ 2.2 360° ARCHITECTURE.
Intent:
The intent of the 360º architectural guidelines is to reinforce the established
pattern and design of buildings and create buildings that provide a consistent
architectural quality and character on all building faces, except those not
visible from a public right-of-way.
Guidelines:
1.   Architectural treatments (e.g., materials, colors, façade design, roof
lines) and the use of screening devices (walls, fences, berms, landscaping)
should be consistent and compatible on all sides when visible from a public
right-of-way.
2.   Building materials used on a primary façade should continue for a distance
of no less that two feet on the adjoining side or rear elevation.
3.   Building faces not visible from a public street or right-of-way may
utilize materials other than those used on the primary façade. However, the
material selection and overall design should be durable and maintain a unified
appearance with the primary façade.
4.   Service elevations should utilize landscape buffering and screening to
shield views from public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
5.   All buildings located on a parcel fronting a street should be oriented
toward the street and contain an identifiable entrance.
6.    Building setbacks should reflect the existing setbacks of neighboring
buildings. To best reflect the setbacks of existing development the average
setback of the neighboring buildings should be used.
7.   In undeveloped areas buildings should maintain a zero setback from the
street, except portions of the façade may be notched, recessed or extruded to
accentuate entrances, dining areas, window displays and outdoor display area,
when permitted.
8.   All electrical and mechanical equipment on or near a building should be
screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right of
way. Such screens and enclosures should be treated as integral elements of the
building’s appearance.
9.   Loading docks, trash enclosures, outdoor storage and other accessory
structures and uses should be incorporated into the overall design of the
building to maintain a unified appearance.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2079.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2074.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2076.png]
 
§ 2.3 WINDOWS & ENTRYWAYS.
Intent:
The main entrance should be the primary focal point of the building. Entryways
and windows should be used to provide views of merchandise and business
operations, provide casual surveillance and take advantage of the sun’s passive
solar energy and natural light.
Guidelines:
1.   The path of entry should be perpendicular to the front property line.
2.   Main building entries should be parallel to the front property line and
include a well defined entryway such as a recessed entrance, protruding
entrance, truncated corner entryway or other design that creates a well-defined
entry.
3.   Building faces fronting a street or public right-of-way should incorporate
a combination of awnings, building-mounted lighting, pedestrian level display
windows, storefronts and entrances.
4.   Each floor of any building façade facing a street should contain
transparent windows that allow views of indoor nonresidential space or product
display areas. Windows should cover at least 20% of the wall area, but no more
than 70%.
5.   Upper story windows should be vertically aligned with the location of
windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows.
6.   Decorative lintels, sills, glazing, door design, moldings or framing
details should be used on windows and entryways located on façades facing
public streets to create architectural interest and enhance the pedestrian
realm. Window treatment should be as follows:
   A.   Windows should be surrounded by trim, molding and/or sill at least four
inches wide. Stone or masonry lintels and sills should be incorporated in
masonry and stucco clad buildings. Wood trim should be incorporated into wood
clad buildings.   
   B.   Commercial buildings with no trim or molding should have window frames
at least two inches wide.    
   C.   Multiple-paned windows should be used to help create visual
interest.   
7.   The following approaches should be considered for all large-scale retail
development to break up the architectural massing of large unadorned walls and
enhance the visual appearance of building frontages.
   A.   Line the primary façades of anchor tenants with smaller tenants, each
having their own entrance and at least one window.
   B.   Provide minor storefronts for each department of a big box user. Each
storefront should physically express internal functions/departments (i.e. food
court, bank, pharmacy, florist, etc.) and have its own entrance and at least
one window.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2081.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2083.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2085.png]
 
§ 2.4 AWNINGS & CANOPIES.
Intent:
Canopies, awnings and similar features that create shade, protect buildings and
users from the elements and physically and visually identify points of entry
are encouraged.
Guidelines:
All building façades with an entrance fronting a street should provide an
overhead canopy, enclosure or other building projection or recess designed as
an integral part of the building entrance as follows:
1.   Canopies should be of a color and texture that compliments the
architectural design of the façade.
2.   Canopies should be open to light and air and provide a transition from
outdoor space to indoor space.
3.   Canopies should be constructed of durable, low maintenance materials that
provide weather and sun protection. Fabric, plastic or other non-durable
materials should be maintained in “like-new” condition.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2087.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2089.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2097.png]
 
§ 2.5 BUILDING MATERIALS & DETAILS.
Intent:
The intent of the building materials and details guidelines is to promote the
use of complimentary exterior building materials that are durable and have a
lasting architectural character.
Guidelines:
1.   A minimum of 50% of all building surfaces should consist of one or more of
the following materials:
   A.   Stone material consisting of granite, sandstone, slate, limestone or
other durable all-weather stone.
   B.   Brick material composed of hard red (kiln red) all-weather brick or
other durable all-weather facing brick.
   C.   Stucco or approved gypsum concrete or plaster materials.
   D.   Wood lap siding or fiber-cement lap siding that offers an architectural
appearance that is equivalent to the quality and durability of the materials
listed above.
2.   The use of external insulating furnishing system (EIFS), corrugated metal,
coated metal siding, aluminum siding, and vinyl siding should be limited to
accent features only. EIFS and vinyl siding should not be used on the base of
the building façade or other areas where it could be easily damaged by yard
equipment or constant contact by vegetation or pedestrians.
3.   The use of highly reflective or glossy materials or coatings should be
limited to building accents only.
4.   Site lighting, security lighting and architectural/landscape lighting that
provides the user with illumination levels appropriate for the designed use is
encouraged as follows;
   A.   Illumination levels should be uniform throughout the site, minimize
glare and avoid light that is projected on adjacent properties.    
   B.   Up-lighting and down-lighting should be used to highlight architectural
features and compliment other site features and pedestrian use areas.
   C.   All lighting should include shields to more efficiently utilize the
light source by controlling the direction and glare.
   D.   Excessive lighting that restricts star gazing, contributes to light
pollution, unnatural sky glow and wastes energy is discouraged.    
5.   Black coated, decorative or period lighting is recommended. “Cobra-head”
lighting fixtures are not appropriate for on-site lighting.
6.   All exterior building materials and lighting should be complimentary and
selected from a consistent palette used throughout the development, except on
service façades that do not face a public right-of-way.
7.   When there is a change in the building plane, consider a change in the
building materials, colors, or patterns to create visual interest and break up
the massing.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2093.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2095.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2097.png]
 
§ 2.6 CORNICES AND PARAPETS.
Intent:
A cornice and parapet wall should be used to visually terminate an exterior
wall on a flat-roofed building. A cornice provides protection to the exterior
façade that a pitched roof overhang would normally provide and helps transition
the vertical wall plane and the horizontal roof plane.
Guidelines:
1.   Flat roofs should incorporate a cornice into street-facing façades.
2.   Cornices should wrap a minimum of 2 feet around exterior corners.
3.   Simple parapets with a stone or brick cap are acceptable for rear and side
elevations.
4.   Flat roofs projecting from a street-facing façade should include a cornice
around the entire projection.
5.   The dimensions, style and proportions of cornices and parapets should be
consistent with the other architectural façade and roof elements.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2099.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2101.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2103.png]
 
§ 2.7 ROOF & EAVES.
Intent:
Roofs should be simple forms such as hip, flat, shed or gable. Eaves should
provide a transition between the façade and roof planes and provide overhangs
that offer protection from the elements and create visual interest. A
distinctive roofline can reduce perceived building height and mass, increase
compatibility with smaller scale and/or residential development, and add
interest to the overall design of the building.
Guidelines:
1.   Building rooftops should have the following features:
   A.   Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment and/or;
   B.   Overhanging eaves.
2.   Roofline offsets should be provided to lend architectural interest and
variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single,
long roof. The use of alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables or other roof
elements should be used to add visual relief and physically break up the
massing of the overall façade.
3.    Flat-roofed designs should include architectural details such as cornices
and decorative eaves to provide interest to the roofline. (See also Section 2.8
Cornices and Parapets.)
4.   Excessive slopes or changes in the horizontal or vertical roof plane are
discouraged.
ILLUSTRATED GUIDELINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2105.png]
 
AVOID
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2107.png]
 
PREFERRED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2109.png]
 
§ 3 CASE STUDIES.
§ 3.1 RETAIL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2111.png]
 
PHOTO EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2113.png]
 
§ 3.2 OFFICE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2115.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2117.png]
 
§ 3.3 HOTEL/ASSISTED LIVING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2119.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2121.png]
 
§ 3.4 COMMERCIAL WAREHOUSE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2123.png]
 
PHOTO EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6389000e1ab6e3169adce3fe185ba9cae85b5406/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2125.png]
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Reserved
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to the Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Code Section Code Section
ILCS Code Section             Code Section
5 ILCS 120                    31.13
5 ILCS 140                    152.15
5 ILCS 315/3                  33.15
10 ILCS 5/1-3                 33.15
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4               33.15
10 ILCS 5/9-3                 33.15
20 ILCS 3305 et seq.          34.01
                              91.02;
35 ILCS 120/                  110.04;
                              118.07
35 ILCS 145/1 et seq.         36.096;
                              36.098
35 ILCS 145/2                 36.095
35 ILCS 200/15-175            152.06
35 ILCS 635/15                36.050
35 ILCS 635/20                36.050
35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.       36.050
35 ILCS 636/5-25              36.050
35 ILCS 636/5-30              36.050
40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.       35.04
40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.       35.05
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.          36.067
50 ILCS 705/1                 35.01
                              161.365;
50 ILCS 840/                  161.390;
                              161.391
50 ILCS 840/90                161.393
55 ILCS 5/5-1097.5            117.05
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1               10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4               33.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25           30.21
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30           30.21
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1—5/8-2- 9.130.21
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1              36.016
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2              36.050
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5              36.016
65 ILCS 5/8-11-17             36.050
65 ILCS 5/8-11-23             36.170
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24             36.210,
                              36.211
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1              35.01
65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5            117.05
65 ILCS 5/11-12 et seq.       159.03
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4—5/11- 12-1155.04
65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 et seq.     161.210
65 ILCS 5/11-20               32.122
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1             150.11
65 ILCS 5/11-37 et seq.       153.07
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2         36.002
105 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.       131.01
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.        156.02;
                              157.19
220 ILCS 5/3-105              161.393
220 ILCS 5/16-102             161.393
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)        161.393
225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.         161.210
225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.         116.01;
                              116.13
225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.         116.13
225 ILCS 225/                 150.05
225 ILCS 305/                 150.05
225 ILCS 320 et seq.          154.01
225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.     154.01
225 ILCS 320/3                50.046
225 ILCS 340/4                161.393
225 ILCS 460/                 70.08
225 ILCS 605                  90.05;
                              161.210
230 ILCS 15/                  115.02
                              111.17;
                              113.01;
230 ILCS 40/                  113.07;
                              114.01;
                              114.07;
                              130.12
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.         36.156
230 ILCS 40/35                113.01
                              111.03;
                              111.06;
235 ILCS 5/                   111.17;
                              111.19;
                              111.20
235 ILCS 5/6-28.5             111.05
235 ILCS 5/7-9                111.20
410 ILCS 705/                 161.210
415 ILCS 5                    161.345
415 ILCS 5/4(e)               50.046
425 ILCS 25/0.01 et seq.      150.11
425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.      91.08
625 ILCS 5/1-169              152.06
                              73.02;
625 ILCS 5/3-609              73.05;
                              150.13
                              73.02;
625 ILCS 5/3-616              73.05;
                              150.13
720 ILCS 5/11-0.1 et seq.     116.05
                              73.02;
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2          73.05;
                              150.13
625 ILCS 5/18b-101            114.01;
                              161.210
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201           161.393
705 ILCS 405/                 130.17
720 ILCS 5/28                 115.02
735 ILCS 5/11-101             117.17
745 ILCS 10/1-101 et seq.     91.11
750 ILCS 5/11-0.1 et seq.     116.15
765 ILCS 205/2                161.347
805 ILCS 5/                   111.03
820 ILCS 192/1 et seq.        33.01
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section    Code Section
Art. 1, 1.1           30.01
Art. 1, 1.2           30.15
Art. 1, 1.3(a)        31.01
Art. 1, 1.3(b)        31.02
Art. 1, 1.3(c)        31.03
Art. 1, 1.3(d)        31.04
Art. 1, 1.3(e)        31.05
Art. 1, 1.3(f)        31.06
Art. 1, 1.3(g)        31.07
Art. 1, 1.3(h)        31.08
Art. 1, 1.3(i)        31.09
Art. 1, 1.3(j)        31.10
Art. 1, 1.3(k)        31.11
Art. 1, 1.3(k)        31.12
Art. 1, 1.3(l)        31.13
Art. 1, 1.4           30.16
Art. 1, 1.5(a)        32.020
Art. 1, 1.5(b), (c)   32.021
Art. 1, 1.5(d), (e)   32.022
Art. 1, 1.5(f)        32.023
Art. 1, 1.5(g)        32.024
Art. 1, 1.5(h)        32.025
Art. 1, 1.5(i)        32.026
Art. 1, 1.5(j)        32.027
Art. 1, 1.5(k)        32.028
Art. 1, 1.5(l)        32.029
Art. 1, 1.5(m)        32.030
Art. 1, 1.5(n)        32.031
Art. 1, 1.5(o)        32.032
Art. 1, 1.5(p)        32.033
Art. 1, 1.5(q)        32.034
Art. 1, 1.5(r)        32.035
Art. 1, 1.5(s)        32.036
Art. 1, 1.5(t)        32.037
Art. 1, 1.5(u)        32.038
Art. 1, 1.6           30.17
Art. 2, 2.1           30.18
Art. 2, 2.1A          30.19
Art. 2, 2.2A          32.050
Art. 2, 2.2B          32.051
Art. 2, 2.2C          32.052
Art. 2, 2.2D          32.053
Art. 2, 2.2E          32.054
Art. 2, 2.2F          32.055
Art. 2, 2.3           30.20
Art. 2, 2.4           32.001
Art. 2, 2.5(a)        34.01
Art. 2, 2.5(b)        34.02
Art. 2, 2.5(c)        34.03
Art. 2, 2.5(d)        34.04
Art. 2, 2.5(e)        34.05
Art. 2, 2.5(f)        34.06
Art. 2, 2.5(g)        34.07
Art. 2, 2.5(h)        34.08
Art. 2, 2.5(i)        34.09
Art. 2, 2.5(j)        34.10
Art. 2, 2.5(k)        34.11
Art. 2, 2.5(l)        34.12
Art. 2, 2.6           32.002
Art. 2, 2.7(a)        32.070
Art. 2, 2.7(b)        32.071
Art. 2, 2.7(c)        32.072
Art. 2, 2.7(d), (e)   32.073
Art. 2, 2.7(f)        32.074
Art. 2, 2.8           32.003
Art. 2, 2.9(I)        32.085
Art. 2, 2.9(II)       32.086
Art. 2, 2.9(III)      32.087
Art. 2, 2.9(IV)       32.088
Art. 2, 2.9(V)        32.089
Art. 2, 2.9(VI)       32.090
Art. 2, 2.9(VII)      32.091
Art. 2, 2.10          32.004
Art. 2, 2.11          32.005
Art. 2, 2.12          30.21
Art. 2, 2.13          32.006
Art. 2, 2.14(A)       32.105
Art. 2, 2.14(B)       32.106
Art. 2, 2.14(C)       32.107
Art. 2, 2.14(D)       32.108
Art. 4                36.001
Art. 5, 5.1           150.01
Art. 5, 5.2           150.02
Art. 5, 5.3           150.03
Art. 5, 5.3A          150.04
Art. 5, 5.4           150.05
Art. 5, 5.5           150.06
Art. 5, 5.6           150.07
Art. 5, 5.7           150.08
Art. 5, 5.8           150.09
Art. 5, 5.9           150.10
Art. 5, 5.10          150.11
Art. 5, 5.11          150.12
Art. 5, 5.12          150.13
Art. 5, 5.13          150.14
Art. 6, 6.1           111.01
Art. 6, 6.2           111.02
Art. 6, 6.3           111.03
Art. 6, 6.4           111.04
Art. 6, 6.5           111.05
Art. 6, 6.6           111.06
Art. 6, 6.7           111.07
Art. 6, 6.8           111.08
Art. 6, 6.9           111.09
Art. 6, 6.10          111.10
Art. 6, 6.11          111.11
Art. 6, 6.12          111.12
Art. 6, 6.13          111.13
Art. 6, 6.14          111.14
Art. 6, 6.15          111.15
Art. 6, 6.16          111.16
Art. 6, 6.17          111.17
Art. 6, 6.18          111.18
Art. 6, 6.19          111.19
Art. 6, 6.21          111.20
Art. 6, 6.22          111.21
Art. 6, 6.23          111.22
Art. 6, 6.24          111.24
Art. 6, 6.25          111.25
Art. 7, 7.1           153.01
Art. 7, 7.2           153.02
Art. 7, 7.3           153.03
Art. 7, 7.4           153.04
Art. 7, 7.5           153.05
Art. 7, 7.6           153.06
Art. 7, 7.7           153.07
Art. 7, 7.8           153.08
Art. 7, 7.9           153.09
Art. 7, 7.10          153.10
Art. 7, 7.11          153.11
Art. 7, 7.12          153.12
Art. 7, 7.13          153.13
Art. 8, 8.1           35.01
Art. 8, 8.2           35.02
Art. 8, 8.3           35.03
Art. 8, 8.4           35.04
Art. 8, 8.5           35.05
Art. 8, 8.6           35.06
Art. 9, 9.1           91.01
Art. 9, 9.2           91.02
Art. 9, 9.3           91.03
Art. 9, 9.4           91.04
Art. 9, 9.5           91.05
Art. 9, 9.6           91.06
Art. 9, 9.7           91.07
Art. 9, 9.8           91.08
Art. 9, 9.10          91.09
Art. 9, 9.11          91.10
Art. 9, 9.12          91.11
Art. 9, 9.13          91.12
Art. 9, 9.14          91.13
Art. 9, 9.15          91.14
Art. 9, 9.16          91.15
Art. 10, 10.1         151.01
Art. 10, 10.2         151.02
Art. 10, 10.3         151.03
Art. 10, 10.4         151.04
Art. 10, 10.5         151.05
Art. 10, 10.6         151.06
Art. 10, 10.7         151.07
Art. 10, 10.8         151.08
Art. 10, 10.9         151.09
Art. 10, 10.10        151.10
Art. 10, 10.11        151.11
Art. 10, 10.12        151.12
Art. 10A, 10-1        152.01
Art. 10A, 10-2        152.02
Art. 10A, 10-3        152.03
Art. 10A, 10-4        152.04
Art. 10A, 10-5        152.05
Art. 10A, 10-6        152.06
Art. 10A, 10-7        152.07
Art. 10A, 10-8        152.08
Art. 10A, 10-9        152.09
Art. 10A, 10-10       152.10
Art. 10A, 10-11       152.11
Art. 10A, 10-12       152.12
Art. 10A, 10-13       152.13
Art. 10A, 10-14       152.14
Art. 10A, 10-15       152.15
Art. 10A, 10-16       152.16
Art. 10A, 10-17       152.17
Art. 10A, 10-18       152.18
Art. 10A, 10-19       152.19
Art. 10A, 10-20       152.20
Art. 10-A, 10-A.1     32.120
Art. 10-A, 10-A.2     32.121
Art. 10-A, 10-A.1     32.122
Art. 11, 11.1         110.01
Art. 11, 11.4         110.02
Art. 11, 11.6         110.03
Art. 11, 11.7         110.04
Art. 11, 11.9         110.05
                      113.01—
Art. 11, 11.10        113.09;
                      113.99
Art. 11, 11.14A       116.01
Art. 11, 11.14B       116.02
Art. 11, 11.14C       116.03
Art. 11, 11.14D       116.04
Art. 11, 11.14E       116.05
Art. 11, 11.14F       116.06
Art. 11, 11.14G       116.07
Art. 11, 11.14H       116.08
Art. 11, 11.14I       116.09
Art. 11, 11.14J       116.10
Art. 11, 11.14K       116.11
Art. 11, 11.14L       116.12
Art. 11, 11.14M       116.13
Art. 11, 11.14N       116.14
Art. 11, 11.14O       116.15
Art. 11, 11.14P       116.16
Art. 11, 11.14Q       116.17
Art. 11, 11.14R       116.18
Art. 11, 11.14S       116.19
Art. 11, 11.14T       116.20
Art. 11, 11.14U       116.99
Art. 11, 11.14V       116.21
Art. 11, 11.15.1      117.01
Art. 11, 11.15.2      117.02
Art. 11, 11.15.3      117.03
Art. 11, 11.15.4      117.04
Art. 11, 11.15.5      117.05
Art. 11, 11.15.6      117.06
Art. 11, 11.15.7      117.07
Art. 11, 11.15.8      117.08
Art. 11, 11.15.9      117.09
Art. 11, 11.15.10     117.10
Art. 11, 11.15.11     117.11
Art. 11, 11.15.12     117.12
Art. 11, 11.15.13     117.13
Art. 11, 11.15.14     117.14
Art. 11, 11.15.15     117.15
Art. 11, 11.15.16     117.16
Art. 11, 11.15.17     117.17
Art. 11, 11.15.18     117.18
Art. 11, 11.15.19     117.19
Art. 11, 11.15.20     117.20
Art. 11, 11.15.21     117.21
Art. 11, 11.15.22     117.22
Art. 11, 11.15.23     117.23
Art. 11, 11.15.24     117.24
Art. 11, 11.15.25     117.25
Art. 11, 11.15.26     117.26
Art. 11, 11.15.27     117.27
Art. 11, 11.15.28     117.28
Art. 11, 11.15.29     117.29
Art. 11, 11.15.30     117.30
Art. 11, 11.15.31     117.99
Art. 11, 11.15.32     117.31
Art. 11, 11.15.33     117.32
                      114.01—
Art. 11, 11.16        114.09;
                      114.99
Art. 11, 11.17(a)     115.01
Art. 11, 11.17(b)     115.02
Art. 11, 11.17(c)     115.03
Art. 11, 11.17(d)     115.04
Art. 11, 11.17(e)     115.05
Art. 11, 11.17(f)     115.06
Art. 11, 11.17(g)     115.07
Art. 11, 11.17(h)     115.08
Art. 11, 11.17(i)     115.09
Art. 11, 11.17(j)     115.10
Art. 11, 11.17(k)     115.99
Art. 11, 11.18(A)     118.01
Art. 11, 11.18(B)     118.02
Art. 11, 11.18(C)     118.03
Art. 11, 11.18(D)     118.04
Art. 11, 11.18(E)     118.05
Art. 11, 11.18(F)     118.06
Art. 11, 11.18(G)     118.07
Art. 11, 11.18(H)     118.08
Art. 11, 11.18(I)     118.99
Art. 12, 12.1         130.01
Art. 12, 12.2         130.01
Art. 12, 12.3         130.02
Art. 12, 12.4         130.03
Art. 12, 12.5         130.04
Art. 12, 12.6         130.05
Art. 12, 12.7         130.06
Art. 12, 12.8         130.07
Art. 12, 12.9         130.08
Art. 12, 12.10        130.09
Art. 12, 12.11        130.10
Art. 12, 12.12        130.11
Art. 12, 12.14        130.12
Art. 12, 12.15        130.13
Art. 12, 12.16        130.14
Art. 12, 12.17        130.15
Art. 12, 12.18        130.16
Art. 12, 12.19        130.17
Art. 12, 12.20(1)     131.01
Art. 12, 12.20(2)     131.02
Art. 12, 12.20(3)     131.03
Art. 12, 12.20(4)     131.04
Art. 12, 12.20(5)     131.05
Art. 12, 12.20(8)     131.06
Art. 12, 12.20(6)     131.99
Art. 12, 12.21        130.18
Art. 12, 12.22        130.19
Art. 12, 12.23        130.20
Art. 12, 12.24        130.21
Art. 13, 13.1         90.01
Art. 13, 13.2         90.02
Art. 13, 13.3         90.03
Art. 13, 13.4         90.04
Art. 13, 13.5         90.05
Art. 13, 13.6         90.06
Art. 13, 13.7         90.07
Art. 13, 13.8         90.08
Art. 13, 13.9         90.09
Art. 13, 13.10        90.10
Art. 13, 13.11        90.11
Art. 13, 13.12        90.12
Art. 13, 13.13        90.13
Art. 13, 13.14        90.14
Art. 13, 13.15        90.15
Art. 13, 13.17        90.16
Art. 13, 13.16        90.99
Art. 14, 14.1         155.01
Art. 14, 14.2         155.02
Art. 14, 14.3         155.03
Art. 14, 14.4         155.04
Art. 14, 14.5         155.05
Art. 14, 14.6         155.06
Art. 14, 14.7         155.07
Art. 15, 15.1         154.01
Art. 15, 15.2         154.02
Art. 15, 15.3         154.03
Art. 15, 15.4         154.04
Art. 15, 15.5         154.05
Art. 15, 15.6         154.06
Art. 15, 15.7         154.07
Art. 15, 15.8         154.99
Art. 16, 16.1         50.001
Art. 16, 16.2         50.002
Art. 16, 16.3(a)      50.015
Art. 16, 16.3(b)      50.016
Art. 16, 16.3(c)      50.017
Art. 16, 16.3(d)      50.018
Art. 16, 16.3(e)      50.019
Art. 16, 16.3(f)      50.020
Art. 16, 16.3(g)      50.021
Art. 16, 16.3(h)      50.022
Art. 16, 16.3(i)      50.023
Art. 16, 16.3(j)      50.024
Art. 16, 16.3(k)      50.025
Art. 16, 16.3(l)      50.026
Art. 16, 16.3(m)      50.027
Art. 16, 16.3(n)      50.028
Art. 16, 16.3(o)      50.029
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(A)   50.040
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(B)   50.041
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(C)   50.042
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(D)   50.043
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(E)   50.044
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(F)   50.045
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(G)   50.046
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(H)   50.047
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(I)   50.048
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(J)   50.049
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(K)   50.050
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(L)   50.051
Art. 16, 16.3(p)(M)   50.052
Art. 16, 16.4         50.065
Art. 16, 16.5         50.066
Art. 16, 16.6         50.067
Art. 16, 16.7(a)      50.080
Art. 16, 16.7(b)      50.081
Art. 16, 16.7(c)      50.082
Art. 16, 16.7(d)      50.083
Art. 16, 16.7(e)      50.084
Art. 16, 16.7(f)      50.085
Art. 16, 16.7(g)      50.086
Art. 16, 16.7(h)      50.087
Art. 16, 16.7(i)      50.088
Art. 16, 16.7(j)      50.089
Art. 16, 16.7(k)      50.090
Art. 16, 16.7(l)      50.091
Art. 16, 16.7(m)      50.092
Art. 16, 16.7(n)      50.093
Art. 16, 16.7(o)      50.094
Art. 16, 16.7(p)      50.095
Art. 16, 16.7(q)      50.096
Art. 16, 16.7(r)      50.097
Art. 16, 16.7(t)      50.098
Art. 16, 16.7(u)      50.110—
                      50.126
Art. 16, 16.8         50.999
Art. 16A              51.001
Art. 16A, IA          51.002
Art. 16A, IB          51.003
Art. 16A, IIA         51.015
Art. 16A, IIB         51.016
Art. 16A, IIC         51.017
Art. 16A, IID         51.018
Art. 16A, IIE         51.019
Art. 16A, IIF         51.020
Art. 16A, IIG         51.021
Art. 16A, III         51.035
Art. 16A, IVA         51.050
Art. 16A, V           51.065
Art. 16A, VIA         51.080
Art. 16A, VIB         51.081
Art. 16A, VIC         51.082
Art. 16A, VID         51.083
Art. 16A, VIE         51.084
Art. 16A, VIIA        51.095
Art. 16A, VIIB        51.096
Art. 16A, VIIC        51.097
Art. 16A, VIID        51.098
Art. 16A, VIIE        51.099
Art. 16A, App. A      Ch. 51, App. A
Art. 16A, App. B      Ch. 51, App. A
Art. 16B, 1.1         52.001
Art. 16B, 1.2         52.002
Art. 16B, 1.3         52.003
Art. 16B, 1.4         52.004
Art. 16B, 2.1         52.015
Art. 16B, 2.2         52.016
Art. 16B, 2.3         52.017
Art. 16B, 2.4         52.018
Art. 16B, 2.5         52.019
Art. 16B, 2.6         52.020
Art. 16B, 2.7         52.021
Art. 16B, 3.1         52.035
Art. 16B, 3.2         52.036
Art. 16B, 3.3         52.037
Art. 16B, 3.4         52.038
Art. 16B, 4.1         52.050
Art. 16B, 4.2         52.051
Art. 16B, 4.3         52.052
Art. 16B, 4.4         52.053
Art. 16B, 4.5         52.054
Art. 16B, 4.6         52.055
Art. 16B, 5.1         52.070
Art. 16B, 5.2         52.071
Art. 16B, 5.3         52.072
Art. 16B, 5.3A        52.073
Art. 16B, 5.3B        52.074
Art. 16B, 5.4         52.075
Art. 16B, 5.5         52.076
Art. 16B, 5.6         52.077
Art. 16B, 5.7         52.078
Art. 16B, 5.8         52.079
Art. 16B, 6.1         52.090
Art. 16B, 6.2         52.091
Art. 16B, 6.3         52.092
Art. 16B, 6.4         52.093
Art. 16B, 6.5         52.094
Art. 16B, 6.6         52.095
Art. 16B, 6.7         52.096
Art. 16B, 6.8         52.097
Art. 16B, 6.9         52.098
Art. 16B, 6.10        52.099
Art. 16B, 6.11        52.100
Art. 16B, 6.12        52.101
Art. 16B, 6.13        52.102
Art. 16B, 6.14        52.103
Art. 16B, 7.1         52.115
Art. 16B, 7.2         52.116
Art. 16B, 8           52.130
Art. 16B, 9           52.145
Art. 16B, 10.1        52.160
Art. 16B, 10.2        52.161
Art. 16B, 10.3        52.162
Art. 16B, 10.4        52.163
Art. 16B, 10.5        52.164
Art. 16B, 10.6        52.165
Art. 16B, 10.7        52.166
Art. 16B, 10.8        52.167
Art. 16B, 11.1        52.180
Art. 16B, 11.2        52.181
Art. 16B, 11.3        52.182
Art. 16B, 11.4        52.183
Art. 16B, 12.1        52.195
Art. 16B, 12.2        52.196
Art. 16B, 12.3        52.197
Art. 16B, 12.4        52.198
Art. 16B, 13.1        52.210
Art. 16B, 13.2        52.211
Art. 16B, 14          52.225
Art. 16B, 15.1        52.240
Art. 16B, 15.2        52.241
Art. 16B, 16          52.242
Art. 16B, 17          52.243
Art. 17, 17.1         159.01
Art. 17, 17.2         159.02
Art. 17, 17.3         159.03
Art. 17, 17.4         159.04
Art. 17, 17.5         159.05
Art. 17, 17.6         159.06
Art. 17, 17.7         159.07
Art. 17, 17.8         159.08
Art. 17, 17.9         159.09
Art. 17, 17.10        159.10
Art. 17, 17.11        159.11
Art. 17, 17.12        159.12
Art. 17, 17.13        159.13
Art. 17, 17.14        159.14
Art. 18, 18.1         70.01
Art. 18, 18.2         70.02
Art. 18, 18.3         70.03
Art. 18, 18.4         70.04
Art. 18, 18.5         71.01
Art. 18, 18.6         Ch. 76, Sch. I
Art. 18, 18.7         Ch. 76, Sch. II
Art. 18, 18.8         70.05
Art. 18, 18.9         Ch. 76, Sch. III
Art. 18, 18.10        72.01
Art. 18, 18.11        72.02
Art. 18, 18.12        72.03
Art. 18, 18.13        74.01
Art. 18, 18.14        75.01
Art. 18, 18.14A       75.02
Art. 18, 18.15        73.01
Art. 18, 18.16        73.02
Art. 18, 18.17        73.03
Art. 18, 18.18        72.04
Art. 18, 18.19        72.05
Art. 18, 18.20        Ch. 77, Sch I
Art. 18, 18.20A       73.04
Art. 18, 18.20B       73.05
Art. 18, 18.21        70.06
Art. 18, 18.22        70.07
Art. 18, 18.23        70.08
Art. 18, 18.24        70.09
Art. 19, 19.1         156.01
Art. 19, 19.2         156.02
Art. 19, 19.3         156.03
Art. 19, 19.4         156.04
Art. 19, 19.5         156.05
Art. 19, 19.6         156.99
Art. 19A, 19A.1       157.01
Art. 19A, 19A.2       157.02
Art. 19A, 19A.3       157.03
Art. 19A, 19A.4       157.04
Art. 19A, 19A.5       157.05
Art. 19A, 19A.6       157.06
Art. 19A, 19A.7       157.07
Art. 19A, 19A.8       157.08
Art. 19A, 19A.9       157.09
Art. 19A, 19A.10      157.10
Art. 19A, 19A.11      157.11
Art. 19A, 19A.12      157.12
Art. 19A, 19A.13      157.13
Art. 19A, 19A.14      157.14
Art. 19A, 19A.15      157.15
Art. 19A, 19A.16      157.16
Art. 19A, 19A.17      157.17
Art. 19A, 19A.18      157.18
Art. 19A, 19A.19      157.19
Art. 19A, 19A.20      157.20
Art. 19A, 19A.21      157.21
Art. 19A, 19A.22      157.22
Art. 19A, 19A.23      157.99
Art. 19B, 19B.1       158.01
Art. 19B, 19B.2       158.02
Art. 19B, 19B.3       158.03
Art. 19B, 19B.4       158.04
Art. 19B, 19B.5       158.99
Art. 20, 20-1         53.01
Art. 20, 20-2         53.02
Art. 20, 20-3         53.03
Art. 20, 20-4         53.04
Art. 20, 20-5         53.05
Art. 20, 20-6         53.06
Art. 20, 20-7         53.07
Art. 20, 20-8         53.08
Art. 20, 20-9         53.09
Art. 20, 20-10        53.10
Art. 20, 20-11        53.11
Art. 20, 20-12        53.12
Art. 20, 20-13        53.13
Art. 20, 20-14        53.14
Art. 20, 20-15        53.15
Art. 20, 20-16        53.16
Art. 20, 20-17        53.17
Art. 20, 20-18        53.18
Art. 20, 20-19        53.19
Art. 20, 20-20        53.20
Art. 20, 20-21        53.21
Art. 20, 20-22        53.22
Art. 20, 20-23        53.23
Art. 20, 20-24, App.  Ch. 53, App. A
Art. 21, 21-101       161.001
Art. 21, 21-102       161.002
Art. 21, 21-103       161.003
Art. 21, 21-104       161.004
Art. 21, 21-105       161.005
Art. 21, 21-106       161.006
Art. 21, 21-107       161.007
Art. 21, 21-108.1     161.025
Art. 21, 21-108.2     161.026
Art. 21, 21-108.3     161.027
Art. 21, 21-108.4     161.028
Art. 21, 21-108.5     161.029
Art. 21, 21-108.6     161.030
Art. 21, 21-108.7     161.031
Art. 21, 21-108.8     161.032
Art. 21, 21-109.1     161.045
Art. 21, 21-109.2     161.046
Art. 21, 21-109.3     161.047
Art. 21, 21-109.4     161.048
Art. 21, 21-109.5     161.049
Art. 21, 21-109.6     161.050
Art. 21, 21-109.7     161.051
Art. 21, 21-109.8     161.052
Art. 21, 21-109.9     161.065—
                      161.071
Art. 21, 21-110.1     161.085
Art. 21, 21-110.2     161.086
Art. 21, 21-110.3     161.087
Art. 21, 21-110.4     161.088
Art. 21, 21-110.5     161.089
Art. 21, 21-110.6     161.090
Art. 21, 21-110.7     161.091
Art. 21, 21-111       161.105
Art. 21, 21-111.1     161.106
Art. 21, 21-111.2     161.107
Art. 21, 21-111.3     161.108
Art. 21, 21-111.4     161.109
Art. 21, 21-112       161.120
Art. 21, 21-113       161.135
Art. 21, 21-113.1     161.136
Art. 21, 21-113.2     161.137
Art. 21, 21-113.3     161.138
Art. 21, 21-114       161.150
Art. 21, 21-114.1     161.151
Art. 21, 21-115       161.165
Art. 21, 21-116       161.180
Art. 21, 21-117       161.195
Art. 21, 21-118       161.008
Art. 21, 21-119       161.009
Art. 21, 21-121       161.010
Art. 21, 21-122       161.011
Art. 21, 21-123       161.012
Art. 21, 21-124-1     161.210
Art. 21, 21-124.2     161.211
Art. 21, 21-125.1     161.225
Art. 21, 21-125.2     161.226
Art. 21, 21-125.3     161.227
Art. 21, 21-126.1     161.240
Art. 21, 21-126.2     161.241
Art. 21, 21-126.3     161.242
Art. 21, 21-126.4     161.243
Art. 21, 21-126.5     161.244
Art. 21, 21-126.6     161.245
Art. 21, 21-126.7     161.246
Art. 21, 21-126.8     161.247
Art. 21, 21-126.9     161.248
Art. 21, 21-126.10    161.249
Art. 21, 21-126.11    161.250
Art. 21, 21-126.12    161.251
Art. 21, 21-126.13    161.252
Art. 21, 21-126.14    161.253
Art. 21, 21-126.15    161.254
Art. 21, 21-126.16    161.255
Art. 21, 21-126.17    161.256
Art. 21, 21-126.18    161.257
Art. 21, 21-126.19    161.258
Art. 21, 21-127.1     161.270
Art. 21, 21-127.2     161.271
Art. 21, 21-127.3     161.272
Art. 21, 21-127.4     161.273
Art. 21, 21-127.5     161.274
Art. 21, 21-127.6     161.275
Art. 21, 21-200       161.290
Art. 21, 21-201       161.291
Art. 21, 21-202       161.292
Art. 21, 21-203       161.293
Art. 21, 21-204       161.294
Art. 21, 21-205       161.295
Art. 21, 21-300       161.310—
                      161.326
Art. 21, 21-400.1     161.340
Art. 21, 21-400.2     161.341
Art. 21, 21-400.3     161.342
Art. 21, 21-400.4     161.343
Art. 21, 21-400.5     161.344
Art. 21, 21-400.6     161.345
Art. 21, 21-400.7     161.346
Art. 21, 21-400.8     161.347
Art. 21, 21-400.9     161.348
Art. 21, 21-400.10    161.349
Art. 21, 21-400.11    161.350
Art. 21, 21-400.12    161.351
Art. 21, 21-400.13    161.352
Art. 21, 21-400.14    161.353
Art. 21, 21-400.15    161.354
Art. 21, 21-500.1     161.365
Art. 21, 21-500.2     161.366
Art. 21, 21-500.3     161.367
Art. 21, 21-500.4     161.368
Art. 21, 21-500.5     161.369
Art. 21, 21-500.6     161.370
Art. 21, 21-500.7     161.371
Art. 21, 21-500.8     161.372
Art. 21, 21-500.9     161.373
Art. 21, 21-500.10    161.374
Art. 21, 21-500.11    161.375
Art. 21, 21-500.12    161.376
Art. 21, 21-500.13    161.377
Art. 21, 21-500.14    161.378
Art. 21, 21-500A      161.390
Art. 21, 21-500A.1    161.391
Art. 21, 21-500A.2    161.392
Art. 21, 21-500A.3    161.393
Art. 21, 21-500A.4    161.394
Art. 21, 21-500A.5    161.395
Art. 21, 21-500A.6    161.396
Art. 21, 21-500A.7    161.397
Art. 21, 21-600       161.410
Art. 22, 22.1         10.01
Art. 22, 22.2         10.02
Art. 22, 22.3         10.03
Art. 22, 22.4         10.04
Art. 22, 22.5         10.05
Art. 23, 1            36.015
Art. 23, 2            36.016
Art. 23, 3            36.017
Art. 24A, 1           36.030
Art. 24A, 2           36.031
Art. 24A, 3           36.032
Art. 24A, 4           36.033
Art. 24A, 5           36.034
Art. 24A, 6           36.035
Art. 24A, 7           36.036
Art. 24A, 8           36.037
Art. 25, 1            92.01
Art. 25, 2            92.02
Art. 25, 3            92.03
Art. 25, 4            92.04
Art. 25, 5            92.05
Art. 25, 6            92.06
Art. 25, 7            92.07
Art. 25, 8            92.08
Art. 25, 9            92.09
Art. 25, 10           92.10
Art. 25, 11           92.11
Art. 25, 12           92.12
Art. 25, 13           92.13
Art. 25, 14           92.14
Art. 25, 15           92.15
Art. 25, 16           92.16
Art. 26               36.050
Art. 27, 1            36.065
Art. 27, 2            36.066
Art. 27, 3            36.067
Art. 27, 4            36.068
Art. 27, 5            36.069
Art. 27, 6            36.070
Art. 27, 7            36.071
Art. 27, 8            36.072
Art. 27, 9            36.073
Art. 27, 10           36.074
Art. 27, 11           36.075
Art. 27, 12           36.076
Art. 27, 13           36.077
Art. 27, 14           36.078
Art. 27, 15           36.079
Art. 27, 16           36.080
Art. 27, 17           36.081
Art. 27, 18           36.082
Art. 27, 19           36.083
Art. 27, 20           36.084
Art. 28, Part I, 28.1 36.095
Art. 28, Part I, 28.2 36.096
Art. 28, Part I, 28.3 36.097
Art. 28, Part I, 28.4 36.098
Art. 28, Part I, 28.5 36.099
Art. 28, Part I, 28.6 36.100
Art. 28, Part I, 28.7 36.101
Art. 28, Part I, 28.8 36.102
Art. 28, Part I, 28.9 36.103
Art. 28, Part II, 1   36.115
Art. 28, Part II, 2   36.116
Art. 28, Part II, 3   36.117
Art. 28, Part II, 4   36.118
Art. 28, Part II, 5   36.119
Art. 28, Part II, 6   36.120
Art. 28, Part II, 7   36.121
Art. 28, Part II, 8   36.122
Art. 29, 1            33.15
Art. 29, 5            33.16
Art. 29, 10           33.17
Art. 29, 25           33.99
Art. 30, 1            112.01
Art. 30, 2            112.02
Art. 30, 3            112.03
Art. 30, 4            112.04
Art. 30, 5            112.05
Art. 30, 6            112.06
Art. 30, 7            112.07
Art. 30, 8            112.08
Art. 30, 9            112.09
Art. 30, 10           112.10
Art. 30, 11           112.11
Art. 30, 12           112.12
Art. 30, 13           112.13
Art. 30, 14           112.14
Art. 30, 15           112.15
Art. 30, 16           112.16
Art. 30, 17           112.17
Art. 30, 18           112.18
Art. 30, 19           112.19
Art. 30, 20           112.20
Art. 30, 21           112.21
Art. 30, 22           112.22
Art. 30, 23           112.23
Art. 30, 24           112.24
Art. 30, 25           112.25
Art. 30, 26           112.26
Art. 31, 31.1         36.135
Art. 31, 31.2         36.136
Art. 31, 31.3         36.137
Art. 31, 31.4         36.138
Art. 31, 31.5         36.139
Art. 31, 31.6         36.140
Art. 31, 31.7         36.141
Art. 31, 31.8         36.142
Art. 31, 31.9         36.143
Art. 31, 31.10        36.144
Art. 32, 32A          119.01
Art. 32, 32B          119.02
Art. 32, 32C          119.03
Art. 32, 32D          119.04
Art. 32, 32E          119.05
Art. 32, 32F          119.06
Art. 32, 32G          119.07
Art. 32, 32H          119.08
Art. 32, 32I          119.09
Art. 32, 32J          119.99
Art. 33, 33a          93.01
Art. 33, 33b          93.02
Art. 33, 33c          93.03
Art. 33, 33d          93.04
Art. 33, 33e          93.05
Art. 33, 33f          93.06
Art. 33, 33g          93.07
Art. 33, 33h          93.08
Art. 33, 33i          93.09
Art. 33, 33j          93.10
Art. 33, 33k          93.99
Art. 34, 1            36.155
Art. 34, 2            36.156
Art. 34, 3            36.157
Art. 35, 1            36.170
Art. 35, 2            36.171
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
2023-08  2-21-2023   161.210
                     161.242;
2023-13  3-6-2023    161.258;
                     161.270—
                     161.275
2023-14  3-20-2023   36.170;
                     36.171
2023-19  4-17-2023   50.092
2023-20  4-17-2023   32.002
2023-23  6-5-2023    111.09
2023-26  6-19-2023   Ch. 77, Sch I
                     160.01—
2023-30  8-21-2023   160.03;
                     161.312—
                     161.326
2023-31  8-21-2023   111.09
2023-32  9-5-2023    111.09
2023-09  12-18-2023  33.01
2024-1   1-2-2024    111.09
2024-07  3-4-2024    36.185—
                     36.194
2024-10  4-1-2024    32.050;
                     32.051
                     94.01—
2024-30  9-3-2024    94.04,
                     94.99
2024-31  9-3-2024    111.09
2024-34  10-7-2024   115.04
                     111.17,
2024-36  10-21-2024  111.23—
                     111.25
                     91.01,
2024-37  10-21-2024  150.01,
                     153.02
2024-39  11-4-2024   35.02
2025-05  3-17-2025   111.05
2025-16  7-7-2025    35.01
2025-17  7-7-2025    36.002
2025-23  9-3-2025    36.210—
                     36.212
                    
 
 
