VILLAGE CODE
OF
MOUNT MORRIS, IL
Code current through:
Ord. 25-08, passed July 22, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Mt. Morris, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 25-08, passed July 22, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 08-02-17
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE MT. MORRIS, ILLINOIS VILLAGE CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Mt.
Morris, Illinois, as follows:
   SECTION 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Mt. Morris, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
   SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official Village Code is identified by the proper catch line and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
Is regularly open.
   SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in the official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official Village code.
   SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED: 8th day of August, 2017
APPROVED: 8th day of August, 2017
/s/         
President
ATTEST:
/s/         
Village Clerk
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: 6
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 0
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
MT. MORRIS VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Village Board of Trustees, this Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of Mt. Morris. This
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MT. MORRIS VILLAGE CODE and
is hereby published by authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the Village as
provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Code by title in any legal documents. (2017 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2017 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code.
(2017 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said Code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the Village and shall be returned to the Office of the
Village Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board of Trustees.
(2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the Village; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (2017 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the Village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code. (2017 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The Village Board hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Village President and Board of Trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other Village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the Village of Mt. Morris".
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
Village has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to Village ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2017 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Mt. Morris.
CODE: The Village Code of the Village of Mt. Morris.
COUNTY: The County of Ogle, State of Illinois.
ILCS: Illinois Compiled Statutes.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
VILLAGE: The Village of Mt. Morris, County of Ogle, State of Illinois. (2017
Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2017
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
Code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this Code shall be fined in an amount not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any
one (1) offense. No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or cost
shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 01-03-17, 1-10-2017;
amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in
subsection A1 of this section, the Circuit Court may impose a period of
"conditional discharge", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4,
or "court supervision", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21,
for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to
perform community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any
other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
Code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set
forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to
time.
      3.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
Code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this subsection
A, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
      4.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The Village Attorney may retain attorneys and
private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment
of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the
Village with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the
Village Attorney under this subsection shall be charged to the offender.
   B.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by State statute for the same offense. (2017 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person
convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where a duty is prescribed
or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is
forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2017 Code)
1-4-3: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the Village Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. ALTERNATIVE SETTLEMENT FOR CERTAIN VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Violations
1-4A-2: Issuance Of Citation
1-4A-3: Payment Of Compromised Amount
1-4A-4: Failure To Settle Claim
1-4A-1: VIOLATIONS:
Whenever a Police Officer of the Village is authorized to arrest a person
because of a violation of a Village ordinance in respect to any of the
following subjects:
Title 3: Business And License Regulations:
   Chapter 6: Door To Door Solicitation
Title 4: Health, Sanitation And Environment:
Chapter 1: Nuisances
   Chapter 2: Noise Control
Chapter 3: Plants And Weeds
   Chapter 4: Open Burning; Fire Prevention Regulations
Title 5: Police And Public Safety:
   Chapter 2: General Offenses
   Chapter 4: Animal Control
    Chapter 4, Article A: Dogs
Chapter 6: Fireworks And Explosives
Title 6: Motor Vehicles And Traffic:
Complete title except section
6-1-1: Illinois Motor Vehicle Code adopted; chapter 2: parking and snow
tickets.
Title 7: Public Ways And Property:
Chapter 1: Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways
Chapter 2: Signs And Awnings
Chapter 3: Trees And Shrubs
Title 8, Public Utilities:
Chapter 1: Water System
    Chapter 1, Article A: Cross-Connection Control
Chapter 2: Sewer System
   Chapter 3: Garbage Collection And Disposal Service
Title 9: Building Regulations:
   Chapter 1: General Building Provisions
   Chapter 6: Private Swimming Pools
(1979 Code § 1-10-1)
The person accused of such violation may settle and compromise the violation
claim in respect to such ordinance violation by paying the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) within ten (10) calendar days from the time such alleged offense was
committed, or by paying to the Village the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
subsequent to said ten (10) day period, but no later than thirty (30) days from
the date such offense was allegedly committed. (1979 Code § 1-10-1; amd. 2017
Code)
1-4A-2: ISSUANCE OF CITATION:
The citations issued under this article shall be a courtesy in lieu of arrest.
The Police Officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in the Circuit
Court of Ogle County, issue a citation under this article for any violation of
an offense set forth in section
1-4A-1 of this article. (1979 Code § 1-10-2)
1-4A-3: PAYMENT OF COMPROMISED AMOUNT:
Any person wishing to settle and compromise an offense shall pay the required
amount either by mailing a check or money order together with the violator's
copy of the citation to the Village of Mt. Morris, 105 W. Lincoln Street, Mt.
Morris, IL 61054, or by paying the same in person at the Mt. Morris Village
Hall during regular business hours. Checks or money orders should be made
payable to the Village of Mt. Morris. (1979 Code § 1-10-3)
1-4A-4: FAILURE TO SETTLE CLAIM:
If the person to whom a citation is issued, pursuant to section
1-4A-1 of this article, fails to settle and pay the violation claim within the
prescribed time as set forth in this article, then the Police Officer shall
file a complaint and prosecute the violation in the manner prescribed by law.
(1979 Code § 1-10-4)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election And Term Of Office
1-5-2: Bond; Oath; Salary
1-5-3: Duties
1-5-4: Appointment Of Officers
1-5-5: Designation Of Duties
1-5-6: President And Vice President Pro Tem
1-5-1: ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and shall
be President of the Board of Trustees as is provided by statute. (1979 Code §
1-5-1)
1-5-2: BOND; OATH; SALARY:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall give bond
with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties, in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute and shall
receive four hundred dollars ($400.00) per regular or special meeting of the
Village Board attended or for which his absence is excused. (Ord. 11-02-08, 11-
25-2008, eff. 11-26-2008)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Village, and shall
perform all such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He
shall have supervision over all of the executive offices of the Village, and
shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any
officer at any reasonable time. (1979 Code §
1-5-3)
1-5-4: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, all officers of the Village whose appointment or election is not
otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in such offices shall be filled
in the same manner. (1979 Code §
1-5-4)
1-5-5: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
officer of the Village, this dispute shall be settled by the President; and the
President shall have the power to delegate to any officer any duty which is to
be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty.
(1979 Code §
1-5-5)
1-5-6: PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
The Board of Trustees shall elect annually two (2) of its number to act as
President Pro Tem and Vice President Pro Tem who, during the absence or
disability of the President, shall perform the duties pertaining to the office.
(1979 Code §
1-5-6)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election; Functions
1-6-2: Oath; Salary
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: President
1-6-5: Quorum
1-6-6: Committees
1-6-7: Disturbances At Meetings
1-6-8: Rules Of Order
1-6-9: Surety Bonds, Board Approval
1-6-1: ELECTION; FUNCTIONS:
The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to
office for a four (4) year term as is provided by statute. This Board shall be
the legislative department of the Village government, and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as may be delegated to it by statute. (1979 Code §
1-6-1)
1-6-2: OATH; SALARY:
   A.   Trustees: Each member of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of
office prescribed by statute and shall receive seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per regular or special meeting of the Village Board attended by said Trustee or
for which his or her absence is excused.
   B.   Standing Committee Chairpersons: In addition, the Chairperson of each
standing committee, as set forth in section
1-6-6 of this chapter, shall receive the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
committee meeting; provided, that compensation for a committee meeting shall be
limited to one (1) committee meeting per month. (Ord. 11-03-08, 11-25-2008,
eff. 11-26-2008)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall
be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the hour of seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M., and no notice of such regular meetings shall be required.
The meeting place of the Board of Trustees shall be at the Village Hall, unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Trustees. Any regular meeting falling upon a
legal holiday shall be held on the day following at the same hour and place
specified. (1979 Code §
1-6-3)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the President of
the Village or any three (3) Trustees upon at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice to all members and the President; provided, that if all of the Trustees
are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary,
subject to statutory requirements. (1979 Code §
1-6-3; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Meetings Open To Public: All meetings of the Board are open to the
public with the exception of certain executive sessions. (1979 Code §
1-6-3)
1-6-4: PRESIDENT:
The Village President shall be the presiding officer of all regular and special
meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times when the Board meets as a
Committee of the Whole. (1979 Code §
1-6-4)
1-6-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no
ordinance shall be passed except upon a favorable vote by a majority of the
elected members, as is provided by statute. (1979 Code §
1-6-5)
1-6-6: COMMITTEES:
   A.   Standing Committees: The following shall be the outstanding committees
of the Board of Trustees:
      1.   Streets, alleys, sidewalks and storm sewers; hereafter referred to
as streets and alleys.
      2.   Finance.
      3.   Water and sanitary sewers.
      4.   Ordinances.
      5.   Law enforcement and communications.
      6.   Public property (all and any public property not described in
subsections A1 through A5 of this section, including sanitary disposal). (1979
Code §
1-6-6; amd. Ord. 08-01-15, 8-25-2015)
   B.   Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to
time as is directed by the Board of Trustees.
   C.   Committee Membership: All standing and special committees shall be
composed of two (2) members, including the Chairperson, unless the Board
directs otherwise. All committees shall be appointed by the Village President.
(1979 Code §
1-6-6)
1-6-7: DISTURBANCES AT MEETINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board of
Trustees or of any committee thereof. (1979 Code §
1-6-7)
1-6-8: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business at meetings of the Board of
Trustees shall be as follows:
      1.   Roll call.
      2.   Reading of minutes of preceding meeting.
      3.   Treasurer's report.
      4.   Presentation of claims.
      5.   Presentation of communications and petitions to the Board.
      6.   Reports of standing committees.
      7.   Reports of special committees.
      8.   Unfinished business.
      9.   New business.
   B.   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be
rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting
when such vote or action was taken, as is provided by statute.
   C.   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be
reduced to writing before being voted upon. (1979 Code §
1-6-8)
   D.   Addressing Meetings:
      1.   Compliance With Rules And Statutes: Any person seeking to address
the members of the Village Board, or any commission, committee or board of the
Village, at any public meeting will be permitted to speak on any matter listed
on the agenda or any other matter of public concern in accordance with these
rules and applicable State statutes.
      2.   Village Board Meetings:
         a.   The agenda for each meeting of the Village Board shall include a
"petitions and communications" item, during which any member of the public may
address the Village Board. Any person so addressing the Village Board shall
state his or her name and the topic of discussion at the commencement of that
person's comments.
         b.   No person shall speak or address the Village Board unless first
recognized by the presiding officer.
         c.   Public comment at a Village Board meeting shall be limited to no
more than five (5) minutes per commenter and to no more than one (1) hour total
per meeting, unless either of said time limits is extended by majority vote of
the Council Members present. The presiding officer may designate the Village
Clerk, Chief of Police or other officer of the Village to monitor the time
utilized by each speaker and to notify the speaker when the allotted time has
expired.
         d.   If the presiding officer recognizes that more than twenty (20)
persons wish to address the Village Board at any one (1) meeting, the presiding
officer may limit each speaker to comment of no more than three (3) minutes.
Whenever any group of persons wishes to address the Village Board on the same
subject matter, the presiding officer may request that a spokesperson be chosen
from the group. If such spokesperson speaks on behalf of multiple members of a
group, the presiding officer may permit the spokesperson to address for a
period longer than the otherwise specified time limits. If other matters are to
be presented by other persons in the same group, the presiding officer may
request that the group limit the number of such persons or may request that the
additional comment be limited to information which has not already been
presented by the group spokesperson or by other members of the group in order
that the total comment period for that meeting not be exceeded.
         e.   Any person invited by a member of the Village Board to address
the Village Board at a meeting is subject to such time limitation, if any, as
the majority of the members of the Village Board present may prescribe.
      3.   Meeting Disruptions: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt
any regular or special meeting of the Village Board or any meeting of any
commission, committee or board of the Village. Any person violating any
provision of this subsection may be prosecuted as provided by law and may be
summarily removed from the Village Board room and Village Hall or such other
place where the meeting is held.
      4.   Meetings Of Commissions, Committees And Boards: The time limits
specified above shall not apply to persons addressing the Zoning Board of
Appeals, Plan Commission or any other municipal body when such body is
conducting a quasi-judicial hearing. Any such body may establish reasonable
rules and time limits regarding the number and amount of time that persons
advocating for or against pending matters must follow, so long as such rules
conform to other requirements of State statute. (Ord. 12-01-15, 12-22-2015)
   E.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting.
   F.   Robert's Rules Of Order: Robert's Rules Of Order shall govern the
deliberations of the Board of Trustees except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules. (1979 Code §
1-6-8)
1-6-9: SURETY BONDS, BOARD APPROVAL:
Whenever a bond to indemnify the Village is required as prerequisite to
exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of a
license or permit, or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on
such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this
State as a surety company, unless there is specific provision to the contrary
by ordinance, or the Board of Trustees by majority vote accepts a personal
surety. Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety
may be needed on any bond to indemnify the Village against any loss or
liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for
any other reason, the Board of Trustees may order a new surety or sureties to
be secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured
within ten (10) days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal
on the bond, or his assignees, the Board of Trustees shall declare the bond to
be void, and thereupon such principal or assignee, shall be deemed to have
surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was
required. (1979 Code §
1-6-9)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Effect Of Provisions
1-7-2: Election Of Officers
1-7-3: Appointment Of Officers
1-7-4: Term Of Office; Vacancies
1-7-5: Oath; Bonds
1-7-6: Salaries
1-7-7: Monies Received
1-7-8: Assignment Of Duties
1-7-9: Records
1-7-10: Arrests
1-7-11: Removal From Office
1-7-12: Termination Of Office
1-7-13: Recruitment; Equal Employment Opportunity
1-7-1: EFFECT OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and employees
of the Village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or
position or the time of the appointment of the officers or employees. (1979
Code §
1-7-1)
1-7-2: ELECTION OF OFFICERS:
Elections for Municipal officers shall be held as provided by statute, and at
the time prescribed by statute. All officers elected to Municipal office as
provided by statute shall take office on the first regular or special meeting
which is held in the month following their election. (1979 Code §
1-7-2)
1-7-3: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
All officers other than elective officers shall be appointed by the Village
President and Board of Trustees as is provided by statute; provided, that all
employees shall, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, be appointed
or selected by the Village President. (1979 Code §
1-7-3)
1-7-4: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
   A.   Term: Every appointive officer of the Village shall hold office until
May 1 following his appointment or until his successor is appointed and
qualified, unless it is otherwise provided by ordinance.
   B.   Vacancy: In case of a vacancy in any such office, it shall be filled in
the same manner as such appointment or selection was made in the absence of any
provision to the contrary. (1979 Code §
1-7-4)
1-7-5: OATH; BONDS:
   A.   Oath: Every officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his
duties, take the oath prescribed by statute.
   B.   Bond: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Board of
Trustees, upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such
amount and with such sureties as may be determined by such Board, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position. (1979
Code §
1-7-5)
1-7-6: SALARIES:
All officers and employees of the Village shall receive such salary as may from
time to time be provided for by ordinance. (1979 Code §
1-7-6)
1-7-7: MONIES RECEIVED:
Every officer of the Village shall, at least once each month, turn over all
monies received by him in his official capacity, to the Village Clerk with a
statement showing the source from which the same was received. (1979 Code §
1-7-7)
1-7-8: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES:
The Board of Trustees shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer
any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer, and
shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or
duties of officers. (1979 Code §
1-7-8)
1-7-9: RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the Village shall be open to inspection by
the Village President, or any member of the Board of Trustees at all reasonable
times, regardless of whether such records are required to be kept by statute or
Village ordinance. (1979 Code §
1-7-9)
1-7-10: ARRESTS:
After receiving a certificate attesting to the successful completion of a
training course administered by the Idaho Law Enforcement Training Standards
Board, the Village President, members of the Board of Trustees and members of
the Police Department are hereby designated to be conservators of the peace
with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by
statute. (1979 Code §
1-7-10; amd. 2017 Code)
1-7-11: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any officer or employee appointed by the Village President may be removed from
office by him; provided, however, that a statement of such removal, with the
reasons therefor, shall be given to the Board of Trustees at their next meeting
following such removal. (1979 Code §
1-7-11)
1-7-12: TERMINATION OF OFFICE:
Every officer and employee of the Village, upon the expiration of his term for
any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records
which may be the property of the Village, and if no successor has been
appointed within one (1) week after the termination of his office, such
property shall be delivered either to the Village Clerk or the Village
Treasurer. (1979 Code §
1-7-12)
1-7-13: RECRUITMENT; EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:
All employees are selected on the basis of merit, character, training,
experience, physical fitness, and compliance with applicable retirement and
pension plan requirements. It is the policy of the Village not to discriminate
against a person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental
disability, military status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, unfavorable
discharge from the military service, or other protected characteristic. Every
person will be given an equal opportunity for employment with the Village, and
the Village shall comply strictly with all State and Federal labor laws and
legislation. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Bond; Salary
1-7A-3: Vacancy In Office
1-7A-4: Powers And Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Village Clerk shall be appointed on an annual basis by the Village
President with the concurrence of the Village Board of Trustees. (1979 Code §
1-8-1)
1-7A-2: BOND; SALARY:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village Clerk shall execute
a bond in such amount and with such sureties as is provided by statute,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The Clerk shall
receive one hundred dollars ($100.00) per regular or special meeting of the
Village Board attended or for which his absence is excused. (1979 Code § 1-8-2;
amd. Ord. 11-01-08, 11-25-2008)
1-7A-3: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
In case the Office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
President and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor as is provided by
statute. (1979 Code § 1-8-3)
1-7A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Signatures; Seal:
      1.   Seal: The Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the Village
and all licenses, permits and such documents as shall require this formality.
      2.   Custodian: The Clerk shall be the custodian of the Village Seal, and
shall fix its impression on documents whenever this is required.
   B.   Monies; Accounts:
      1.   Money Collected: The Clerk shall turn over all monies received by
him on behalf of the Village to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of
the same; and with such monies, he shall give a statement as to the source
thereof.
      2.   Accounts: The Clerk shall keep the accounts showing all monies
received by him and the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts
as may be required by statute or Village ordinance.
   C.   Records; Documents:
      1.   Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records
which the Clerk is required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued; and the payments thereon; a record showing all of
the officers and regular employees of the Village; and such other records as
may be required by the Board of Trustees.
      2.   Documents: The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents
belonging to the Village which are not assigned to the custody of some other
officer.
      3.   Indices: The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all
documents and records kept by him, so that ready access thereto may be had.
   D.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk
shall perform such other duties and functions which may be required by statute
or Village ordinance. (1979 Code § 1-8-4)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Bond
1-7B-3: Duties
1-7B-4: Warrants, Required Signatures
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Treasurer, who shall be appointed
by the Village President and Board of Trustees as is provided by statute. He
shall serve for one (1) year. (1979 Code §
1-9-1)
1-7B-2: BOND:
The Treasurer shall give a bond before entering upon the duties of his office,
in the sum required by the Board of Trustees, but such amount shall not be less
than that required by statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the Treasurer of his duties, and shall be conditioned to
indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act
of the Treasurer. (1979 Code §
1-9-2)
1-7B-3: DUTIES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   General Duties: The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be
prescribed for him by statute or Village ordinance. He shall receive all monies
paid to the Village either directly from the person paying the money or from
the hands of some other officer or employee as may receive it, and he shall pay
out monies only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the President and
Clerk.
      2.   Coliseum Funds: The Treasurer shall receive all taxes and other
monies levied and collected for the Mt. Morris Municipal Coliseum and shall be
held in a separate fund designated as the Municipal Coliseum Fund. The
Treasurer shall pay out such monies only upon order of the Coliseum Board and
upon checks or vouchers drawn upon the Treasurer and signed by the President
and Secretary of the Board.
   B.   Deposit Of Funds: The Treasurer shall deposit the funds of the Village,
including Coliseum Funds, in such depositories as may be selected from time to
time as is provided by law; and shall keep the deposit of the Village monies
separate and distinct from his own money, and shall not make private or
personal use of any Village money.
   C.   Records; Reports:
      1.   The Treasurer shall keep the records showing all monies received by
him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it
is paid, and he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of
the Village.
      2.   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Board of Trustees
showing the state of the finances of the Village, including the Coliseum Fund,
and the amount received and spent during the month, which reports shall be
filed. The Treasurer shall make an annual report prior to September 1 with the
total of all receipts and expenditures of the Village and his transactions as
Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year.
      3.   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Coliseum Board
showing the status of the Coliseum Fund.
   D.   Accounting: The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be
required by statute or Village ordinance, and he shall keep them in the manner
required by the Board of Trustees.
   E.   Register Of Warrants: The Treasurer shall keep a register of all
warrants, bonds or orders filed with him or paid by him, and all vouchers, as
is required by statute. (1979 Code §
1-9-3)
1-7B-4: WARRANTS, REQUIRED SIGNATURES:
No warrant of the Village shall be recognized or paid unless it is signed by
both the Village President and the Village Clerk. (1979 Code §
1-9-4)
CHAPTER 8
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-8-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-8-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   A.   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this section) are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the Village
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   B.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the Village, is
hereby prohibited.
   C.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the Village under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   D.   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited.
   E.   For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   F.   The penalties for violation of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.
   G.   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of Village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
   H.   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village.
   I.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the Village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois Supreme Court.
   J.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not
address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by
this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
(1979 Code § 1-11-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
CHAPTER 9
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF TAXPAYERS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Title
1-9-2: Scope; Application Of Provisions
1-9-3: Definitions
1-9-4: Notice Requirements
1-9-5: Late Notices, Payments Or Other Filings
1-9-6: Application Of Tax Payments
1-9-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-9-8: Audit Procedure
1-9-9: Appeal
1-9-10: Hearing
1-9-11: Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
1-9-12: Installment Contracts
1-9-13: Statute Of Limitations
1-9-14: Voluntary Disclosure
1-9-15: Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
1-9-16: Review Of Liens
1-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY PROVISIONS. (2017 Code)
1-9-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Village
procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   B.   Application; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall be liberally
construed and administered to supplement all of the Village's tax ordinance
provisions. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter's provisions shall be controlling.
(2017 Code)
1-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them
as follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act" 1 .
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village President and Board of Trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The Village Treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local Tax Administrator's stead. The
Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
Act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the Village
that is collected or administered by the Village not an agency or department of
the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the Village.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed, and with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
Village. (2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
1-9-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing sent not less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the Local
Tax Administrator. The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator by
U.S. registered or certified mail addressed to the persons concerned at the
persons' last known address. (2017 Code)
1-9-5: LATE NOTICES, PAYMENTS OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the Village on or before the due date; or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the Village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (2017 Code)
1-9-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (2017 Code)
1-9-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The Village shall not refund or credit any
taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be two (2) or less years after the end of the calendar
year in which payment in error was made. The Village shall not grant a credit
or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to
a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the Village.
      2.   Within fourteen (14) days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate per annum as published in the money
rates section of the Wall Street Journal on the business date twenty eight (28)
days before the refund is to be mailed, based on a year of three hundred sixty
five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the
overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(2017 Code)
1-9-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this section.
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
      4.   All requirements under 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/35, as may
be amended from time to time.
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer which shall be
within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than fourteen (14) days nor
more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the
taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator agree to some other convenient time.
In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in
question, the taxpayer may request another date, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer's Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the Village.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available his books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based
on the Tax Administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the Village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall
notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (2017 Code)
1-9-9: APPEAL:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The Local Tax Administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
Local Tax Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the Local Tax
Administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (2017 Code)
1-9-10: HEARING:
   A.   Conduct Of Hearing: Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a
timely written protest and petition for hearing under section
1-9-9 of this chapter, the Local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   B.   Continuances: No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed twenty eight (28) days.
   C.   Testimony And Evidence: At the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator
shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the
tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
   D.   Written Determination: At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax
Administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision. (2017 Code)
1-9-11: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five
(365) days and the number of days elapsed.
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return, shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling Village ordinance
provision.
   D.   Waiver Of Penalties: The Local Tax Administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the Local Tax Administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (2017 Code)
1-9-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is fourteen (14) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the Local Administrator, the installment contract may be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (2017 Code)
1-9-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The Village, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   C.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
Village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed,
whichever occurs later.
   D.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (2017 Code)
1-9-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the Local Tax
Administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer. (2017 Code)
1-9-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's Office. (2017 Code)
1-9-16: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (2017 Code)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Compensation For Appointed Board And Commission Members
2-1-1: COMPENSATION FOR APPOINTED BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS:
   A.   Appointed Board and Commission members shall be paid as follows:
Park and Recreation Advisory Board:  
 Chairman                          $50.00 per meeting
 Secretary                         35.00 per meeting
 Other members                     25.00 per meeting
Plan Commission:                     
 Chairman                          50.00 per meeting
 Secretary                         35.00 per meeting
 Other members                     25.00 per meeting
Historical Committee:                
 Chairman                          25.00 per meeting
 Secretary                         25.00 per meeting
 Other members                     15.00 per meeting
Board of Police Commissioners       All Board members shall be paid $10.00 per
                                    hour for hearings and meetings
 
(Ord. 11-04-08, 11-25-2008, eff. 11-26-2008)
   B.   The compensation as set forth in subsection A of this section for all
of the appointed Board, Commission and Committee members shall be limited to
one (1) meeting per month, unless prior approval is obtained from the Village
President for subsequent meetings. The compensation set forth herein shall be
effective June 1, 2009. (Ord. 11-04-08, 11-25-2008, eff. 11-26-2008; amd. 2017
Code)
CHAPTER 2
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Organization, Creation And Procedure
2-2-2: Official Plan; Commission Procedures And Duties
2-2-3: Zoning Ordinance; Commission Procedures And Duties
2-2-4: Amendments
2-2-5: Special Uses
2-2-1: ORGANIZATION, CREATION AND PROCEDURE:
A Plan Commission is hereby created. The word "Board" or "Commission" when used
in this chapter shall be construed to mean the Plan Commission. The Commission
shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the President and confirmed by
the Board of Trustees. Members of the Commission shall reside within the
Village or within territory contiguous to the Village and not more than one and
one-half miles beyond the corporate limits and not included within any other
municipality. Additionally, no member of the Commission shall be a relative of
any other member of the Commission. A "relative" shall be defined as a spouse,
domestic partner, and, whether by blood, adoption, marriage or domestic
partnership, a child, parent, or any person residing in the immediate household
of a member of the Commission. Members of the Commission shall serve
respectively for the following terms: three (3) for two (2) years and four (4)
for four (4) years. The successor to each member of the Commission so appointed
shall serve for a term of four (4) years. All terms shall be deemed to commence
on May 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies upon the Commission shall be
filed for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the
manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. One (1) member of
the Commission shall be named as Chairperson at the time or his or her
appointment and shall serve in such capacity for the balance of his or her
term. One (1) member of the Commission shall be named as Vice Chairperson at
the time of his or her appointment and shall serve in such capacity for the
balance of his or her term. Successor Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons shall
be appointed by the President and confirmed by the Board of Trustees after
recommendation by majority vote of the members of the Commission. (1979 Code §
2-6-1; amd. Ord. 10-02-20, 10-27-2020)
2-2-2: OFFICIAL PLAN; COMMISSION PROCEDURES AND DUTIES:
   A.   Records, Annual Report: The Commission shall keep written records of
its proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The
Commission shall also file an annual report with the President and Board of
Trustees setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Plan Commission shall have the following powers
and duties: (1979 Code §
2-6-2)
      1.   To prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees a
Comprehensive Plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the Village. Such Plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the official
Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the Village. This Plan may include
reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, public grounds, and
other improvements hereinafter specified. The Plan, as recommended by the Plan
Commission and as thereafter adopted in the Village, may be made applicable, by
the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits and contiguous
territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate
limits and not included in any municipality. Such Plan may be implemented by
ordinances:
         a.   Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and
for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as herein defined;
         b.   Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for
public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage
collection and treatment; and
         c.   Designating land suitable for annexation to the Village and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
      2.   To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official
Comprehensive Plan.
      3.   To prepare and recommend to the Corporate Authorities, from time to
time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
Comprehensive Plan.
      4.   To give aid to the Village officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of these projects, and, generally, to promote the realization of the
official Comprehensive Plan.
      5.   To prepare and recommend to the President and Board of Trustees
schemes for regulating or forbidding structures or activities which may hinder
access to solar energy necessary for the proper functioning of solar energy
systems, as defined in section 1.2 of the Comprehensive Solar Energy Act of
1977, or to recommend changes in such schemes.
      6.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this
chapter as may be conferred by the President and Board of Trustees.
   C.   Official Comprehensive Plan And Official Map: The official
Comprehensive Plan and official map shall be adopted and filed and copies made
in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-6. (1979 Code §
2-6-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Compliance Of Plat With Map: The President and Board of Trustees of the
Village shall determine whether a proposed plat of subdivision or resubdivision
complies with the official map. To secure such determination, the person
requesting the subdivision or resubdivision shall file four (4) copies of a
plat thereof with the Clerk of the Village, and shall furnish therewith four
(4) copies of all data necessary to show compliance with all applicable Village
regulations, and shall make application for preliminary or final approval of
the proposed plat.
   E.   Improvements: The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for
its consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto
if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Board
of Trustees.
   F.   Expenditures: The Commission may, at the discretion of the Board of
Trustees, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other necessary
expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the Board of
Trustees from public funds. If said Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to
secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the
Board of Trustees and appropriations by the Board of Trustees therefor. (1979
Code §
2-6-2)
2-2-3: ZONING ORDINANCE; COMMISSION PROCEDURES AND DUTIES:
   A.   Jurisdiction: The Plan Commission of the Village, which has been duly
established, is the Plan Commission referred to in this chapter, and shall have
the following duties under this chapter:
      1.   To hear all applications for amendments and special uses and
thereafter submit reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the
Village Board in the manner prescribed in this section for amendments and
special uses;
      2.   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this chapter, and to make reports of its recommendations to the
Village Board not less frequently than once a year; and
      3.   To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass
under this chapter.
   B.   Meetings And Rules: Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held
monthly; provided, that no monthly meeting shall be held if there are no
business items on the agenda. Additionally, the Commission shall hold all other
meetings and hearings as may be necessary to fulfill the requirements of
applicable Village Code provisions and Illinois Statutes. All hearings
conducted by the Commission under this chapter shall be in accordance with
Illinois Statutes. In all proceedings of the Commission provided for in this
chapter, the Chairperson, and in his or her absence the Vice Chairperson, shall
have the power to administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
provided for in this chapter shall be given under oath. The Commission shall
keep minutes of its proceedings and records of its hearings and other official
actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special use,
and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Commission under this chapter shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk
and shall be a public record. The Commission shall adopt its own rules and
procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or applicable Illinois Statutes.
C.   Public Hearings: Any public hearing required under title 10 of this Code
shall be preceded by notice thereof, giving the time, place and purpose of
hearing by publishing said notice not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days prior to hearing in a newspaper with a general circulation
within the Village. In addition, any abutting property owner and any adjacent
property owner separated only by a Village street or alley shall receive direct
notice of said hearing by certified mail mailed to the address of the abutting
or adjacent property not more than thirty (30) days, but not less than fifteen
(15) days, prior to the hearing. (1979 Code § 2-6-3; amd. Ord. 10-02-20, 10-27-
2020)
2-2-4: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this chapter, and title 10 of this Code, may be amended from time
to time by ordinance in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of
Illinois. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board of
Trustees only after public hearing before the Plan Commission and a report of
its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Village
Board, by the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, other governmental
bodies, of or by any resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional
limits of this chapter or title 10 of this Code. (1979 Code § 2-6-4; amd. 2017
Code)
   C.   Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Board and thereafter introduced to the Village Board of Trustees. Such
application shall be forwarded from the Village Board to the Plan Commission,
with a request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the time and
place of the hearing, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one (1) or
more newspapers with a general circulation within Mt. Morris. (1979 Code § 2-6-
4)
2-2-5: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Purpose: The development and execution of the zoning ordinance is based
upon the division of the Village into districts, within any one of which the
use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures,
as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are special uses, which, because of their unique character, cannot
be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands
and upon the public need for the particular use or the particular location.
Such special uses fall into the following categories:
      1.   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or
uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities. (1979 Code § 2-6-5)
   B.   Authority:
      1.   Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the Village Board in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and title 10 of this Code,
applicable to amendments of this chapter, or title 10 of this Code, and the
regulations and conditions set forth in this chapter, and title 10 of this
Code, for special uses.
      2.   No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the Village
Board until after:
         a.   A written report is prepared and forwarded to the Village Board
by the Plan Commission in a manner prescribed herein for amendments to this
chapter, or title 10 of this Code; and
         b.   A public hearing has been held by the Plan Commission after due
notice by publication as prescribed herein, for amendments, and the findings
and recommendations of the Plan Commission have been reported to the Village
Board. (1979 Code § 2-6-5; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Initiation: An application for a special use may be made by any person,
firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission
requesting or intending to request a building permit or occupancy certificate.
   D.   Processing:
      1.   An application for a special use, in such form and accompanied by
such information as shall be established from time to time by the Plan
Commission, shall be filed with the Village Clerk and thereafter processed in
the manner prescribed heretofore for applications and amendments. (1979 Code §
2-6-2)
      2.   The Plan Commission shall hold the public hearing and forward its
recommendations in the form of a written report to the Village Board within
thirty (30) days following the date of public hearing on each application,
unless it is withdrawn by the petitioner. During its review of the special use
application, and in formulating its recommendations, the Plan Commission shall
take the following into consideration: (1979 Code §
2-6-2; amd. 2017 Code)
         a.   That the proposed use at that particular location requested is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the
interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of
the neighborhood or community; and
         b.   That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular
case be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property values or
improvement in the vicinity; and
         c.   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and
conditions specified in this chapter for such use, and with the stipulation and
conditions made a part of the authorization granted by the Village Board of
Trustees.
   E.   Decisions: The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and
without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, or may refer it
back to the Plan Commission for further consideration. (1979 Code § 2-6-5)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Membership, Appointment And Terms
2-3-2: Vacancies And Removals
2-3-3: Chairperson
2-3-4: Meetings
2-3-5: Duties
2-3-1: MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
   A.   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board shall
consist of seven (7) members nominated by the Village President and appointed
by the Village Board. The members of said Board shall serve for the following
initial terms:
1 for 1 year
1 for 2 years
1 for 3 years
1 for 4 years
1 for 5 years
1 for 6 years
1 for 7 years
   B.   The successor of each member so appointed shall serve for a term of
five (5) years. (2017 Code)
2-3-2: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
Vacancies shall be filled by the Village President, subject to confirmation by
the Village Board, for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the
Village Board for cause after written charges have been filed and after a
public hearing has been held if demanded by the member so charged. (2017 Code)
2-3-3: CHAIRPERSON:
One (1) of the members of the Board shall be designated by the Village
President, with the consent of the Village Board, as Chairperson of said Board
and shall hold said office as Chairperson until a successor is appointed. Such
Chairperson, or in his absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. (2017 Code)
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
   A.   Time, Place And Notification: All meetings of the Board shall be held
at the call of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine.
There shall be at least fifteen (15) days', but not more than thirty (30)
days', notice of the time and place of such meeting published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village, said notice to contain a statement of the
particular purpose of such meeting and a brief description of the location of
the property or properties under consideration at such meetings.
   B.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   C.   Record Of Meetings: The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of
each case, and the Board's recommendations to the Village Board to grant or
deny each application shall be specified. Every rule, regulation, and every
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall immediately
be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, a
copy of which and all recommendations thereto to be filed in the Office of the
Village Clerk. (2017 Code)
2-3-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Board of Appeals to hear and decide any
appeal from an order, decision or interpretation of the Zoning Administrator or
any matter referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the
provisions of the zoning ordinances or State statutes. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created; Appointment
2-4-2: Powers And Duties
2-4-3: Orders, Notices
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Board of Health for the Village. The Board of
Health shall consist of the Village President, and one (1) member of the Board
of Trustees and three (3) additional persons, one (1) of whom shall be a
physician, selected at large, appointed by the Village President by and with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (1979 Code §
2-1-1)
2-4-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the
duties assigned to it by statute or Village ordinance. It shall be the duty of
the Board of Health to enforce all ordinances of the Village which relate to
public health or relate to nuisances. The Board of Health shall make all
necessary rules and regulations for the protection of the health of the Village
and guard against the spread of contagious diseases, and to prevent by
necessary rules the induction of diseases, contagious or otherwise, within the
corporate limits of the Village.
   B.   Inspections: Each member of the Board of Health and any person
specifically authorized by such Board for that purpose, shall have the right
during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises for the purpose of
making an inspection to ensure compliance with all Village ordinances
containing provisions for the protection of public health or relating to
nuisances, and rules and regulations of the Board of Health. Such right to
inspect shall also apply to foodstuffs offered for sale or kept for the purpose
of selling or offering for sale. (1979 Code § 2-1-2)
2-4-3: ORDERS, NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to violate or refuse to obey any order of the Board of
Health, or destroy or mutilate or conceal any notice posted by or under the
authority of such Board. (1979 Code § 2-1-3)
CHAPTER 5
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Election Of Members
2-5-2: Vacancies
2-5-3: Special Tax
2-5-4: Powers And Duties
2-5-1: ELECTION OF MEMBERS:
There shall be elected a Library Board of Directors consisting of seven (7)
members who shall serve for six (6) years as is provided by statute. (1979 Code
§
2-2-1; amd. 2017 Code)
2-5-2: VACANCIES:
In the event of a vacancy on the Library Board of Directors, the remaining
Directors shall choose a person to fill that vacancy until the next election.
(1979 Code §
2-2-2)
2-5-3: SPECIAL TAX:
The special library tax shall be levied and collected each year as is provided
in 75 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-1. (1979 Code §
2-2-3; amd. 2017 Code)
2-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The Library Board of Directors shall have such powers and
duties as are given to it by statute. (1979 Code §
2-2-4)
   B.   Reports: The Library Board of Directors shall make a report of the
financial condition of the library within sixty (60) days after the close of
the fiscal year of the Village, which report shall be filed with the Board of
Trustees and shall be made in the manner provided in 75 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-10. A copy of this report shall also at the same time be filed
with the Illinois State Library as is also provided in said statute. The Board
shall also make such other reports as may be requested from time to time by the
Board of Trustees of the Village. (1979 Code §
2-2-4; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Rules And Regulations: The Library Board of Directors shall have the
power to make reasonable rules and regulations governing the use of the
library, and may exclude from the library any person or persons who wilfully
and continually violate such rules. (1979 Code §
2-2-4)
CHAPTER 6
PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-6-1: Appointment; Terms; Powers And Duties
2-6-2: Special Taxes
2-6-3: Board Composition
2-6-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; POWERS AND DUTIES:
There is hereby established a Park and Recreation Advisory Board for the
purpose of advising the Board and Trustees in respect of the conducting and
maintaining of a recreational system within the Village and the operation and
maintenance of all Municipal parks. All decisions with respect to the foregoing
shall be made by the Board of Trustees. Effective August 25, 2015, the Park and
Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of one (1) member of the Board of
Trustees who shall serve at the discretion of the Village President and four
(4) persons at large who shall be appointed by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The four (4) at large members
shall hold office one- half (1/2) for two (2) year terms and one-half (1/2) for
four (4) year terms from and after the date of their appointment. Thereafter,
the successor four (4) at large members shall serve four (4) year terms or
until their successors are duly appointed. The four (4) at large members may
serve consecutive terms. The Village President, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, may remove any at large member. The Board of Trustees
Member shall serve as Chairman of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board. The
expense of maintaining and conducting a recreational system shall be paid out
of taxes or money received as, or realized as gifts received for recreational
purposes. The expense of maintaining and operating the Municipal parks shall be
paid out of taxes or money received as, or realized from gifts received for,
park purposes. The expenditures shall be made by the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
08-01-15, 8-25-2015)
2-6-2: SPECIAL TAXES:
The Village shall levy and collect a tax each year as provided by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-95-1 et seq., and 5/11-98-1 et seq. The Village shall
maintain a separate ledger account for each of the two (2) tax purposes and
shall pay out of the taxes generated, those expenses associated with the
purpose for which that levy is made. (1979 Code §
2-3-2)
2-6-3: BOARD COMPOSITION:
No member of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be a relative of any
other member of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board. A "relative" shall be
defined as a spouse, domestic partner, and, whether by blood, adoption,
marriage or domestic partnership, a child, parent or any person residing in the
immediate household of a member of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board.
(Ord. 11-01-20, 11-17-2020)
CHAPTER 7
BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-7-1: Appointment; Terms
2-7-2: Meetings
2-7-3: Powers And Duties
2-7-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
There shall be a Board of Police Commissioners consisting of three (3) members
to be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. Members shall serve for a term of three (3) years. (1979
Code §
2-4-1)
2-7-2: MEETINGS:
The Board of Police Commissioners shall meet regularly at such times as it may
by resolution designate; and it shall hold special meetings on call by the
President or any two (2) members thereof. (1979 Code §
2-4-2)
2-7-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board of Police Commissioners shall have such powers and duties as are
given to it by State statute, including the following:
   A.   Appointment of and issuance of certificates of appointment to all
officers and members of the Police Department of the Village, except the right
of appointment of the Chief of Police is held by the Village President and
Board of Trustees, after having received the recommendation of the Board of
Police Commissioners.
   B.   Appointment in the matter of promotions within the Police Department,
except as noted above concerning the Chief of Police.
   C.   Suspension, removal or discharge of members of the Police Department
for cause, following fair and impartial hearings concerning this cause. (1979
Code §
2-4-3)
CHAPTER 8
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-8-1: Establishment
2-8-2: Coordinator
2-8-3: Functions
2-8-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-8-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-8-6: Emergency Action
2-8-7: Compensation For Special Training, Drills Or Exercises
2-8-8: Reimbursement By State
2-8-9: Purchases And Expenditures
2-8-10: Oath
2-8-11: Office Space
2-8-12: Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes
2-8-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   There is hereby created the Mt. Morris Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency, hereinafter called "ESDA" to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate
injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by explosion of atomic or other
means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or
from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or
technological causes, in accordance with the "Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act" 1 . (1979 Code §
2-5-1; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   This ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members
as may be selected by the Coordinator. (1979 Code §
2-5-1)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-8-2: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by
the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
and shall serve until removed by same. (1979 Code §
2-5-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Duties: The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the Village President as provided by statute.
   C.   Acting Coordinator: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve as the Coordinator, the Village President or any person
designated by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is
made as provided in this chapter. (1979 Code §
2-5-2)
2-8-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall
be prescribed in and by the State ESDA Plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by the "State Emergency Management Agency Act". (1979 Code §
2-5-3; amd. 2017 Code)
2-8-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be designated
as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA
as provided by law.
   B.   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the Village ESDA organization.
   C.   Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from
the State reasonable compensation as provided by law. (1979 Code §
2-5-4)
2-8-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be effective
until it has been approved by the Village President and by the State Director
of ESDA, all with the advice of the Village Board. (1979 Code § 2-5-5)
2-8-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from explosion of atomic or other
means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or
from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or
technological causes, it shall be the duty of the Village ESDA to cooperate
fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency
powers as provided by law. (1979 Code § 2-5-6; amd. 2017 Code)
2-8-7: COMPENSATION FOR SPECIAL TRAINING, DRILLS OR EXERCISES:
Full time employees of the Village, if called for training, drills or exercises
by the Village President, ESDA Coordinator or State Director of ESDA, shall
receive compensation for the time spent in such training, drills or exercises
the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held. Persons other than
full time Village employees who are similarly summoned will be compensated in
such amount as set in the wage and benefit schedule upon vote of the Board of
Trustees per training exercise, drill or event. (1979 Code § 2-5-7; amd. 2017
Code)
2-8-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State
incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (1979 Code § 2-5-8)
2-8-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The Village President may, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator
of ESDA and approval of the Village Board, authorize any purchase or contract
necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster or from manmade or natural
disaster. (1979 Code § 2-5-9)
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the "State Emergency Management Agency Act"; provided, that if
the Village President and Village Board meet at such time, he shall act subject
to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (1979 Code § 2-5-9;
amd. 2017 Code)
2-8-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Village Coordinator:
I,                      , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Mt. Morris ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(1979 Code § 2-5-10)
2-8-11: OFFICE SPACE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for the Village
ESDA as its office. (1979 Code § 2-5-11)
2-8-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The Village President may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to
exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by
the "State Emergency Management Agency Act"; however, that amount collectable
under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita.
(1979 Code § 2-5-12; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 9
COLISEUM BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Appointment; Terms
2-9-2: Powers And Duties
2-9-3: Special Taxes
2-9-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
There is hereby created a Coliseum Board for the Village. The Board shall
consist of three (3) members who shall be appointed pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-66-5, as amended. Members shall serve respectfully for
the following terms: one (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years, and
one (1) for three (3) years; the successor to each member so appointed to serve
for a term of three (3) years. (1979 Code §
2-7-1; amd. 2017 Code)
2-9-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Coliseum Board shall have the powers and duties specified by 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-66-1 et seq., as amended. (1979 Code §
2-7-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   The Board of Directors of the Municipal Coliseum shall make a full
report of receipts and expenditures to the Corporate Authorities annually on or
before July 1 of each year, and annually, prior to the passage of the annual
appropriation ordinance and tax levy ordinance by the Corporate Authorities,
and shall report and certify to the Corporate Authorities the amount of money
appropriated by them for the ensuing year, and the items thereof, and the
amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the maintenance of the
Municipal Coliseum.
   C.   Any bylaws, rules or regulations adopted by the Coliseum Board shall be
filed with the Village Clerk and made available for public inspection.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to violate any order or rule of the Coliseum
Board. (1979 Code §
2-7-2)
2-9-3: SPECIAL TAXES:
The Village shall levy and collect a tax each year for the Municipal Coliseum
as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-66-1 et seq., as amended.
(1979 Code §
2-7-3; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 10
MT. MORRIS HISTORICAL COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-10-1: Appointment; Terms; Vacancies
2-10-2: Qualifications
2-10-3: Unpaid Service, Expenses Paid
2-10-4: Meetings
2-10-5: Officers
2-10-6: Projects And Recommendations
2-10-7: Scope Of Committee's Work
2-10-8: Other Services
2-10-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created the Mt. Morris Historical
Committee, an advisory Committee of the Village. The Committee shall consist of
three (3) members appointed by the Village President with approval of the Board
of Trustees, as well as the Village President and the public properties
Trustees who will serve as ad hoc members of the Committee.
   B.   Terms: The appointed members of said Committee shall serve respectfully
for the following terms: one (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two (2) years,
and one (1) for three (3) years, the successor to each member so appointed to
serve for a term of three (3) years.
   C.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments. (1979 Code §
2-8-1)
2-10-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person sixteen (16) years of age or older having interest in the Village or
knowledge of the Village may be appointed to the Committee. Interest in the
Village or knowledge of the Village may include being a resident of the
Village, doing business in the Village, owning property in the Village or
working in the Village. (1979 Code §
2-8-2; amd. 2017 Code)
2-10-3: UNPAID SERVICE, EXPENSES PAID:
Members of the Committee shall serve without pay. Members of the Committee may
be reimbursed for expenses when such expenses are authorized by the Village
Board of Trustees. (1979 Code §
2-8-3)
2-10-4: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public at all times. The
Committee shall hold regular meetings on the second Thursday of each month at
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (1979 Code §
2-8-4; amd. 2017 Code)
2-10-5: OFFICERS:
The Committee shall select one (1) of its members as its Chairman, one (1) as
Vice Chairman and one (1) as Secretary. (1979 Code §
2-8-5)
2-10-6: PROJECTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
The Committee shall make studies, projections and recommendations. These shall
be in writing and submitted to the Village President and the Village Board of
Trustees. These shall not be binding upon the Village in any way. (1979 Code §
2-8-6)
2-10-7: SCOPE OF COMMITTEE'S WORK:
The projections, studies and recommendations shall cover a broad scope of
subject matter, which may include, but shall not be limited to, the following
subjects:
   A.   Formulate, recommend and advise the Village Board of Trustees of
development policies and programs for the preservation of historical artifacts
and memorabilia of the Village.
   B.   Plan, coordinate and assist in the operation of celebrations related to
events with historical significance for the Village.
   C.   Act as a liaison for the Village with the Ogle County Historical
Society.
   D.   Assist in the development of educational programs for students in the
Village, educating the students on the history of Mt. Morris.
   E.   Search and apply for any grant monies available for historical
purposes.
   F.   Formulate recommendations for the expenditure of funds donated to the
Village for historical purposes. (1979 Code §
2-8-7)
2-10-8: OTHER SERVICES:
The Mt. Morris Historical Committee shall perform such other and additional
services as shall, from time to time, be assigned to the Mt. Morris Historical
Committee by the Village Board of Trustees. (1979 Code §
2-8-8)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required; Fees; Term
3-1-2: Persons Subject To License
3-1-3: Forms
3-1-4: Signatures
3-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
3-1-6: Building And Premises
3-1-7: Change Of Location
3-1-8: Nuisances
3-1-9: Posting Of License
3-1-10: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
3-1-11: Appeal Procedure
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; TERM:
   A.   License Required; Exemptions:
      1.   Except for businesses or occupations otherwise licensed under this
Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on or manage a business, occupation or activity, either by
himself or through an agent, employee, or partner, without first having
obtained a license for such business, occupation or activity and without having
first paid the license fee provided in subsection B of this section.
      2.   No such business license shall be required of businesses which
qualify as a home occupation under section
10-1-4 of this Code. Any business which claims to be exempt hereunder shall
provide any information required by the Village to verify the claimed
exemption. In addition, any business or occupation which is currently in
existence on the effective date hereof shall be exempt from this provision
until such a time as the ownership of the business changes.
   B.   License Fees; Term: The initial application fee for a miscellaneous
business license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) to be paid in advance at the
time the application is made to the Village Clerk. In the event that an initial
application for miscellaneous business license shall be made after June 30, the
application fee shall be reduced to twenty five dollars ($25.00). The
miscellaneous business licenses shall be renewed on an annual basis by January
31 and the annual renewal fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 05-
02-14, 5-13-2014)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to this
requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the Village. (2017 Code)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Village Clerk or his designee. (2017 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the Village Clerk or
his designee in absence of any provision to the contrary. (2017 Code)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where laws of the
Village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the Village Clerk or his designee shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty
eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty
of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon,
favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or
a copy thereof. (2017 Code)
3-1-6: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the Village. (2017 Code)
3-1-7: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the Village Clerk or his designee; and
further provided, that the building requirements of this Code are complied
with. (2017 Code)
3-1-8: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2017 Code)
3-1-9: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
Village to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business. (2017 Code)
3-1-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
   A.   Village Authority: Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be
revoked by the Village Board of Trustees during the life of such license or
permit for the violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision relating
to the license or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises
occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. The Village
Board shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the
closing of the premises, and the suspension of any business license or permit
for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   B.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the Village officials have so
acted, the Village President shall call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
   C.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   D.   Hearing Procedure: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The Village President shall preside over the Board of Trustees who
will render the decision and recommendation.
   E.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the Village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the
Village Board of Trustees after notice and hearing, as provided in subsections
C and D of this section, for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or State law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections, as provided in this Code. (2017 Code)
3-1-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the Village
to issue a license or permit or by revocation of a license or permit shall have
the right to appeal the Village's decision to the Village Board of Trustees.
Such appeal shall be requested by submitting a written request to the Village
Board within five (5) days of the action of the Village which is appealed.
   B.   Board Consideration: The Village Board shall consider the appeal at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be entitled
to present his appeal orally or in writing. The Village Board shall act on the
appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the action
of the Village or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which the
Village has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the Village
had revoked. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Liquor Control Commission
3-2-3: License Required
3-2-4: Application For License
3-2-5: Restrictions On Licenses
3-2-6: Bond Required
3-2-7: License Term; Prorating Fee
3-2-8: License Classification; Fees
3-2-9: Limitation On Number Of Licenses
3-2-10: Issuance Of Licenses
3-2-11: Transfer Of License
3-2-12: Renewal Of License
3-2-13: Disposition Of Fees
3-2-14: List Of Licenses
3-2-15: Change Of Location
3-2-16: Location Restrictions
3-2-17: Sales Restrictions; Minors, Certain Persons
3-2-18: Permitted Hours Of Operation
3-2-19: Closing Hours; Exceptions
3-2-20: Music Devices And Entertainment
3-2-21: Giving Away Liquor
3-2-22: Peddling Liquor
3-2-23: Premises Requirements
3-2-24: Sale Prohibited, Portions Of Premises
3-2-25: Employees
3-2-26: Suspension, Revocation Of License
3-2-27: Violation; Penalties
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every other
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BOWLING ALLEY: A building or structure utilized primarily for the sport of
bowling, which may also include the incidental sale or dispensing of food and
drink, including alcoholic liquor, and the sale or rental of bowling equipment.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning or hiring or leasing a building
or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and guests and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving
food and meals for its members and guests; provided, that such club files with
the Village President at the time of application for a license under this
chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of members, and
similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member
of his name and address; and provided, that its affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting, and that no member or any officer,
agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in
the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or
sale of alcoholic liquor to the club, or to the members of the club or its
guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of the salary fixed or voted at
any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other
governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
GOLF CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of the common object of providing
facilities by which members and/or the public can enjoy the game of golf. The
sale of alcoholic liquor shall account for fifteen percent (15%) or less of its
annual revenue. It shall file, with the Village, the names of those persons
serving on its board of directors or other executive committee vested with the
management of the club within ten (10) days of any election or appointment of
such a member. No member or officer, agent or employee of the golf club may be
paid directly or indirectly from any profits from the distribution or sale of
alcoholic liquor to the golf club or the members of the golf club or its guests
beyond the amount of salary as may be fixed by the board of directors or other
governing body out of the general club revenues.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being
conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and such
building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
RESIDENT: Any person (other than a corporation) who resides and maintains a
bona fide residence in the Village at the time of issuance of a license as
provided in section
3-2-4 of this chapter.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to
the public as a food service establishment which has a culinary area approved
by the Ogle County Health Department used in the preparation of meals. A
"culinary area" means a room, space or other area containing food service
equipment within a liquor establishment intended, designed and used in the
preparation of meals, other than only a counter with a hot plate, microwave
oven or similar warming device.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined,
provided the alcoholic content thereof does not exceed twenty four percent
(24%) of alcohol by volume. (1979 Code §
3-4-1; amd. Ord. 02-01-15, 2-10-2015)
3-2-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION:
   A.   Commission Established: The Village President, as Liquor Control
Commissioner, may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of
the powers and the performance of the duties provided for such Liquor Control
Commissioner. (1979 Code §
3-4-2)
   B.   Salary Of Liquor Control Commissioner And Compensation Of
Commissioners: The Village President shall receive an annual salary of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for his services as Liquor Control
Commissioner, which salary shall be in addition to all other compensation
payable to him as Village President, and shall be designated as "salary of
Liquor Control Commissioner". Said salary shall be paid monthly. In addition,
the Liquor Control Commissioner and each Commissioner shall receive the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meeting or hearing held before the Liquor
Control Commission attended by said Commissioners. The salary listed in this
section shall take effect at the commencement of the next term of the
Commissioners. (1979 Code §
3-4-2; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in
violation of the terms of such license. (1979 Code §
3-4-3)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Village President in
writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized
agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affirmation, and
shall contain the following statements and information:
   A.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a
majority interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one (1) person
or his nominee, the name and address of such person.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was
issued.
   E.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time the
application is made.
   F.   The location and description of the premises or place of business which
is to be operated under such license.
   G.   A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or
other license on premises other than those described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
   H.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this State or ordinances of the Village.
   I.   Whether a previous license by any State or subdivision thereof or by
the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
   J.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the Village in
the conduct of his place of business.
   K.   If said application is made by a partnership, all partners must sign
or, if made by a corporation, the proper corporate officers must sign said
application.
   L.   A statement that the applicant is a resident of the Village at the time
of filing of said application and also will be a bona fide resident and will
maintain a residence in the Village for the duration of the license. (1979 Code
§
3-4-4)
3-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the Village at the time of making an
application for license and at all times subsequent thereto.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and repute in the community in
which he resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law, if the Liquor Control Commission determines after investigation that such
person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated, to warrant the public trust.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or who is a
keeper of a house of ill fame.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
   H.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   I.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license.
   J.   1. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
      2.   Unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign
corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to
transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of any Federal or State law concerning
the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or who shall have
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges of any such violation.
   M.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, any Village President, or member of
the Board of Trustees; and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor.
   O.   Any person not eligible for a State retail liquor dealer's license.
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   Q.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any section of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as heretofore or hereafter
amended or as prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid
statutory provisions.
   R.   1. A person to whom a Federal gaming device or a Federal wagering stamp
has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax period.
      2.   A copartnership to which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a Federal gaming device
stamp or Federal wagering stamp by the Federal government for the current tax
period.
      3.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period.
      4.   Any premises for which a Federal gaming device stamp or a Federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal government for the current tax
period. (1979 Code §
3-4-5)
3-2-6: BOND REQUIRED:
Each person desiring a license under this chapter shall execute a penal bond in
form and with a corporate surety satisfactory to the Village President,
conditioned upon the faithful observance of the provisions of the laws of the
State and of this chapter and the ordinances of the Village, such bond to be in
the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall, upon approval, be
filed in the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code §
3-4-6)
3-2-7: LICENSE TERM; PRORATING FEE:
Each such license shall terminate on April 30 next following issuance. The fee
to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which
have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license. (1979 Code §
3-4-7)
3-2-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION; FEES:
Every person engaged in business in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the
Village shall pay a license fee. Licenses shall be classified in the following
manner:
   A.   Class A: Class A retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises as well as in packages or bottles. The fee for such licenses shall be
eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) per year.
   B.   Class B: Class B license for the sale of alcoholic liquor by a club.
The fee for such licenses shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00); provided,
that when beer only is sold by any such club, the license fee shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year.
   C.   Class C: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for
such license shall be four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
   D.   Class C-1: Class C-1 shall apply to convenience stores and shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in original packages or bottles for
consumption off the premises. The annual fee for such license shall be three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
   E.   Class D: Class D license for the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises only by a golf club. The fee for such license shall
be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year. (1979 Code § 3-4-8)
   F.   Class E: Class E, caterer retailer license shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor where the alcoholic liquor is both delivered and served by the
licensee on premises located either inside or outside of the corporate limits
of the Village, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an
incidental part of food service where prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are
sold at a package price agreed upon under contract. The annual fee for such
license shall be four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00). (Ord. 09-01-12, 9-11-
2012, eff. 9-12-2012)
   G.   Class F:
      1.   Class F temporary license shall authorize the sale of beer and wine,
and the tasting of beer and wine in connection with the bona fide sale thereof
in the original packaging only. All consumption shall be under the supervision
of the license holder and shall be conducted in a manner which confines
consumption on the premises only. Beer and wine tasting sales shall take place
only between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Monday through Saturday. Curb services or sales is prohibited. The Liquor
Commission and/or Committee shall determine the length of the license, but
licenses hereunder shall not exceed three (3) days and shall be issued only to
not-for-profit organizations. All other limitations and conditions as set forth
in this chapter shall apply to Class F licenses.
      2.   There shall be in effect no more than one (1) Class F license per
not-for-profit organization at any one (1) time.
      3.   Prior to the issuance of a Class F license, the proposed license
holder shall provide evidence to the Liquor Commission and/or Committee of
dramshop liability insurance issued by a reputable insurance company doing
business in the State of Illinois and naming the Village as an additional
insured.
      4.   The fee for such Class F license shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00), payable in advance.
   H.   Class G:
      1.   Class G special event license shall be for the sale and consumption
of beer and wine within the boundaries of the Village as permitted by the
license. The Liquor Commission and/or Committee shall determine the length of
the license, but licenses hereunder shall not exceed five (5) days, and shall
be issued only to not-for-profit organizations.
      2.   Special events liquor license shall be issued only to not-for-profit
organizations in connection with some special public event or benefit to the
Village. A special event liquor license shall not be considered a liquor
license outstanding and shall not be subject to the restrictions of the number
of licenses contained in this chapter.
      3.   Special events liquor license shall allow the sale of beer and wine
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight on the days Monday through Saturday, and Sundays between the hours of
one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
      4.   All other limitations and conditions as set forth in this chapter
shall apply to Class G licenses.
         a.   There shall be in effect no more than one (1) Class G special
event license per not-for-profit organization at one (1) time.
         b.   Prior to the issuance of a Class G license, the proposed license
holder shall provide evidence to the Local Liquor Commissioner and/or Committee
of dramshop liability insurance issued by a reputable insurance company doing
business in the State of Illinois and naming the Village as an additional
insured.
         c.   The fee for such Class G license shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00), payable in advance.
   I.   Class I: Class I licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and
wine for consumption on the premises only and shall be issued only to those
establishments whose principal business is a grocery store. The term "grocery
store" shall be limited to businesses whose primary source of income is derived
from the retail sale of vegetables, meat, fruit and other food products and
which shall be located in a building containing not less than twenty two
thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet. To be eligible for a Class I
license, the licensee must also have a Class C license. The annual fee for a
Class I license shall be four hundred dollars ($400) per year. The license
shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
      1.   No Class I license shall be issued unless a separate area is
established for on premises sale and consumption of beer and wine. No beer and
wine may be consumed, and no open containers may be taken, outside of such
separate area.
      2.   The permitted hours of operation of the separate area established
for on premises sale and consumption of beer and wine shall be the same hours
as applicable to a Class C license as set forth in section
3-2-18  of this chapter. (Ord. 05-01-10, 5-11-2010, eff. 5-12-2010; Ord. 04-03-
21, 4-13-2021)
3-2-9: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
There shall be issued, not to exceed the following number of licenses in the
Village:
   Five (5) Class A licenses.
   Two (2) Class B licenses.
   Seven (7) Class C licenses.
   Three (3) Class C-1 licenses.
   One (1) Class D license.
   One (1) Class F license. (Ord. 10-01-15, 10-13-2015; amd. Ord. 09-01-21, 9-
14-2021; Ord. 7-13-23, 7-25-2023; Ord. 25-06, 2-25-2025)
3-2-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
Upon the approval of the Village President of the application for a license as
provided in this chapter, the Village President shall issue to the person
applying therefor, a license, signed by the Village President, to sell at
retail alcoholic liquors under the provisions of this chapter, indicating the
classification under which the license is issued, the term for which such
license is granted, and the fee paid. (1979 Code §
3-4-10)
3-2-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one (1)
year after issuance thereof unless sooner revoked as is in this chapter
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution; provided, that the
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic
liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such
license but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the
license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(1979 Code § 3-4-11)
3-2-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof; provided, that he
is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought is suitable for such purposes; provided, further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the Village President from decreasing the
number of licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction. (1979 Code § 3-4-12)
3-2-13: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All fees required under this chapter shall be paid to the Village President at
the time application for a license is made, and shall be forthwith turned over
to the Village Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the
fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee
shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall
have been designated by the Board of Trustees by proper action. (1979 Code § 3-
4-13)
3-2-14: LIST OF LICENSES:
The Village President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
such licenses issued by him. (1979 Code § 3-4-14)
3-2-15: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be
changed only upon a written permission to make such change issued by the
Village President. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the
laws of this State and the ordinances of the Village. (1979 Code § 3-4-15)
3-2-16: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution
of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided,
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on if the place
of business so exempted is not located in a municipality of more than five
hundred thousand (500,000) persons, unless required by local ordinance; nor to
the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where the church or
school has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one
hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
(1979 Code § 3-4-16; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-17: SALES RESTRICTIONS; MINORS, CERTAIN PERSONS:
   A.   Age Limit:
      1.   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated
person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1. No
person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell,
give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty
one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(1979 Code § 3-4-17; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he is over the age of twenty one (21) years.
      3.   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a Federal, State, County or Municipal government, or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
Armed Forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent,
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction, forbidden by this section, is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
      4.   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed or
photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives
or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, evidence of
age and identification of any other person is guilty of a violation of this
section.
      5.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing or attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any
alcoholic beverage or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
      6.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who has any
alcoholic beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public
place or in any place open to the public is guilty of a violation of this
chapter. This section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance
of his employment.
      7.   Whoever violates this section shall, in addition to other penalties
provided for, be guilty of a violation of this chapter. (1979 Code § 3-4-17)
   B.   Parental Responsibility:
      1.   Minors Prohibited On Premises:
         a.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be
permitted to sit at a bar or other place where alcoholic liquor is dispensed at
any licensed premises.
         b.   For Class A licensees only, except as set forth below and as set
forth in subsection 3-2-25B of this chapter: 1) no person under the age of
twenty one (21) years shall remain in a licensed premises; 2) no person having
the custody or control of a person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall
allow any such person to remain in a licensed premises; and 3) no licensee, nor
any employee or agent thereof, shall allow a person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to remain in a licensed premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
prohibitions set forth in this subsection shall not apply to any Class A
licensee that is a bowling alley or a restaurant as defined in section
3-2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-01-15, 2-10-2015)
      2.   Violation: Any parent or guardian who shall knowingly suffer or
permit any person of which he may be the parent or guardian to violate any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereunder.
      3.   Post Warning: In every place in the Village where alcoholic liquor
is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed
card supplied by the licensee and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) under the
Municipal Code of the Village of Mt. Morris if you purchase alcoholic liquor,
or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
(1979 Code § 3-4-17; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-18: PERMITTED HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Class A And C Licenses: Except as provided in section
3-2-19 of this chapter, no persons licensed hereunder under a Class A or Class
C license shall keep open for business between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday, or at any time on
Sunday, except between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight until one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. No persons licensed under a Class A or Class C license hereunder shall
sell, permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor, except during those
times which they are allowed to be open as set forth herein. (Ord. 02-02-16, 2-
24-2016)
   B.   Class B License:
      1.   No club licensed hereunder under a Class B license shall sell,
permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on weekdays, or at any
time on a Sunday, except between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., and except that the closing hour on Friday and
Saturday nights shall be extended one (1) hour beyond twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight.
      2.   Also, be it noted that the Class B hour of closing on Christmas Eve
shall be eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and the closing hour on New Year's Eve shall
be two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
   C.   Class D License: A club licensed under a Class D license shall be
governed by the rules and regulations prescribed to a Class B license except
that alcoholic liquor may be sold only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday and except as otherwise
specifically provided herein.
   D.   Christmas Day: No licensed establishment shall sell or give away
alcoholic liquor on Christmas Day, except between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
   E.   Class F License: Closing hours for a Class F license shall be the same
as those of a Class A license, except that no persons licensed hereunder under
a Class F license shall keep open for business between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on Sunday. Beer and wine may be
sold only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. on Sunday.
   F.   Class C-1 License: No person licensed hereunder under a Class C-
1 license shall keep open for business between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on weekdays. On Sundays, beer and wine may be
sold only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. (1979 Code § 3-4-18)
3-2-19: CLOSING HOURS; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to any
premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
which the sale of liquor is prohibited except as follows:
   A.   Restaurants and hotels, as defined in an Act Relating to Alcoholic
Liquors 1  which have a Class A or Class F license may remain open for business
after the times designated in section
3-2-18 of this chapter, but only for the sale of food or beverages other than
alcoholic liquor; provided, that during such time, the bar of such
establishment must remain closed and must be marked "Closed" by a sign placed
on the bar.
   B.   Businesses which have a Class C license and which sell goods and
services other than alcoholic liquor may remain open for business after the
times designated in section
3-2-18 of this chapter, but solely for the purpose of the sale of such goods
and services other than alcoholic liquor. During such times, all entrances to
the area of such business used for the storage and sale of alcoholic liquor
shall be separated from the other areas of said business by a solid physical
barrier or door. A sign shall be posted on each such barrier marked "Closed".
(1979 Code § 3-4-18.5)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23, 5/1-3.25.
3-2-20: MUSIC DEVICES AND ENTERTAINMENT:
It shall be unlawful to provide any live entertainment or to permit any dancing
in any place where alcoholic liquor is sold except that music may be provided
therein by a machine reproducing music or singing (if any required permit
therefor has been obtained and annual fee paid), television or radio, provided
such machine reproducing music or singing is equipped with a volume governor,
the setting of which is subject to the control of the Village President. (1979
Code § 3-4-19; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-21: GIVING AWAY LIQUOR:
   A.   No person shall give away any alcoholic liquor for commercial purposes
or in connection with the sale of nonalcoholic products or to promote the sale
of nonalcoholic products.
   B.   No licensee shall give away or offer to give away alcoholic liquor in
connection with the sale of nonalcoholic products or in any way to promote the
sale of nonalcoholic products or in any way to promote the business of the
licensee. (1979 Code § 3-4-20; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-22: PEDDLING LIQUOR:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the Village. (1979 Code § 3-
4-21)
3-2-23: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or the storage of
such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the Village
ordinances relating to the condition of premises used for the storage or sale
of food for human consumption. (1979 Code § 3-4-22; amd. 2017 Code)
3-2-24: SALE PROHIBITED, PORTIONS OF PREMISES:
   A.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor in the basement of any premises, nor on the second or higher floors of
any premises, and all licenses issued hereunder shall be for the sale at retail
of alcoholic liquor on the first and main floor of the premises licensed only;
provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to clubs.
   B.   No club licensed hereunder under a Class D license shall sell or offer
for sale or give away any beer to be consumed other than on the club property,
including the golf course. No beer shall be taken from the club property by
anyone for any purpose. It shall be unlawful to sell beer or offer the same for
sale from any location other than the clubhouse without the prior written
approval of the Liquor Control Commissioner. (1979 Code § 3-4-23)
3-2-25: EMPLOYEES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   B.   In the sale, distribution or delivery or service of alcoholic liquors,
no licensee under this chapter may employ, with or without compensation, or in
any way directly or indirectly, use the services of a person who has not yet
attained the age of twenty one (21) years. However, a person who has attained
the age of eighteen (18) years or older may be employed by the licensee to
deliver or serve alcoholic liquor; provided, that the sale of said alcoholic
liquor delivered or served was made by an employee of the licensee who had
attained the age of twenty one (21) years. If the licensed premises derives the
majority of its income from the sale of goods or services other than alcoholic
beverages, persons under the age of twenty one (21) years may be employed,
provided they are in no way associated with the actual sale, distribution,
delivery or service of alcoholic liquors, subject to the aforedescribed
exception, and that they are otherwise permitted to be so employed by other
applicable ordinances of the Village or laws or regulations of other
governmental units. (1979 Code § 3-4-24)
   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B, persons eighteen (18)
years of age or older may be employed by a Class D license holder to sell and
serve unopened prepackaged liquor for consumption on the golf club premises.
(amd. Ord. 25-07, 3-11-2025)
3-2-26: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license
issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by
the Board of Trustees or any applicable rule or regulation established by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State Commission, which is not
inconsistent with law. However, no such license shall be so revoked or
suspended except after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend himself. If the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion and without notice of hearing, order the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to
be heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged
in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such
order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
   B.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five (5) days after
such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be
revoked or suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a
written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order
within the five (5) days upon the licensee.
   C.   Any appeals or reviews of the decision of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record from the local
proceedings. (1979 Code § 3-4-25)
3-2-27: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who sells alcoholic liquor at any place without having first
obtained a valid license to do so under the provisions of this chapter, or
shall make any false statement or otherwise violates any of the provisions of
this chapter in obtaining any license hereunder, or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter with respect to the distribution or sale of
alcoholic liquor, or with respect to the maintenance of the licensed premises,
or shall violate any other provision of this chapter, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed the maximum allowable fine as provided from time to time
in the Illinois Liquor Control Act, as amended. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   B.   Each day any person engages in business as a distributor or retailer in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (1979 Code § 3-4-26)
   C.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who, for the purpose
of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor other than beer and wine
from a licensee, represents that he is twenty one (21) years of age or over
shall for a first offense be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a second or subsequent offense
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (1979 Code § 3-4-26; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Any act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally. (1979 Code § 3-4-26)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required
3-3-3: Application For License
3-3-4: License Fees
3-3-5: Grant, Denial, Issuance Of License
3-3-6: Display Of License
3-3-7: Closing Hours
3-3-8: Gambling Prohibited; Exception
3-3-9: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BILLIARD CENTER: A place of amusement or entertainment in which one (1) or more
persons are invited to play and participate in the game of billiards, including
pocket table billiards or snooker table billiards, or wherein one (1) or more
pool tables or billiard tables are kept, used or operated for profit or in the
course of a business enterprise.
GAME ROOM: A place of amusement or entertainment in which three (3) or more
mechanical amusement devices are kept or maintained for the use of the public,
operated for a profit or in the course of a business enterprise.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any musical device, pinball machine, novelty
machine, skill machine, pool machine, bowling machine or similar machine which
operates or may be operated for use as a game of skill, amusement or play and
for which a charge is made, whether coin operated, token operated, ticket
operated, time operated, operated by control of an operator or operated as an
enticement for the business enterprise.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation who keeps or allows billiard or pool
tables to be kept on premises owned by him or under his control where the same
may be played by members of the public legally upon such premises upon payment
of the charge therefor.
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who owns and places billiard or pool
tables by whatever arrangements on the operator's premises. (2017 Code)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the Village a mechanical
amusement device, pinball machine, pool table, billiard table, maintenance
bowling machine, electronic amusement machine, shuffleboard game (whether
electronic or otherwise), or any other amusement device or machine, either for
gain or not, in any game room or billiard center without a license therefor.
(2017 Code)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license for any game or machine listed in section
3-3-2 of this chapter shall be made to the Village Clerk, signed by the
applicant, if an individual; by a partner in the case of a partnership; or by
an officer in case of a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall
contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address, age and date and place of birth of the applicant.
   B.   Prior convictions of the applicant for any violation of the gaming laws
of the State of Illinois or any other state, if any.
   C.   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at the place.
   D.   Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
   E.   Whether said machine is owned by the applicant, and if not, the name of
the owner thereof. (2017 Code)
3-3-4: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for licenses for mechanical amusement devices, pinball machines, pool
tables, billiard tables, maintenance bowling machines, electronic amusement
machines, shuffleboard games (whether electronic or otherwise), or any other
amusement device or machine shall be as established by the Village Board of
Trustees from time to time. (2017 Code)
3-3-5: GRANT, DENIAL, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The application shall be referred to the Village Board of Trustees who shall
grant or deny the license pursuant to this chapter within thirty (30) days of
the application. Upon approval by the Village Board, licenses shall be issued
by the Village Clerk. (2017 Code)
3-3-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted prominently and
conspicuously at the location of the game or machine in the premises wherein
the device is to be operated or to be maintained to be operated. (2017 Code)
3-3-7: CLOSING HOURS:
All billiard centers, billiard halls, poolrooms, bowling or 10-pin alleys, or
game rooms having mechanical amusement devices, pinball machines or devices or
any other game as set forth in this chapter shall be closed from twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight each day to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day. (2017
Code)
3-3-8: GAMBLING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or
operating any mechanical amusement device, pinball game or machine, pool table,
billiard table, maintenance bowling machine, shuffleboard game (whether
electronic or otherwise) or any other amusement device or machine to permit
said machine or any scheme whatsoever to dispense any form of payoff, prize, or
reward, except free games dispensed by the machine, and nothing in this chapter
shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling
device whatsoever, or any mechanism which has been judicially determined to be
a gambling device, or in any way contrary to the laws of the State.
   B.   Exception; Video Gaming, Fee:
      1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the
prohibitions provided in this chapter and any other chapter of this Code that
may reference or govern gambling or gambling devices within the Village shall
not prohibit any device, equipment, paraphernalia or activity authorized and
operated in full compliance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act 1 , including,
but not limited to, video gaming terminals and equipment ancillary thereto.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a
yearly fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each video gaming
terminal utilized in compliance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act shall be
paid in advance on or before May 1 of each year. The application for an annual
permit, including renewal applications, shall be filed each year along with
payment of the yearly fee. Each permit shall expire on the last day of April of
each year. There shall be no proration of permit fees. The cost of such permit
fees shall be shared equally between the terminal operator and the applicable
licensed establishment, as provided by State law. (Ord. 11-01-12, 11-27-2012,
eff. 11-28-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 02-01-22, 3-8-2022)
 
Notes
1 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
   
3-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Compliance With Chapter
3-4-4: Application
3-4-5: Licensee Qualifications
3-4-6: License Issuance
3-4-7: Conduct Of Raffles And Poker Runs
3-4-8: Raffles Manager
3-4-9: Records
3-4-10: Penalty; Enforcement
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles
and poker runs within the Village. (1979 Code § 3-6-1; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words used in this chapter
shall be construed according with the definitions given below:
BOARD: The Village Board of the Village of Mt. Morris, Ogle County, Illinois.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must confer benefit upon the public generally.
CLERK: The Village Clerk, Village of Mt. Morris, Ogle County, Illinois.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide instruction by methods common to schools and institutions of
learning which compare in their scope and intensity, but are not necessarily
limited to, the course of study presented in tax supported public schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote welfare of its members and
provide assistance to the general public.
KEY LOCATION: The location where the poker run concludes and the prize or
prizes are awarded.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions in their respective occupations.
LICENSEE: An organization which has been issued a license to operate a raffle
as provided under this chapter.
NET PROCEEDS: Gross receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker runs, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a direct result of operating a raffle or poker
run.
NONPROFIT: An organization which is operated and conducted on a not-for-profit
basis with no personal profit inuring to the benefit of any one (1) individual
as a result of said operation.
PERSON: Individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership or unincorporated association.
POKER RUN: A prize awarding event organized by an organization licensed under
the Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et seq.,
and under this chapter, in which participants travel to multiple predetermined
locations, including a key location, to play a randomized game based on an
element of chance. "Poker run" includes dice runs, marble runs, or other events
where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an
item or playing a randomized game at each location.
RAFFLE: As defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: A church congregation, society or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members who
are veterans or spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of
which is to promote the welfare of its members and provide assistance to the
public. (1979 Code §
3-6-2; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-3: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run or to sell,
offer for sale, convey, issue or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a
raffle unless done in accordance with this chapter. (1979 Code §
3-6-3; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-4: APPLICATION:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run shall file an
application therefor with the Clerk on the forms provided by the Clerk. Said
application shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name, address and type of organization.
   B.   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation.
   C.   The name, address, telephone number, social security number and the
date of birth of the organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles
manager and other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the
raffle or poker run.
   D.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle or
poker run.
   E.   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle or
poker run.
   F.   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold.
   G.   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued.
   H.   The area in which raffle chances will be issued or sold or in which the
poker run will be conducted.
   I.   The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold.
   J.   The date, time and location at which winning chances will be
determined, and the key location if a poker run.
   K.   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the
applicant organization signed by its presiding officer and secretary.
   L.   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct.
   M.   A fidelity bond in an amount equal to the aggregate retail value of all
prizes to be awarded shall accompany said application for raffles. (1979 Code §
3-6-4; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-5: LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to a bona fide charitable, educational,
fraternal, labor, religious and veterans organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years or more immediately before making application for a
license and which have, and during that entire five (5) year period, a bona
fide membership engaged in carrying out the purpose of said organization. The
following are ineligible for any raffle or poker run license:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   D.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections A, B and C of
this section as a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
person is active or employed, whether compensated or not, or is an officer or
director.
   E.   Licenses for poker runs shall be issued for the following purposes:
      1.   Providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as a result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster; or
      2.   To maintain the financial stability of the organization. (1979 Code
§
3-6-5; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   A.   The Chairman of the Ordinance Committee shall review all raffle and
poker run license applications and recommend approval or denial to the Village
Board. The Board shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of application,
accept or reject a raffle or poker run license application. If an application
is accepted, the Clerk shall issue a raffle or poker run license to be valid
for the period of time stated in the application, but in no event longer than
three hundred sixty five (365) days.
   B.   The raffle license shall limit the area in which raffle chances may be
sold or issued to the Village limits, and shall show the period of time during
which raffle chances may be sold or issued. The license shall also show the
date, time and location at which the winning chances will be determined.
   C.   The license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location of
the determination of the winning chances.
   D.   A license shall be valid for one (1) raffle or poker run only. The fee
for each license shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (1979 Code §
3-6-6; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS:
   A.   The conducting of raffles and poker runs is subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
      3.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
      4.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
      5.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license for a raffle.
      6.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances or poker runs only with the permission of a
parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within
the area where winning chances in a raffle or winning hands or scores in a
poker run are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
   B.   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle or a winning hand or score in a poker run is determined, the lessor
shall not be criminally liable if the person who uses the premises for the
determining of winning chances does not hold a license issued by the Village.
(1979 Code §
3-6-7; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-8: RAFFLES MANAGER:
The operation and conduct of a raffle shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the licensee. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond equal in the amount to the aggregate retail value of all prizes
to be awarded in favor of the licensee, conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given, in writing, to the Village not less than thirty (30) days prior
to the cancellation of such bond. Corporate surety shall be given on such bond
unless waived by the Village. This section shall not apply to poker runs. (1979
Code §
3-6-8; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-9: RECORDS:
   A.   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts and net proceeds
for each raffle or poker run. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles or poker runs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the licensee until the raffle or poker run is
complete, prizes awarded and final report made to the Village.
   C.   Raffle and poker run records shall be preserved for three (3) years and
such records will be made available for public inspection at reasonable times
and places. (1979 Code §
3-6-9; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-10: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
violation of this Code and each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable under the
general penalty provisions of this Code. The imposition of penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the State's Attorney of Ogle County from
instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful raffles or restrain, correct
or abate a violation of this chapter or of the conditions of a raffle license
issued pursuant hereto. (1979 Code §
3-6-10)
CHAPTER 5
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: License Fee
3-5-4: Application For License; Contents
3-5-5: Requirement For Authorized Physician
3-5-6: Health And Sanitation Requirements
3-5-7: Care Of Instruments
3-5-8: Infections
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the words and terms defined below shall have the
following meanings:
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns
or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed and any individual
who performs or practices the art of tattooing other human beings.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING: Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any
other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles
or other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin. (1979 Code § 3-7-
1)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a
tattooing establishment without first having obtained a license from the
Village. (1979 Code § 3-7-2)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for engaging in the business of operating a tattooing
establishment within the Village shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
annum, payable in advance to the Village at the time application for a license
is made. (1979 Code § 3-7-3)
3-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS:
All applications for licenses to operate a tattooing establishment shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the license
fee for the period for which the application is made. Any change of ownership
shall require a new application and license with payment of fees therefor.
(1979 Code § 3-7-4)
3-5-5: REQUIREMENT FOR AUTHORIZED PHYSICIAN:
The operator of a tattooing establishment must be authorized to practice
medicine or osteopathic medicine in the State of Illinois as set forth in the
Illinois Medical Practice Act of 1987 1 , or any replacement legislation. All
tattooing performed within such establishment shall be either done by a
physician or osteopath or in the presence and direct supervision of a physician
or osteopath. (1979 Code § 3-7-5; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
3-5-6: HEALTH AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each person who operates a tattooing establishment shall comply with the
following requirements:
   A.   The room in which tattooing is done shall have an enclosed area of not
less than two hundred (200) square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall
have an impervious, smooth and washable surface.
   B.   A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible
at all times the tattooing establishment is open for business. The lavatory
shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels.
   C.   All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable
material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable
finish and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a solid
wall or door totally eliminating any view into the tattooing room.
   D.   The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
   E.   The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with antiseptic soap and
water before starting to tattoo; the hands shall be dried with individual,
single use towels.
   F.   The area on the patron to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed
with a sterile, single use sponge with warm water containing an antiseptic
liquid soap. The area should be shaved with a safety razor, using single
service blades for each customer or patron, followed by a solution of seventy
percent (70%) alcohol to be applied to the area before tattooing is begun.
   G.   Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes shall be
used on the area to be tattooed and it shall be applied with sterile gauze.
   H.   Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for
each patron and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after
completing work on a patron and any dye in which the needles are dipped shall
not be used on another person. After completing work on a patron, any dye in
which the needles are dipped shall not be used on another person. After
completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed with sterile
gauze and seventy percent (70%) alcohol solution and allowed to dry. The
sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area. (1979 Code
§ 3-7-6)
3-5-7: CARE OF INSTRUMENTS:
All clean and ready to use needles and instruments shall be stored in a closed
glass or metal case while not in use. A steam sterilizer shall be provided to
properly sterilize all needles and similar instruments before use on any
customer, person or patron. Such needles and instruments required to be
sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing so
that they will not be contaminated. (1979 Code § 3-7-7)
3-5-8: INFECTIONS:
Persons, customers or patrons having any skin infection or other disease
including, but not limited to, jaundice, hepatitis, AIDS or any communicable
disease shall not be tattooed. (1979 Code § 3-7-8)
CHAPTER 6
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application For License
3-6-4: Issuance
3-6-5: Fees
3-6-6: Possession Of License
3-6-7: Renewal
3-6-8: Revocation Of License
3-6-9: Appeal
3-6-10: Restrictions Applicable To All Solicitation
3-6-11: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings:
CHARITABLE: The words charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Defined under 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1, or
a not for profit organization incorporated under 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes
110/0.01 and/or 110/35, or any other organization that has been granted tax
exempt status from the State of Illinois or from the Internal Revenue Service.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1. For
purposes of this chapter, solicitation for a charitable purpose shall include a
solicitation for or on behalf of a "charitable organization", as that term is
defined herein.
COMMERCIAL DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The sale, or seeking to obtain orders for
the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind,
character or description, for any kind of consideration whatsoever, either for
immediate or future delivery, by means of in person contact or attempted
contact with Village residents at their residences.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: "Commercial door to door solicitation" as defined
herein, and door to door, in person requests for money, credit, or any other
items of value for a religious, charitable, or political purpose.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
(1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure and the
yard, curtilage, or grounds upon which such structure is located. (Ord. 11-01-
16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage in commercial
door to door solicitation in the Village without first securing a license as
herein provided. If an organization employs multiple individuals for such
activities, each such individual and the organization shall be required to be
licensed and pay the requisite fees hereunder. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Application Requirements: The application for a license under this
chapter shall be made under oath upon a form provided by the Village Clerk.
Each original application shall be completed in full by the applicant and shall
set forth the following information:
      1.   The name, home and business address, date of birth, sex and a
physical description of the applicant, including, but not limited to, height,
weight, hair color, and eye color.
      2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation, association or organization by whom the applicant is employed or
represents, and the length of time of such employment or representation.
      3.   A description of the business, merchandise, wares, or services of
the applicant.
      4.   The period of time/dates for which the license is applied.
      5.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for license under this chapter.
      6.   Whether a license issued to the applicant under this chapter has
ever been revoked.
      7.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or the ordinances of any other municipality or any
Illinois Statute regulating similar activities.
      8.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of any State or under Federal law, and if so, the offense
and date of conviction.
      9.   Documentary evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for
the organization represented.
      10.   The number and description of vehicles used, if any, including
make, model, color, and license plate number of all such vehicles.
   B.   Records Of Application: The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his
or her office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon,
together with all information and data pertaining thereto and all licenses
issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of any
applications. The Village Clerk shall review any applications for licensure
under this chapter and determine if such license should be issued, within ten
(10) days of receipt of the application.
   C.   Denial Of License: No license shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of
Illinois or of any other State or Federal law within five (5) years of the date
of the application, or who has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whose license issued hereunder has previously
been revoked, or who submits an incomplete or inaccurate application.
   D.   Exceptions To License Requirement: The requirement of a license under
this chapter shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Solicitation by or on behalf of a charitable organization that is
currently registered with the Attorney General of the State of Illinois and is
in full compliance with the provisions of an Act to Regulate Solicitation and
Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
460/1 et seq., or is exempt from registration with the Attorney General
pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/3(b).
      2.   Any solicitation made on premises owned or occupied by the person or
organization on behalf of whom the solicitation is made, or by permission of
such owner or occupant.
      3.   The provisions contained in this chapter shall not be construed to
prohibit or inhibit any activities or speech not involving any form of request
for money or other article of value, including, but not limited to, speech of a
political or religious nature. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-4: ISSUANCE:
The Village Clerk shall issue a license upon approval of the application and
payment of the prescribed license fee as provided in section
3-6-5 of this chapter. The Village Clerk shall keep a full record of all
licenses issued. Such record shall contain the number of the license, the date
of issuance, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount
of the license fee paid, the expiration date of said license, and the name or
names of the person or persons authorized to carry on such solicitation. Every
license shall be for a maximum term of thirty (30) days, unless the license, by
its terms, expires earlier. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-5: FEES:
   A.   In General: The license fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for the
first day and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day thereafter. The charge for
the daily fee may be extended for a set period of days not to exceed thirty
(30) days and shall be paid in advance at the time of issuance of the license.
   B.   Exemption: Individuals who represent an organization which has
maintained a physical office, store or service center within the corporate
limits of the Village for the previous twelve (12) months shall be exempt from
the subsequent twenty dollar ($20.00) daily fee. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-6: POSSESSION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be upon the person of the licensee
at all times during the operation of such solicitation, and the licensee shall,
upon request of a law enforcement officer, display the license to said officer.
(Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-7: RENEWAL:
All licenses are valid for the entire licensing period unless revoked or
suspended prior to expiration, as provided in this chapter. An application to
renew a license under this chapter shall be made not later than five (5) days
before the expiration of the current license and shall comply in all respect
with the license requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Village
President, after notice of hearing, for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license.
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement or statements made in
the course of carrying on business.
      3.   Any violation of this chapter, or any violation of the Village
traffic, parking, or public safety ordinances or regulations, or otherwise
conducting business in an unlawful manner under local, State or Federal law, or
in such manner as to violate the regulations issued hereunder, or in a manner
so as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   B.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license issued hereunder
shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place for hearing. Such notice shall be delivered in person to
the licensee or mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown
on the application, at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for hearing.
(Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-9: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Village Clerk in the denial of an
application, or in the decision of the Village President with reference to the
revocation of a license shall have the right of appeal to the Board of Trustees
of the Village. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board of
Trustees, within seven (7) days after notice of the decision complained of has
been mailed to the person's address listed on the application, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds and/or basis for the appeal. The
Board of Trustees shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as
provided in subsection 3-6-8B of this chapter for notice of hearing on
revocation. The order of the Board of Trustees on such appeal shall be final
and conclusive. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-10: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To engage in solicitation upon any premises or residence located
thereon if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation by signage
bearing the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or any
other similar notice indicating that the occupant or occupants of such premises
or residence desire not to be disturbed or to have their rights of privacy
disturbed, unless such solicitation has been specifically requested by the
owner or occupant of such premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon any residence or
nonresidential premises for the purpose of conducting any form of solicitation
at any time after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. or before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on
any Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or at any time on any
holiday recognized by the State of Illinois, unless such solicitation has been
requested by the owner or occupant of such premises.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any form of solicitation
at any residence or nonresidential premises to fail to immediately leave such
premises, and/or to fail to immediately cease conducting such solicitation at
such residence or nonresidential premises upon receiving from any person in
charge of said premises or an occupant thereof, a request to leave or to cease
solicitation.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any form of solicitation
at any residence or nonresidential premises to claim any affiliation with, or
endorsement of, the Village without the express written consent of the Village
following approval of the same at a meeting of the Board of Trustees of the
Village. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
3-6-11: PENALTY:
   A.   A person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each such violation.
   B.   In any case in which an offense is of a continuing nature, each day
such violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation, and shall
subject the person so violating such provision to a separate fine for each such
day. (Ord. 11-01-16, 11-8-2016)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Public Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-2: Public Nuisances Generally
4-1-3: Public Nuisances Affecting Health
4-1-4: Public Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety
4-1-5: Offensive Premises In Residential Districts
4-1-6: Abatement Of Public Nuisances; Penalty
4-1-7: Cost Of Abatement
4-1-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the Village or within the law enforcement
jurisdiction of the Village. (2017 Code)
4-1-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES GENERALLY:
A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
   A.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public.
   B.   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
   C.   Greatly offend the public morals or decency.
   D.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way. (2017 Code)
4-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following acts, omissions, places and things are hereby specifically
declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude
other health nuisances coming within the definition of section
4-1-2 of this chapter:
   A.   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or
offered for sale to the public.
   B.   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of
in a sanitary manner within twenty four (24) hours after death.
   C.   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or machinery,
scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying
insects, rats or other vermin may breed, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
   D.   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply.
   E.   Garbage cans which are not flytight.
   F.   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the Village limits in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or
cause substantial injury to property.
   G.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal, or
body of water by sewage, creamery, or industrial wastes or other substances.
   H.   Any use of property, substances or things within the Village emitting
or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable
odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of
ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of
any appreciable number of persons within the Village.
   I.   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use.
   J.   Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine.
   K.   Any open burning contrary to the regulations of the Illinois Pollution
Control Board.
   L.   The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any
street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may be
permitted by ordinance.
   M.   Any noxious weed on private property as defined by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, as amended. (2017 Code)
4-1-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety:
   A.   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures.
   B.   Noises as restricted in chapter 2 of this title.
   C.   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or devices which purport to
be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or maintained
upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing.
   D.   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
   E.   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than eight
feet (8') above the surface thereof or less than ten feet (10') above the
surface of a public street.
   F.   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
State of Illinois and ordinances of the Village.
   G.   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to
be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
   H.   All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are strung less
than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the street or ground.
   I.   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the
Village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished.
   J.   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
   K.   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes.
   L.   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks.
   M.   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof.
   N.   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or which
overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight feet
(8') above the sidewalk surface.
   O.   Any condition or practice constituting a fire hazard.
   P.   Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended.
   Q.   All unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked, and other
automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other
vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any
kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was
manufactured, within the corporate limits of the Village.
   R.   All unsheltered storage of unlicensed automobiles for a period of ten
(10) days or more within the corporate limits of the Village. (2017 Code)
4-1-5: OFFENSIVE PREMISES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Outdoor Storage Of Materials And Equipment: It shall be a violation and
shall constitute a public nuisance to maintain private property in all
residential districts in such a manner as to cause a detrimental effect to
adjacent properties, by causing to have stored on the exterior of the premises
any of the following:
      1.   Materials and items stored in a haphazard or unorganized manner, so
as to present an objectionable visual appearance or a nuisance; but not to
include stacked firewood for use on the premises or compost material for use on
the premises;
      2.   Yard maintenance equipment including, but not limited to, lawn
mowers, garden tractors, snow blowers, garden tools, and similar items, which
are stored outside in a haphazard, unorganized, or unprotected manner, past the
season of the reasonable use of such equipment;
      3.   Materials or items brought to the premises for planned improvements
such as landscaping, construction, and similar purposes, including, but not
limited to, fill dirt, mulch, and building materials, and which are not used
for said improvements within ninety (90) days, or which merely constitute
outdoor storage of said materials or items;
      4.   Recreational equipment, or parts thereof, including, but not limited
to, bicycles, motorcycles, boats, jet skis, and snowmobiles, which are stored
on the exterior premises out of the normal season of usage, and which are
stored in a haphazard, unorganized, or unprotected manner;
      5.   Household, commercial, and industrial objects and materials which
are not ordinarily found in residential districts, stored for more than two (2)
weeks on the exterior premises visible from adjacent properties or public
right-of-way.
   B.   Detrimental Effect To Adjacent Properties Defined: "Detrimental effect
to adjacent properties", as used in this section, shall include, but not be
limited to, diminished property value to adjacent properties, a creation of any
unsightly and unaesthetic appearance in the neighborhood in general, and a
decline or loss of comfort, convenience, well being and mental health of
adjacent property owners. (1979 Code §
8-2-1)
   C.   Penalty: In addition to the Village's right and power to abate a
nuisance as set forth in this chapter, any person violating any provision of
this section shall be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each date during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1979 Code §
8-2-3)
4-1-6: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES; PENALTY:
   A.   Inspection Of Premises: Whenever complaint is made to the Village
President, or Trustee of the Village Board, that a public nuisance exists, or
has existed, within the Village, he shall promptly notify a law enforcement
officer or some other Village official whom the President shall designate, who
shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises, and shall make a
written report of his findings to the President. Whenever practicable, the
inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall
file the same with the Village Enforcement Officer.
   B.   Summary Abatement:
      1.   Notice To Owner: If the inspecting officer determines that a public
nuisance exists on the private property and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village
President may direct the law enforcement officer to serve a notice on the
owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance, and to post a copy of the notice on
the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or persons causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate and remove such nuisance
within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Abatement By Village: If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the law enforcement officer or a Village official whom the President
shall designate, may cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
   C.   Abatement By Court Action: If the inspecting officer determines that a
public nuisance exists on private premises but the nature of such nuisance is
not an immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency,
he shall file a written report of his findings with the President, who shall
cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of the
Village.
   D.   Penalty: The owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which such nuisance is permitted to exist.
(2017 Code)
4-1-7: COST OF ABATEMENT:
In addition to the penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of the public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such
cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes. (2017
Code)
CHAPTER 2
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions; Hours Of Restriction
4-2-2: Prohibited Generally
4-2-3: Persons Responsible
4-2-4: Exceptions
4-2-5: Specific Prohibitions
4-2-6: Horns And Signaling Devices On Vehicles
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS; HOURS OF RESTRICTION:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    AMPLIFIED SOUND: The sound produced by any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound.
   LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE: Any sound which, because of its volume level,
duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within
the limits of the Village.
   B.   Hours: No person shall make or cause to be made noises as defined in
subsection A of this section from the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (1979 Code § 8-5-1; amd. 2017 Code)
4-2-2: PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person responsible
as defined herein to wilfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued,
any loud and raucous noise when such noise is audible in any one (1) of the
following places:
   A.   Upon the public streets.
   B.   In any public park.
   C.   In any school or public buildings or upon the grounds thereof while in
use.
   D.   In any church or healthcare facility or upon the grounds thereof while
in use.
   E.   Upon any parking lot open to members of the public as invitees or
licensees.
   F.   In any occupied residential unit which is not the source of the noise
or upon the grounds thereof.
   G.   Amplified sound, when such is audible at the boundary line of the
property from which such sound is emanating. The term "boundary line" shall
mean:
      1.   In the case of a residential unit in a structure containing more
than one (1) residential unit, the boundary line shall be the perimeter of such
unit. Residential unit shall be that area under the exclusive use or control of
the owner or occupant.
      2.   In all other cases, the boundary line shall be the perimeter of the
lot or lots as defined by the property line or on the side abutting public
right-of-way, the public sidewalk, if any or, if no public sidewalk exists on
the perimeter of such property, then the boundary line shall be the curb line.
(1979 Code § 8-5-2)
4-2-3: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE:
   A.   The occupant of the property or residential unit, or the agent of the
occupant on which a prohibited activity takes place, shall be presumed to have
permitted the activity to occur; this presumption may be rebutted by evidence
of a bona fide effort to prevent a violation of this chapter.
   B.   The occupant of the property or residential unit, or the agent of the
occupant who shall permit another person to create a noise or conduct an
activity in violation of this chapter shall be deemed responsible for the noise
or activity to the same extent as the person creating the noise or conducting
the activity and shall be subject to the same punishment.
   C.   Any person in charge of operating, ordering, directing or allowing the
operation or maintenance of the device or machine creating a noise as
prohibited in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter.
(1979 Code § 8-5-3)
4-2-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The term "loud and raucous noise" does not include noise or sound generated by
the following:
   A.   Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls.
   B.   Radios, sirens, horns and bells on police, fire and other emergency
response vehicles.
   C.   Parades, fireworks displays and other special events for which a permit
has been obtained from the Village, within such hours as may be imposed as a
condition for the issuance of the permit.
   D.   Activities on or in Municipal and school athletic facilities and on or
in publicly owned property and facilities; provided, that such activities have
been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agents.
   E.   Fire alarms and burglary alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a
reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises
served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm.
   F.   Religious worship activities, including, but not limited to, bells and
organs.
   G.   Locomotives and other railroad equipment.
   H.   Aircraft.
   I.   Noise which is a normal byproduct of commercial and industrial
activity, when the activity producing the noise is occurring on premises where
such activity is permitted under the zoning ordinance, in which case such noise
shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
   J.   Noise which is a normal byproduct of lawn maintenance or snow removal,
provided such activity is conducted between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., or at any time when snow has accumulated to
a depth of two inches (2") or more. (1979 Code § 8-5-4)
4-2-5: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Construction Operations: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
pile driver, shovel, hammer derrick, hoist tractor, roller or other mechanical
apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in building or construction
operations between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. Monday through Saturday and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon Sunday, except for emergency work, within five hundred
feet (500') of any building used for residential or healthcare purposes.
   B.   Motor Vehicles:
      1.   Excessive Running: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any motor of a motor vehicle of a weight in excess of four (4) tons for a
consecutive period longer than two (2) minutes while such vehicle is standing
still and located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of property zoned and
used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is standing within a
completely enclosed structure, and except when traffic conditions or weather
conditions necessitate such. This subsection shall not apply to buses operated
for the transportation of passengers while standing in established bus stops,
bus terminals, bus parking lots and bus storage yards.
      2.   Sound Systems: No person shall operate or permit the operation of
any sound amplification system in or on any motor vehicle which can be heard
outside the vehicle for a distance of seventy five feet (75') or more when the
vehicle is operated or located on a public right-of-way, unless such system is
being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
      3.   Noisemaking Devices: No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
permit the operation of a motor vehicle which:
         a.   Is equipped with a siren, whistle, bell or gong signaling device
unless such vehicle is an emergency vehicle or unless such device is capable of
being used only as an antitheft device and cannot be used as an ordinary
warning signal.
         b.   Is not equipped with a muffler and exhaust system that is in
constant operation and good working order.
         c.   Is equipped with an exhaust system that has been modified so as
to amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above that emitted by the
exhaust system originally installed on the vehicle.
      4.   Excessive Acceleration: No person shall operate a motor vehicle on
any highway within the Village in such a manner as to cause or allow to be
emitted squealing, screeching, or other such noise from the tires in contact
with the ground because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners
or other such reason, except that noise resulting from emergency operation to
avoid imminent danger shall be exempt from this provision.
      5.   Applicability: The provisions of this section shall apply to motor
vehicles as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code. The definitions set forth in
the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be the definitions that are applicable to such
words used in this section. (1979 Code § 8-5-5)
4-2-6: HORNS AND SIGNALING DEVICES ON VEHICLES:
No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor vehicle of
any kind while the vehicle is not in motion; nor shall such horn or signal
device be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, and except
as reasonably required for other emergency circumstances; nor shall it be
sounded for any unnecessary period of time. (1979 Code § 8-5-6)
CHAPTER 3
PLANTS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-3-2: Height Restrictions
4-3-3: Removal, Notice
4-3-4: Abatement By Village
4-3-5: Lien For Removal Costs
4-3-1: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Weeds: Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur
or other weeds of like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the
Village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to
permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
   B.   Barberry Bushes: It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit
the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European barberry,
further known as Berberis vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties anywhere in
the Village. (1979 Code § 8-4-1)
4-3-2: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the Village, and any such plants or
weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1979 Code §
8-4-2)
4-3-3: REMOVAL, NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand
the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days. (1979 Code § 8-4-3)
4-3-4: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days after
receiving such notice, the Chief of Police may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of such abatement, and such expense shall be
charged to and paid by the owner or occupant, and shall be collected by the
Village by suit or otherwise in addition to the fine or penalty as provided in
this Code. (1979 Code § 8-4-4)
4-3-5: LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS 1 :
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    LIEN COST: The removal cost and the filing costs for any notice of lien
under subsection C of this section.
   REMOVAL ACTIVITY: Any activity for which a removal cost was incurred.
   REMOVAL COST: As defined under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 11-20-7, 11-20-
8, 11-20-12, or 11-20-13.
   UNDERLYING PARCEL: A parcel of private property upon which a removal
activity was performed.
   YEAR: A three hundred sixty five (365) day period.
   B.   If the Village incurs a removal cost under this chapter with respect to
any underlying parcel, then that cost is a lien upon that underlying parcel.
This lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens and
as otherwise provided in subsection D of this section.
   C.   To perfect a lien under this section, the Village must, within one (1)
year after the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the Office of
the County Recorder or, if the underlying parcel is registered under the
Torrens system, in the Office of the County Registrar of Titles. The notice
must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
      1.   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies
the parcel;
      2.   The amount of the removal cost; and
      3.   The date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the Village.
If, for any one (1) parcel, the Village engaged in any removal activity on more
than one (1) occasion during the course of one (1) year, then the Village may
combine any or all of the costs of each of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   D.   A lien under this section is not valid as to: 1) any purchaser whose
rights in and to the underlying parcel arose after the removal activity but
before the filing of the notice of lien; or 2) any mortgagee, judgment
creditor, or other lienor whose rights in and to the underlying parcel arose
before the filing of the notice of lien.
   E.   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a notice
is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year
immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must be delivered or
sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it must: 1) state
the substance of this section and the substance of any ordinance of the Village
implementing this section; 2) identify the underlying parcel, by common
description; and 3) describe the removal activity.
   F.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in case of mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action to foreclose a lien
under this section must be commenced within two (2) years after the date of
filing notice of lien.
   G.   Any person who performs a removal activity by the authority of the
Village may, in his or her own name, file a lien and foreclose on that lien in
the same manner as the Village under this section.
   H.   A failure to file a foreclosure action does not, in any way, affect the
validity of the lien against the underlying parcel.
   I.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel
after notice of lien has been filed, the Village (or its agent under subsection
G of this section) shall release the lien, and the release may be filed of
record by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of filing notice
of lien. (2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING; FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Open Burning
4-4-2: Storage Of Combustible Refuse
4-4-1: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Open Burning Prohibited: No person shall cause or allow the burning of
refuse, leaves, grass or brush, and all other materials prohibited by the
Environmental Protection Act of the State of Illinois or by a rule or
regulation of the Pollution Control Board of the State is hereby prohibited.
(1979 Code §
9-3-1; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Recreational Fires: No person shall cause or allow the burning of wood
in an open fire outside of an incinerator, except as provided herein.
Recreational burning of wood shall be allowed where contained in a fire safe
vessel or pit not exceeding thirty inches (30") in diameter. All recreational
fires shall be extinguished by twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. Any fires
permitted under this section shall be supervised by an adult at all times. No
fire shall be built or lit so close to any building or other structure so as to
endanger such building or structure, or on any public street or sidewalk
pavement. The police department is authorized to prohibit, stop, cause or order
any fire be extinguished if the fire does not comply with the provisions of
this section or if the Police Department determines that due to the size,
location, wind or other atmospheric conditions, it poses a threat to the safety
of persons or property. (1979 Code §
9-3-4)
4-4-2: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to store or permit to be stored any combustible refuse in
such a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse of any
kind in any alley, street or other public place in the Village. (1979 Code §
9-3-2)
CHAPTER 5
SMOKE FREE PREMISES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Nonsmoking Places And Areas Designated
4-5-3: Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
4-5-4: Exemptions
4-5-5: Discrimination Prohibited
4-5-6: Enforcement; Complaints
4-5-7: Violations; Penalties; Injunctions
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Health.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, which employs
the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: As defined in the Illinois Gaming Board rules of
the Illinois Administrative Code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in subsection 4-5-2D of
this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open,
and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break
rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based
business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care,
or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not-for-profit association that: a) has been active and in
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to January 1, 2008,
whether incorporated or not; b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building
or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; c) is
operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and d) only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this
definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established by laws, a constitution, or both, to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of Federal
income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: That part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodations, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not
be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in subsection 4-5-2D of this chapter, of fifteen
feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does
not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service on the
premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to: hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government
owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased,
or operated by the State or State subcontract, healthcare facilities or
clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial
institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,
public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of
the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and
breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but
excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: A. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to: coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and
   B.   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
which has any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
STATE AGENCY: Has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of
section 3 of the Illinois Purchasing Article (now repealed). (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-
22-2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-2: NONSMOKING PLACES AND AREAS DESIGNATED:
   A.   Public Places And Governmental Vehicles: No person shall smoke in a
public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any
entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any
vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the State or a political subdivision of
the State. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by section
4-5-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Student Dormitories: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters,
including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining area, restrooms, laundry
areas, lobbies, and hallways, or a building used in whole or in part as a
student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public
or private institution of higher education.
   C.   Other Nonsmoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other
person in control of any public place or place of employment, including outdoor
areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited; provided, that such
employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting
smoking in the manner described in subsections 4-5-3A and B of this chapter.
   D.   Entrances, Exits, Windows And Ventilation Intakes: Smoking is
prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that tobacco
smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other
means. (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-22-2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-3: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   A.   "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting
of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each
public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that
place.
   B.   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   C.   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control
of the area. (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-22-2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   A.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based business open to
the public.
   B.   Retail tobacco stores, in operation prior to January 1, 2008. The
retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31 an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar
year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after January 1, 2008, may only qualify for an exemption if located in a
freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the
business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
   C.   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where
smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the
nursing home.
   D.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided, that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-22-2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-5: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-22-2008,
eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-6: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   A.   The Village Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and may assess fines pursuant to section
4-5-7 of this chapter.
   B.   Any person may register a complaint with the Police Department for a
violation of this chapter. The Police Department shall establish a telephone
number that a person may call to register a complaint. (Ord. 01-01-08, 1-22-
2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
4-5-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; INJUNCTIONS:
   A.   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
   B.   A penalty equal to the minimum fine for the violation, as set forth in
subsection C of this section, shall be assessed to violators of this chapter if
payment is made within ten (10) days of the violation, after which a violation
shall result in a fine within the range set forth in subsection C of this
section.
   C.   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited shall be
fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or
otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates
subsection 4-5-2A or B, or section
4-5-3 of this chapter shall be fined:
      1.   Not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation;
      2.   Not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second
violation within one (1) year after the first violation; and
      3.   Not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each
additional violation within one (1) year after the first violation.
   D.   The Village, a State certified local Public Health Department, or any
individual personally affected by repeated violations may institute, in a
Circuit Court, an action to enjoin violations of this chapter. (Ord. 01-01-08,
1-22-2008, eff. 1-23-2008)
CHAPTER 6
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
Section:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
4-6-3: Public Nuisance Declared
4-6-4: Violations
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
 
                                       A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS            processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                         organization, dispensing organization or
                                       transporting organization.
                                       A facility operated by an organization
                                       or business that is licensed by the
                                       Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                       cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                       cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:       activities to make cannabis available
                                       for sale at a dispensing organization or
                                       use at a processing organization, per
                                       the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
                                       (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
                                       from time-to-time, and regulations
                                       promulgated thereunder.
                                       A facility operated by an organization
                                       or business that is licensed by the
                                       Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                       cultivate, process, transport and
                                       perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                       to licensed cannabis business
                                       establishments, per the Cannabis
                                       Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027),
                                       as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                       and regulations promulgated thereunder.
 
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 03-01-2020,
                                        3-10-2020)
 
4-6-2: ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in the
Village. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or
aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of any of the
following:
   Adult-use cannabis craft grower
   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center
   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization
   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser
   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor
   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter
(Ord. 03-01-2020, 3-10-2020)
4-6-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited adult-use cannabis business establishment within
the Village in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord.
03-01-2020, 3-10-2020)
4-6-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750).
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
03-01-2020, 3-10-2020)
TITLE 5
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created; Composition
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Duties Of Members
5-1-4: Serving Process
5-1-5: Conduct Of Members
5-1-6: Witness Fees
5-1-7: Part Time Police
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Police Department, an executive department of the
Village. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, one (1)
Sergeant, and such other positions as shall be determined by the Village
President and Board of Trustees. Appointment of officers and members of the
Police Department shall be in accordance with the provisions of title 2,
chapter 7 of this Code. (1979 Code §
10-1-1)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the Office of Chief of Police.
The Chief shall be appointed by the Village President and Board of Trustees
after having received the recommendation of the Board of Police Commissioners.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Generally: The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
performance by the Police Department of all of its functions, and all persons
who are members of the Department shall serve subject to orders of the
President and Board of Trustees.
      2.   Custody Of Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall be custodian
of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in the Village.
      3.   Rules And Regulations: The Chief of Police may make or prescribe
such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the
Department; such rules, when approved by the Village President and Board of
Trustees, shall be binding on such members. (1979 Code §
10-1-2)
5-1-3: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
Except as otherwise directed by the Board of Trustees, it shall be the duty of
the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all of the
ordinances of the Village, and of all statutes effective in the Village, and to
preserve order and prevent infractions of the laws and arrest violators
thereof. Every member of the Police Department is hereby declared to be a
conservator of the peace. (1979 Code §
10-1-3)
5-1-4: SERVING PROCESS:
All members of the Police Department shall be authorized to serve writs,
summonses and other process; but no Police Officer shall serve any such summons
or process except on the order of the Chief of Police or the Village President,
or the Chairman of the Law Enforcement Committee. (1979 Code §
10-1-4)
5-1-5: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner. (1979 Code §
10-1-5)
5-1-6: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a Village ordinance or of any
State or Federal law. But no such member shall receive any witness fees for
service as a witness in any action or suit in which the Village is a party; all
fees due for such services shall, if paid, be turned over to the Village
Treasurer for deposit in the Village treasury. (1979 Code §
10-1-6)
5-1-7: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   Employment: The Village may employ part time Police Officers from time
to time as they deem necessary.
   B.   Duties: A part time Police Officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full time Police Officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
general orders of the Village Police Department, but the number of hours a part
time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time Police
Officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time Police
Officers. Part time Police Officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois Police Training Act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB
(Illinois Emergency Telephone System Board).
   C.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time Police Officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   D.   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part time Police Officers serve at the
discretion of the Village authorities, shall not have any property rights in
said employment, and may be removed by the Village authorities at any time.
Part time Police Officers shall comply with all applicable rules and general
orders issued by the Police Department. (1979 Code § 10-1-7; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Possession Of Liquor In Public
5-2-2: Driving Under The Influence Of Liquor Or Drugs; Reckless Driving
5-2-3: Disorderly Conduct
5-2-4: Theft
5-2-5: Assault And Battery
5-2-6: Reckless Conduct
5-2-7: Criminal Trespass
5-2-8: Officers, Offenses Regarding
5-2-9: Loitering
5-2-10: Hunting
5-2-11: Firearms And Weapons
5-2-12: Injurious Materials On Public Ways
5-2-13: Injuring Property
5-2-14: Advertisements, Billposting
5-2-15: Poisonous Substances On Premises
5-2-1: POSSESSION OF LIQUOR IN PUBLIC:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have possession of any
intoxicating beverage in any opened container on any Village property except as
otherwise provided.
   B.   Beer only may be possessed in an open container on Village property
upon approval of written application to the Liquor Control Commissioner with
the consent of the Village Board. (1979 Code §
10-2-1)
5-2-2: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR OR DRUGS; RECKLESS DRIVING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor to drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle;
and, it is unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of or under the
influence of any narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug
to a degree which renders him incapable of safely driving a vehicle, to drive
or be in actual physical control of any vehicle.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle with a wilful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. (1979 Code § 10-2-10)
5-2-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for a person to commit any disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of the Village or Fire
Protection District, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such
transmissions that there is no reasonable grounds for believing such fire
exists; or
   C.   Transmits in any manner to another, a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb or explosive
is concealed in such place; or
   D.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing
that such an offense has been committed; or
   E.   Enters upon the property of another and deliberately looks into a
dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it. (1979 Code
§ 10-2-11)
5-2-4: THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a theft. A person commits theft
when he knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen; and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (1979 Code § 10-2-12)
5-2-5: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault. A
person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct
which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (1979
Code § 10-2-13)
   B.   Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery. A
person commits a battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal
justification and by any means: 1) causes bodily harm to an individual; or 2)
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
(1979 Code § 10-2-14)
5-2-6: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause bodily harm or to endanger the
safety of an individual by any means, if he performs recklessly the acts which
cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or
unlawful. (1979 Code § 10-2-15)
5-2-7: CRIMINAL TRESPASS:
   A.   Land:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the land or any
part thereof of another, after receiving, immediately prior to such entry,
notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remain upon
the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to
depart.
      2.   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection A1 of this section if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land or the forbidden part thereof.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the Village owned
property commonly referred to as the "campus" area and more specifically
defined as that property owned by the Village and bordered by Wesley Avenue on
the east, Main Street on the north, Seminary Avenue on the west and Center
Street on the south between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M., without having received prior consent of the Village.
(1979 Code § 10-2-16)
   B.   Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and without
authority enter or remain within any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft or any
part thereof of another without his consent. (1979 Code § 10-2-17)
   C.   Public Parks: It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or
remain upon any portion of a public park within the Village from the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until sunrise. (1979 Code § 10-2-20)
5-2-8: OFFICERS, OFFENSES REGARDING:
   A.   Impersonation: It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate,
without lawful authority, any Village officer or employee.
   B.   Interference: It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any
officer or employee of the Village while engaged in the duties of his office or
employment. (1979 Code § 10-2-6)
5-2-9: LOITERING:
   A.   No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to create or
cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace, create or cause to be
created any disturbance or annoyance to the general comfort and peace of any
other person; obstruct free access to or free use of public buildings, stores,
streets, sidewalks or other public ways; interfere with or interrupt the
conduct of business in stores, shops or other public buildings in the Village;
or otherwise obstruct, molest or unlawfully interfere with any person lawfully
in a public place. No person shall sit, stand, lie or recline on any
improvement such as walls, planters, retaining fixtures, sidewalks, curbings,
or any other such improvement which is not specifically provided for or
intended for such purpose or use in any public place. No person shall singly,
or with others, loiter or prowl in a public place at a time or in a manner not
usual for law abiding individuals, but in a manner and under circumstances that
warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of such
conduct. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
such alarm is warranted are: the immediate flight of the person or persons
suspected of unlawful conduct upon the appearance of a Police Officer; refusal
to identify oneself when requested to do so by a Police Officer; the attempt or
endeavor to conceal oneself or any object upon appearance of a Police Officer;
the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting
nature or which are obviously calculated to annoy or disturb the person to, or
in whose hearing they are made.
   B.   Unless circumstances make it impracticable, a Police Officer shall,
prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
questioned the opportunity to dispel any alarm for the safety of persons or of
property in the vicinity of the suspected person by requesting said person to
identify himself and explain the person's presence and conduct in such public
place.
   C.   Whenever the presence of any person in a public place is likely to
cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection A of this section, the
Police Officer may order that person to leave the public place. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being so ordered shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
   D.   This section shall not be construed to prohibit innocent public
assembly, political, religious or civil demonstrations, gatherings or
activities of a like nature. (1979 Code § 10-2-9)
5-2-10: HUNTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any birds or animals
other than as prescribed by law, in the Village, except that if birds or
animals congregate in such numbers as to constitute a nuisance or jeopardize
health, permits may be issued for destroying such birds by use of shotguns or
means other than firearms, in the discretion of the President of the Village,
or the Chief of Police; provided, that any person engaging in such action shall
be liable for all resulting damage and shall properly dispose of the remains of
such birds and animals. (1979 Code §
10-2-2)
5-2-11: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS:
   A.   Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapon
in the Village in violation of the laws of the State.
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms
or air guns in the Village; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in
the performance of his duty, nor shall the provisions of this subsection apply
to a citizen discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his person or
property or when destroying blackbirds, starlings or sparrows pursuant to a
permit therefor issued under the provisions of section
5-2-10 of this chapter. (1979 Code §
10-2-3)
5-2-12: INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley
or public place; and it shall be unlawful to deposit any glass, nails, tacks or
other similar objects or articles on any street, alley or sidewalk in the
Village. (1979 Code §
10-2-4)
5-2-13: INJURING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to:
   A.   Injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the Village
without proper authority from the Board of Trustees; or
   B.   Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
   C.   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damage property of another;
or
   D.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
   E.   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
   F.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without
his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intend to interfere with the use by another of the land or building; or
   G.   Damage any property, other than property described in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/20-1, with intent to defraud an insurer; or
   H.   Knowingly shoot a firearm at any portion of a railroad train. (1979
Code § 10-2-5)
5-2-14: ADVERTISEMENTS, BILLPOSTING:
   A.   Advertising: It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or
article in the Village and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful
notice or advertisement.
   B.   Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisement
on any public property without authority from the President and Board of
Trustees; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any
property without the written consent of the owner thereof. (1979 Code § 10-2-7)
5-2-15: POISONOUS SUBSTANCES ON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any poisonous substance on such
premises, within the Village, in such manner that it may come into contact with
any domestic animal. (1979 Code § 10-2-8)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Consumption Of Alcohol
5-3-2: Curfew
5-3-3: Prevention Of Youth Nicotine Addiction
5-3-1: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to
consume alcoholic liquor within the Village. However, the consumption by a
person under twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a person
under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and approval of
the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of such person
under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited
by this section. (1979 Code § 10-2-18)
5-3-2: CURFEW:
For the regulation of curfew restrictions for minors, the Village hereby adopts
by reference 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12C-60, as amended, with one (1)
copy on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for inspection by the public.
(2017 Code)
5-3-3: PREVENTION OF YOUTH NICOTINE ADDICTION:
For the prevention of youth nicotine addition, the Village hereby adopts by
reference 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 675/1 et seq., as amended, with one
(1) copy on file in the Office of the Village Clerk for inspection by the
public. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Running At Large Prohibited, Impoundment
5-4-2: Dangerous Animals
5-4-3: Diseased Animals
5-4-4: Noises
5-4-5: Housing
5-4-6: Cruelty To Animals
5-4-7: Kennels And Pet Shops
5-4-8: Potbelly Pigs
5-4-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED, IMPOUNDMENT:
It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats or
poultry to run at large in the Village; any such animal running at large in any
public place shall be impounded in the manner provided in article A of this
chapter. (1979 Code §
10-3-1; amd. 2017 Code)
5-4-2: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited; Permit For Exhibitions Or Parades: It shall be unlawful to
permit any dangerous animal or any vicious animal of any kind to run at large
within the Village. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae
in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the
Chief of Police or the President and Board of Trustees. (1979 Code §
10-3-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Authority To Kill: The members of the Police Department are authorized
to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the
protection of any person or property. (1979 Code §
10-3-2)
5-4-3: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease
shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby
the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the
supervision of the Village President and Chief of Police. (1979 Code §
10-3-3)
5-4-4: NOISES:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night. (1979 Code §
10-3-4)
5-4-5: HOUSING:
No person shall cause or allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to
become unclean or unwholesome. It shall be unlawful to keep any livestock,
pigeons or poultry in the Village, with the exception of potbelly pigs as set
forth in section
5-4-8 of this chapter. (1979 Code §
10-3-5)
5-4-6: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the Village in any way; any person
who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section. (1979 Code §
10-3-6)
5-4-7: KENNELS AND PET SHOPS:
   A.   Definition: The terms "kennel" and "pet shop" shall be construed to
include any establishment for the raising, training, boarding or selling of
dogs, cats, birds, mice, rabbits or other small animals for hire or profit, or
any place where more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats or combination thereof
over the age of four (4) months are harbored or kept. (1979 Code §
10-3-7)
   B.   License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel or pet
shop anywhere in the Village without first securing a license therefor. The
annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (1979 Code §
10-3-7; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Condition Of Premises: Every place used as a kennel or pet shop shall
be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall
be allowed to remain thereon or therein for more than twenty four (24) hours.
All animals shall be humanely treated and shall be supervised so as to prevent
unnecessary disturbances to adjoining property. (1979 Code §
10-3-7)
   D.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1979 Code §
10-3-7; amd. 2017 Code)
5-4-8: POTBELLY PIGS:
   A.   Ownership Authorized: The ownership and possession of a domestic pet
known as a potbelly pig which is also commonly known as the Asian potbelly,
Vietnamese potbelly, or Chinese potbelly and scientifically known as Sus scrofa
biffatus within the Village is hereby authorized.
   B.   Restrictions On Keeping: The possession of said potbelly pigs is
limited to one (1) per household. No such pig shall be kept within the Village
limits unless it has been spayed or neutered to render it incapable of
reproduction. No such potbelly pig shall be kept within the Village limits if
it exceeds one hundred (100) pounds in weight or exceeds more than twenty two
inches (22") in height at the shoulder.
   C.   Dog Provisions Applicable: In order to ensure that potbelly pigs kept
within the Village do not serve as a source of disease or run at large or
endanger any person, provisions of this title that apply to dogs shall also
apply to potbelly pigs. (1979 Code §
10-3-8)
ARTICLE A. DOGS
SECTION:
5-4A-1: License Required; Fees
5-4A-2: Running At Large Prohibited
5-4A-3: Impoundment; Notice; Redemption Fees
5-4A-4: Interference With Enforcement
5-4A-5: Destruction Of Certain Dogs
5-4A-6: Dogs Prohibited In Public Parks
5-4A-7: Animal Feces Prohibited
5-4A-8: Ticket Issuance For Violations
5-4A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
Every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog within the Village shall
register the same with the Village Clerk who shall keep a book for that
purpose. It shall be the further duty of such person to pay to the Village
Clerk annually within ten (10) days after May 1 of each year, or upon acquiring
any unlicensed dog thereafter, a tax at the following rates for each dog owned,
kept or harbored by such person:
   A.   Male or female dog neutered, ten dollars ($10.00).
   B.   Male or female dog not neutered, fifteen dollars (15.00). (1979 Code §
10-4-1)
5-4A-2: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at large in the streets or
public places in the Village, or upon the private premises of any person other
than the owner or keeper of such dog. The running at large of any dog in any of
said places is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The President or any Trustees,
officer or agent of the Village is hereby authorized to abate said nuisance, as
hereinafter provided.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to suffer or
permit such dog to run at large in the streets or public places in the Village
or upon the private premises of any person other than the owner or keeper of
such dog. (1979 Code §
10-4-2)
5-4A-3: IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; REDEMPTION FEES:
   A.   Impoundment: All dogs running at large contrary to the provisions of
this article, or for which a license has not been issued, are hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and shall be restrained and impounded in a place or
pound as may be designated and set apart for that purpose.
   B.   Registry; Notice To Owner: The poundkeeper or such person in charge of
the pound or place designated for that purpose, to which any dog is so
impounded, shall immediately upon receiving any dog at such pound or place,
make a complete registry, entering the name of the animal, if known, license
tag number; breed; color and sex of such dog, if known; and the date and hour
such dog was impounded. When any dog shall be impounded, notice thereof shall
forthwith be given by the poundkeeper or such person in charge, to the Village
Clerk; and the Village Clerk shall forthwith give notice to the owner or keeper
of such dog, of the impounding of said dog.
   C.   Time Limit; Disposition: Any dog so impounded shall be retained and
properly cared for by the poundkeeper or such person in charge, for a period of
seventy two (72) hours, and at the expiration of said seventy two (72) hours,
if it has not been redeemed, said dog shall be destroyed by the poundkeeper or
other person in charge.
   D.   Redemption; Payment Of Costs: At any time within said seventy two (72)
hours, the owner or keeper of any such dog so impounded shall have the right to
recover the possession of such dog by paying to the poundkeeper or other person
in charge of said dog, pound charges for each day or part thereof during which
such dog was impounded, to cover the expense of impounding and caring for said
dog; the payment of said expense for caring for said dog shall in no way
relieve the owner or keeper of said dog from the penalties provided for in this
article. (1979 Code §
10-4-3)
5-4A-4: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to break open or assist in breaking open
any such pound, or to let out or assist in letting out or in the escape of any
dog impounded therein, or to interfere with, obstruct or prevent the
poundkeeper or other person in charge, in the performance of his duties
hereunder, or any officer or agent of the Village in the performance of his
duties. (1979 Code §
10-4-4)
5-4A-5: DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS:
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this article, it shall be the duty
of the Chief of Police or other agent to destroy any dog found to be vicious,
ferocious or dangerous, severely injured or sick with or liable to communicate
hydrophobia or any contagious or infectious disease. (1979 Code §
10-4-5)
5-4A-6: DOGS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to permit such dog at any
time to be in any public park within the Village, whether leashed or unleashed.
(1979 Code §
10-4-6)
5-4A-7: ANIMAL FECES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to permit such dog to
deposit animal feces on any street, public place or upon the private premises
of any person other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog,
without immediately removing the feces therefrom and properly disposing of
same. (1979 Code §
10-4-7)
5-4A-8: TICKET ISSUANCE FOR VIOLATIONS:
Tickets shall be issued for dog violations with a progressive fine starting at
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first offense within any twelve (12) month
period, twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the second offense within any twelve
(12) month period, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for the third and subsequent
offenses within any twelve (12) month period. Tickets shall state the
particular provisions of this article violated, along with the breed, age,
color and name of such dog, if known. (1979 Code §
10-4-8)
CHAPTER 5
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL/PUBLIC PARK ZONE MAP
SECTION:
5-5-1: Statutory Authorization
5-5-2: Official Map
5-5-3: Notification Of Change Of Boundaries
5-5-4: Duties Of Village Clerk
5-5-5: Prima Facie Evidence
5-5-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/407, the Drug-Free School/Public Park Zone Map produced on or
about September 13, 1994, by the Village is hereby approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of the location in areas within the Village of
properties which is used for school purposes or public park purposes and which
is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board or
municipality and of the areas on or within one thousand feet (1,000') of such
school and public park property. (1979 Code § 11-8-1)
5-5-2: OFFICIAL MAP:
The Drug-Free School/Public Park Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
section
5-5-1 of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within one thousand
feet (1,000') of school property and public park property owned or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or school board or municipality which is
used for school or public park purposes until such time, if any, that this
chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to
the location and boundaries of such school property and drug- free school/
public park zones. (1979 Code § 11-8-2)
5-5-3: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF BOUNDARIES:
The School Board or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any private
or parochial school or the Village Board of Trustees, is hereby directed and
shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the Village Clerk of
any changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned or leased to
any elementary or secondary school or School Board or the Village and which is
used for school purposes or public park purposes. (1979 Code § 11-8-3)
5-5-4: DUTIES OF VILLAGE CLERK:
The Village Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to section
5-5-1 of this chapter, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency, or court which may from time to time request such a
copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed
that a true copy of such map and this chapter shall be provided without cost to
the Office of the Ogle County State's Attorney. (1979 Code § 11-8-4)
5-5-5: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and
stated: It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to section
5-5-1 of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
proceedings arising under the criminal laws of this State and that, pursuant to
State law, such shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
   A.   The location of elementary and secondary schools and parks within the
Village; and
   B.   The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or School Board or owned or leased by a Village for public park
purposes; and
   C.   That such property is and continues to be used for school purposes or
public park purposes; and
   D.   The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one
thousand feet (1,000') of such school property or public park. (1979 Code § 11-
8-5)
CHAPTER 6
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definition
5-6-2: Restrictions Regarding Fireworks
5-6-3: Sale And Explosion Of Fireworks By Permit
5-6-4: Confiscation Of Fireworks
5-6-5: Explosives
5-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "fireworks", as used in this chapter, shall mean and include any
combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation; provided,
however, that this definition shall not be construed to include shells and
cartridges or reloading equipment supplies for the use in firearms. (1979 Code
§
9-2-1)
5-6-2: RESTRICTIONS REGARDING FIREWORKS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful (except as hereinafter provided) for any person to
store, possess, sell, give away or deliver any fireworks in the Village.
   B.   It shall be unlawful (except as hereinafter provided) for any person to
discharge, ignite or explode, or to cause to be discharged, ignited or exploded
any fireworks within the Village. (1979 Code §
9-2-2)
5-6-3: SALE AND EXPLOSION OF FIREWORKS BY PERMIT:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
5-6-2 of this chapter, fireworks may be exploded within the Village in
connection with fairs, carnivals or other public celebrations or exhibitions
after first securing permission therefor from the President of the Village. Any
person desiring to explode fireworks or cause the same to be done in connection
with any of the occasions hereinbefore specified shall file a written
application in which shall be stated the time, place and kind of fireworks he
desires to explode or cause to have exploded, the person who is so to do and
when and from whom he proposes to purchase the same, with the Village Clerk at
least five (5) days before the day on which it is proposed to use said
fireworks. The said Clerk shall forthwith transmit the said application to the
Village President who shall examine and consider it and if in his judgment the
public safety will not be endangered thereby, he may issue a written permit
which shall state the time when, the place where and the kind of fireworks
which may be exploded, the person who is authorized to explode them and any
other reasonable regulations he may deem proper, which said permit shall be
dated and signed by him. (1979 Code § 9-2-3)
5-6-4: CONFISCATION OF FIREWORKS:
If any of the Police Officers of the Village shall discover that fireworks are
being stored, possessed, sold, given away, delivered, exploded, discharged or
ignited in violation of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his duty
immediately to seize and destroy the same and to arrest the person guilty of
violating the provisions hereof. (1979 Code § 9-2-4)
5-6-5: EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Nitroglycerine, TNT: It shall be unlawful to keep or store
nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as TNT in the Village in any
quantities, except for medicinal purposes. (1979 Code § 9-2-5)
   B.   Compliance With Rules And Regulations: All explosives must be kept or
stored in accordance with the statutes, rules and regulations of the State Fire
Marshal, and Federal regulations, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 9-2-5; amd. 2017 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
STATE VEHICLE CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Illinois Motor Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-2: Unsafe Driving
6-1-3: Skateboards, Roller Skates And Play Vehicles
6-1-4: Stop Intersections
6-1-5: One-Way Streets And Alleys
6-1-6: Posting Of Traffic Signs
6-1-1: ILLINOIS MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., are hereby adopted in full and as subsequently
amended. Three (3) copies of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be and remain on
file in the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code § 11-1-6; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1-2: UNSAFE DRIVING:
Any person who, while driving a motor vehicle, knowingly causes the tires to
squeal when accelerating or braking, or drives from roadside to roadside on or
adjacent to the roadway or into the opposite lane of traffic in a careless or
reckless manner commits unsafe driving. (1979 Code § 11-3-2)
6-1-3: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND PLAY VEHICLES:
   A.   Prohibitions: No person shall rollerskate or ride a skateboard or play
vehicle anywhere in the city without complying with the terms of this section.
As used herein, "to rollerskate" shall mean to skate on any type of roller
skates or street skates. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride
a skateboard, roller skates or roller skis or play vehicles in any of the
following places:
      1.   On any street except for the purpose of crossing the street. The
rules relating to pedestrians crossing the street shall apply to persons
crossing the street on roller skates or a skateboard. No person crossing the
street on roller skates or a skateboard shall travel too fast for safety under
the conditions existing.
      2.   On any sidewalk in the business district of the Village, being all
that part of the Village described as follows:
On both sides of Main Street between Seminary Avenue and McKendrie Avenue; on
both sides of Wesley Avenue between Center Street and Hitt Street; and on both
sides of Front Street between Wesley Avenue and McKendrie Avenue.
      3.   On any public property where signs are posted prohibiting such use,
such as parking lots.
      4.   On private property where signs prohibiting such items have been
posted by the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property.
   B.   Yield Right-Of-Way To Pedestrians: Operators of skateboards, roller
skates, roller skis or play vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to other
pedestrians using public sidewalks and shall not otherwise endanger or
interfere with pedestrian traffic on those sidewalks.
   C.   Warning: For a first offense, a written warning shall be issued to the
offender, and no fine shall be imposed. If the offender is under the age of
eighteen (18) years, a parent or guardian of the offender shall be notified and
shall be handed or mailed a copy of the written warning.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section again
after a written warning shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. (1979 Code § 11-3-6)
6-1-4: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Certain streets in the Village designated by the Board of Trustees, and posted
as such, shall be stop intersections, and drivers of vehicles shall stop in
obedience to such stop signs. A complete listing of specific stop intersections
shall be and remain on file in the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code §
11-3-8; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1-5: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Vehicle Operation: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any
street or alley designated as a one-way street or alley by ordinance in any
direction other than that so designated.
   B.   One-Way Streets Designated: The following are hereby designated as one-
way streets:
Church Street to Fletcher and Fletcher to Brayton Road. No person shall operate
a vehicle on Church Street except in an eastbound direction and on Fletcher
Street except in a northbound direction to Brayton Road.
East Front Street from Wesley Avenue to McKendrie Avenue. No person shall
operate a vehicle in such portion of said street except in an eastbound
direction. (1979 Code § 11-3-9; amd. Ord. 06-03-11, 6-28-2011, eff. 6-28-2011)
6-1-6: POSTING OF TRAFFIC SIGNS:
The Committee of Streets and Alleys, with the advice of the Chief of Police,
shall cause to be installed or posted suitable signs for all one-way or through
streets, alleys and stop intersections. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at
the entrance to a through street or in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected, and shall then proceed cautiously
yielding to the vehicles on the through street or vehicles not so obligated to
stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute
an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a
Police Officer on duty, in which event the directions of the Police Officer
shall be complied with. (1979 Code § 11-3-10)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: No Parking Rules
6-2-2: No Parking Zones; Limited Parking; Penalties
6-2-3: Emergency Condition; Snow Removal
6-2-4: Loading Zones
6-2-5: No Parking Of Restricted Vehicles
6-2-6: Commercial Vehicles
6-2-1: NO PARKING RULES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle, at any time, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other vehicles or in compliance with the direction of
traffic Police Officers or traffic signs, to stand in any of the following
places:
   A.   In any intersection.
   B.   In a crosswalk.
   C.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or the approach thereto.
   D.   Between a safety island or safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a
safety zone.
   E.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or a through street sign
on the approaching side.
   F.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.
   G.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle reduces the usable width
of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
   H.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   I.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the street side opposite the entrance to such station within seventy
five feet (75') of the entrance.
   K.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   L.   On any Village owned terrace lying between the cement or asphalt street
curb and the adjacent sidewalk running parallel thereto. (1979 Code § 11-2-1)
6-2-2: NO PARKING ZONES; LIMITED PARKING; PENALTIES:
   A.   No Parking Zones: The parts of streets in the Village designated by the
Board of Trustees, and posted as such, shall be no parking zones, and no
vehicle shall be parked in such no parking zone at any time as posted except
where an indented curb allows parking space entirely between the established
curbline and the sidewalk. The Village Board may also from time to time
establish streets and parts of streets as no parking zones between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., and when signs prohibiting
parking between such hours are posted on such streets and parts of streets, no
vehicle shall be parked in such streets and parts of streets between such
hours, except where an indented curb allows parking space entirely between the
established curbline and the sidewalk.
   B.   Limited Parking Zones: The parts of streets in the Village designated
to be limited parking zones by the Board of Trustees, and posted as such, shall
be limited parking zones, and no vehicle shall be parked in any such limited
parking zone for a longer time than designated. (1979 Code § 11-2-2)
      1.   Parking shall be permitted on the west side of Wesley Avenue between
West Hitt Street and Sunset Lane. (Ord. 05-01-14, 5-13-2014)
      2.   The following location is designated as a commercial loading or
unloading zone on Mondays through Fridays between the hours of five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.: The north side of E. Front Street
between the westerly edge of Sullivan's Grocery Store and the easterly edge of
Sullivan's Grocery Store. (Ord. 09-01-15, 9-8-2015)
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on the south side of E.
Front Street between the following locations during the hours from five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.: Fifteen feet (15') east of the fire
hydrant located next to 401 E. Front Street and the utility pole located next
to 311 E. Front Street.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on the south side of E.
Front Street between the following locations during the hours from five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.: The intersection of N. Ogle Street
and E. Front Street and thirty feet (30') east of said intersection. (Ord. 10-
02-15, 10-13-2015)
   C.   Penalty; Failure To Pay Fine:
      1.   It shall be the duty of members of the Police Department:
         a.   To take the State vehicle license plate number of all vehicles
parked in violation of the provisions of subsections A and B of this section
and to leave on such vehicle, in accordance with the instructions of the
Chairman of the Streets and Alleys Committee, a notice of such violation in the
form approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village requiring
payment of a fine of five dollars ($5.00) for each violation of the provisions
of subsection A or B of this section to the Village Clerk before twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on the seventh day following such violation; and
         b.   To report the same information to the Chief of Police upon an
accompanying portion of such form or notice.
      2.   If the fine of five dollars ($5.00), as provided in subsection C1a
of this section, for any violation, is not received by the Village Clerk by
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the seventh day following such violation, the
Chief of Police shall cause a notification of such violation in the form
approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village, to be mailed to
the registered owner of such vehicle, if the name and address of such
registered owner can be determined.
      3.   If the fine of five dollars ($5.00), as provided in subsection C1a
of this section, is not received by the Village Clerk within three (3) days
after the mailing of such notification, or after the seventh day following such
violation if the name and address of the registered owner cannot be determined,
the Chief of Police shall cause a complaint to be made by the member of the
Police Department who reported such violation.
      4.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of subsection A
or B of this section and who shall fail to pay the fine of five dollars ($5.00)
as provided in subsection C1a of this section, for each violation in such
manner that the same shall be received by the Village Clerk by twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon of the seventh day following such violation or within the further
period of three (3) days after the mailing of notice of such violation to the
registered owner of the vehicle with which such violation was committed if the
name and address of such registered owner can be determined, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than eight dollars ($8.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs for each violation of the provision of
subsection A or B of this section, for which such fine of five dollars ($5.00)
is not paid as aforesaid. (1979 Code § 11-2-2; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-3: EMERGENCY CONDITION; SNOW REMOVAL:
It is declared and ordained that any accumulation of snowfall of a depth of two
inches (2") or more, as declared and determined by the Village Street
Department employee in charge and Village Police Officer on duty, creates an
emergency on the streets and highways of the Village.
   A.   Snow Removal Operation: It shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle on any public street in the Village for a period of forty eight (48)
hours after a snowfall of two inches (2") or more has accumulated, except:
      1.   Vehicles may be parked on that side of the street where the even
numbered buildings are or would be located between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. on that day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day on
even calendar days.
      2.   Vehicles may be parked on that side of the street where odd numbered
buildings are or would be located between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. that day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the following day on odd
calendar days.
      3.   The restrictions as set forth above shall not apply at any time to
the parking of vehicles on Sunset Lane between Seminary Avenue and Wesley
Avenue.
      4.   This section shall not affect other parking restrictions and shall
not be deemed to permit parking where otherwise prohibited by this section or
other ordinances.
      5.   No person shall, at any time during an emergency, park or permit any
vehicle to park or stand on the following streets within the Village:
Center Street from Seminary Avenue to McKendrie Avenue,
Front Street from Wesley Avenue to McKendrie Avenue,
Main Street from Seminary Avenue to McKendrie Avenue,
Wesley Avenue from Lincoln Street to Illinois Route 64,
unless such natural obstruction has been removed or abated. (1979 Code § 11-2-
3)
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense; however, the notice of parking ticket
violation may contain a provision that any person violating the parking
provision of this section may avoid a court appearance and a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) by
paying the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) to the Office of the Village Clerk
within forty eight (48) hours after issuance of the notice and complaint of
said parking violation, or by paying fifteen dollars ($15.00) to the Office of
the Village Clerk more than forty eight (48) hours after the issuance of said
notice and complaint, but less than seven (7) days after the issuance of said
notice and complaint. The Police Department is authorized to have any
automobile, truck, tractor, wagon, trailer or combination thereof, towed to and
stored at a commercial towing service location at the expense of the owner or
operator of such. (1979 Code § 11-2-3; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-4: LOADING ZONES:
During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for longer than is necessary to load or
unload passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand
any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any
of the following places:
   A.   In any public alley during any hour of the day or night.
   B.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   C.   At any place not to exceed seventy feet (70') along the curb before the
entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M., except on a Sunday.
   D.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business.
   E.   On either side of East and West Hitt Street (Illinois Highway Route 64)
from the west Village limits to the railroad right-of- way. (1979 Code § 11-2-
4)
6-2-5: NO PARKING OF RESTRICTED VEHICLES:
   A.   For purposes of this section, a "restricted vehicle" shall include
semitrucks, semitrailers, any vehicle with a gross weight of sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds or more, motorhomes, recreational vehicles, travel trailers,
car haulers, car hauler trailers, utility trailers, boat trailers, and any
other type of pull type trailer, and regardless of whether the trailer is of an
"open" or "closed" type.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person or entity shall
park, stand, or allow the parking or standing, of a restricted vehicle upon any
street or alley within the Village.
   C.   A restricted vehicle owned and/or operated by the Village or by any
person or entity engaged in providing a delivery or commercial service to a
specific property located within the Village shall be permitted to park upon
any adjacent street or alley for such time as is reasonably necessary to
complete its particular delivery or commercial service. The parking of said
restricted vehicle shall not block other vehicles from traveling upon such
street or alley, nor shall it block the driveway of any premises without the
permission of the owner or occupant of such premises.
   D.   Owners of recreational type vehicles, including motorhomes,
recreational vehicles, travel trailers and boat trailers, may park such
restricted vehicles on the street in front of their own property for the
purpose of loading or unloading for a period of no more than twenty-four (24)
hours.
   E.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day that an offense continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. The Police Department is authorized to tow and
store (at the expense of the owner or operator) any restricted vehicle in
violation of this section at a commercial towing service location. (Ord. 02-01-
16, 2-9-2016; amd. 2017 Code; 12-03-20, 12-22-2020)
6-2-6: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Parking Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle to
park within one hundred feet (100') of any intersection, except for the purpose
of making a temporary stop for the purpose of making pick ups or deliveries.
(1979 Code § 11-2-6)
   B.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
this section shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day during or which a violation occurs or continues. (1979
Code § 11-2-6; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Operator And Snowmobile Requirements And Restrictions
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
OPERATE: To control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR: A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners. (1979 Code § 11-6-1)
6-3-2: OPERATOR AND SNOWMOBILE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following
circumstances:
   A.   Private Property: On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of said property.
   B.   Public Grounds Or Property: On public school grounds, park property,
playgrounds and recreational areas without express provision or permission to
do so by the proper public authority.
   C.   Loud Noise: In a manner so as to create loud unnecessary noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   D.   Careless Or Reckless Manner: In a careless, reckless or negligent
manner so as to endanger the safety of any person or the property of any other
person.
   E.   Nonregistered Snowmobile: Without having such snowmobile registered as
provided by statute.
   F.   Route Exceptions:
      1.   Upon any right-of-way or any public street or alley within the
Village except on the following parts of streets in the Village:
East Hitt Street between East Route 64 and Leaf River Road.
McKendrie Avenue between north Village limits and south Village limits.
      2.   Snowmobilers who live in the Village shall be allowed to ride the
shortest direct route to approved Village route; police to approve direct
route.
   G.   Hours Of Operation: No snowmobile shall be operated in the Village
except:
      1.   Sundays: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., but
not during church hours.
      2.   Monday through Thursday: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. (1979 Code § 11-6-2)
      3.   Fridays, Saturdays and holidays: Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. (1979 Code § 11-6-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   H.   Speed Limit: Fifteen (15) miles per hour. Penalty for violation to be
the same as for other vehicles.
   I.   Approved Route And Map:
      1.   Approved route shall be well marked.
      2.   Map of approved route shall be published and a copy on file in the
Village Hall.
   J.   Unattended Vehicles: It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave
or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public property while the
motor is running or with the keys left in the ignition.
   K.   Equipment Required: All snowmobiles operated within the Village shall
have the following equipment:
      1.   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle; and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device on
said vehicle; and
      2.   Adequate brakes in good working order and at least one (1) headlight
and one (1) taillight.
   L.   Traffic Rules And Regulations: Each person operating a snowmobile shall
strictly observe all traffic signs and signals and all other traffic rules and
regulations applicable thereto, and shall obey the orders and directions of any
Police Officer of the Village authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
   M.   Yield At Intersections: All snowmobiles operating within the Village
shall yield at all intersections. (1979 Code § 11-6-2)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Abandonment Of Vehicles Prohibited
6-4-3: Towing Vehicles; Establishing Tow Zones
6-4-4: Storing Or Parking Dismantled Vehicles; Nuisance; Exceptions
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is
the subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease thereof with the
right of purchase upon the performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purposes of this chapter.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt
from registration; excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1979 Code § 11-7-1)
6-4-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   A.   A person commits abandonment of a vehicle when he is the owner of a
vehicle that is within the Village limits and:
      1.   That is left unattended and is creating a traffic hazard or nuisance
because of its position in relation to the highway;
      2.   That is left unattended and its physical appearance is causing the
impedance of traffic;
      3.   That is left unattended upon any public way and is parked illegally
and in violation of the law;
      4.   That is occupying any portion of a street or alley in violation of a
limited parking zone for a vehicle of five (5) times the permitted parking
time;
      5.   That has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or
more and which is unlicensed, uninsured and which is not stored within a
building;
      6.   That is in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of
being driven in its condition and is apparently deserted;
      7.   That is left unattended upon private property without the property
owner's consent. (1979 Code § 11-7-2)
   B.   Violation of this section is a petty offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and the owner shall be required to make disposition on the
vehicle. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (1979 Code § 11-7-2; amd. 2017 Code)
6-4-3: TOWING VEHICLES; ESTABLISHING TOW ZONES:
   A.   The Police Department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to
remove and tow away or to direct a commercial towing service to tow away any
vehicle in violation of this chapter, or that may be lost, stolen or unclaimed.
   B.   Towed vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 to 5/4-214.
   C.   When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is
authorized by a Police Officer, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible
for all towing costs and storage fees. These costs shall be in addition to any
fine levied for a violation of this chapter. The towing company shall be
permitted to retain the vehicle until all reasonable commercial towing and
storage charges are paid.
   D.   All towed vehicles shall first be searched for valuables and the
contents inventoried.
   E.   In any event any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any
vehicle upon any public way, members of the Police Department are hereby
authorized to remove or relocate any such vehicle from one (1) location to any
other location.
   F.   Any vehicle parked on any of the following designated streets during
the hours when parking thereon is prohibited may also be removed and towed away
as herein provided:
Center Street from McKendrie Avenue to Seminary Avenue.
Front Street from McKendrie Avenue to Wesley Avenue.
Main Street from McKendrie Avenue to Seminary Avenue.
Wesley Avenue from Lincoln Avenue to Hitt Street. (1979 Code § 11-7-3)
6-4-4: STORING OR PARKING DISMANTLED VEHICLES; NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Storing, Parking Or Leaving: No person shall park, store, leave or
permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which
is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or
partially dismantled condition whether attended or not upon any property within
the Village for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. The
presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or
partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby
declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the
provisions of this section. This section shall not apply to any vehicle
enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in
connection with a business enterprise, actively operated with an office on the
subject premises and properly operated in the appropriate business zone,
pursuant to the zoning laws of the Village, or to any motor vehicle in operable
condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or
raceways. Further, this section shall not apply to any vehicle which is
inoperative, dismantled or partially dismantled as a result of repair or
maintenance work being performed by the owner of said vehicle on his property;
provided, that said vehicle can be repaired and made operative within fourteen
(14) days.
   B.   Notice To Remove: Whenever it comes to the attention of the Chief of
Police that any nuisance as defined in subsection A of this section exists in
the Village, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land
where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the
owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the
nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this section.
   C.   Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be
heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle
and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located,
either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of
removal and disposition by the Village, the owner or occupant of the private
property where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
   D.   Notice Procedure: The Chief of Police shall give notice of removal to
the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located at least five
(5) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice
when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property
on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by certified mail
to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known
address.
   E.   Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal
within the time specified in this section, and the notice shall advise that
upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the Village or its designee
shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the
owner or occupant of the property. (1979 Code § 11-7-4)
   F.   Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or
their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the
Village Board of Trustees within the five (5) day period of compliance
prescribed in subsection D of this section for the purpose of defending the
charges by the Village. (1979 Code § 11-7-4; amd. 2017 Code)
   G.   Procedure For Hearing: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable
after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are
directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three
(3) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the Village and the persons
to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and
evidence as either party deems necessary.
   H.   Removal Of Motor Vehicles From Property: If the violation described in
the notice has not been remedied within the five (5) day period of compliance,
or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing
is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed, the Chief of Police or
his designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor
vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon
private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of
this section.
   I.   Notice Of Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such
vehicle, the Chief of Police shall give notice to the registered owner of the
vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property
from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle, or vehicles, has been
impounded and stored for violation of this section. The notice shall give the
location of where the vehicle or vehicles are stored and the costs incurred by
the Village for removal.
   J.   Disposition Of Vehicles: Removed vehicles shall be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-203 and 5/4-204. (1979 Code § 11-7-4)
   K.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall
be deemed a separate offense. (1979 Code § 11-7-4; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 5
NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Regulation Of Non-Highway Vehicles
6-5-4: Insurance Requirements
6-5-5: Seatbelts Required
6-5-6: Permit Required
6-5-7: Violations
6-5-1: OPERATION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
The use of the non-highway vehicles specified in section
6-5-2 of this chapter on the roadways of the Village shall be permissible
subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01-20, 10-27-2020)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth in this section:
 
             A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of transporting
GOLF CART:   one (1) or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while
             engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or maintaining the
             condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
             Any recreational off-highway vehicle (UTV) or golf cart. For purposes of this
NON-HIGHWAY  chapter, non-highway vehicles shall not include all-terrain vehicles,
VEHICLE:     neighborhood vehicles, off-highway vehicles and low-speed vehicles, all as
             defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
RECREATIONAL Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel primarily off-highway, sixty
OFF-HIGHWAY  four (64) inches or less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry weight of two
VEHICLE      thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or more non-highway
(UTV):       tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for steering
             control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
             Any streets, roadways, and alleys within the Village limits; provided, that the
ROADWAY(S):  Board of Trustees of the Village may from time to time exclude specific streets,
             roadways, and alleys from the definition. Roadways shall not include any highway
             under the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 10-01-20, 10-27-2020)
 
6-5-3: REGULATION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
   A.   Non-highway vehicles shall be permitted to operate daily solely between
the hours of 6:00 A.M. until 11:00 P.M.
   B.   All non-highway vehicles shall be operated only on roadways where the
posted speed limit is thirty five (35) miles per hour or less. The foregoing
provision shall not prohibit a non-highway vehicle from crossing a roadway at
an intersection where the roadway has a posted speed limit of more than thirty
five (35) miles per hour. All-terrain vehicles, neighborhood vehicles, off-
highway vehicles and low-speed vehicles, all as defined in the Illinois Vehicle
Code, are not permitted on any roadways.
   C.   A person may not operate a non-highway vehicle upon any street,
highway, or roadway unless he or she (i) is eighteen (18) years of age or
older; and (ii) has a valid driver’s license issued in his or her name by the
Illinois Secretary of State or such other applicable foreign jurisdiction.
   D.   No person operating a non-highway vehicle shall make a direct crossing
upon or across any tollroad, interstate highway, or controlled access highway.
A person may make a direct crossing of any other highway under the jurisdiction
of the State at an intersection of the highway with another roadway.
   E.   No non-highway vehicle may be operated on a roadway unless, at a
minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview
mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving
emblem (as required of other vehicles in Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code) on the rear of the non-highway vehicle, headlights that emit a while
light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front, a tail
lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred (100) feet from
the rear, brake lights, and turn signals. When operated on a roadway, a non-
highway vehicle shall have its headlights and tail lamps lighted as required by
Section 12-201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   F.   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a non-highway
vehicle on a roadway while under the influence is subject to Sections 11-500
through 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and all other applicable laws.
   G.   The operation of a non-highway vehicle upon any roadway is subject to
the provisions of Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code concerning the Rules
of the Road and all applicable Village ordinances, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
   H.   No non-highway vehicle shall be operated on any Village sidewalks or
other similar surfaces within the Village limits. (Ord. 10-01-20, 10-27-2020)
6-5-4: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Any person who operates a non-highway vehicle on roadway of the Village shall
be subject to the mandatory insurance requirements under Article VI of Chapter
7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 10-01-20, 10-27-2020)
6-5-5: SEATBELTS REQUIRED:
During the operation of a non-highway vehicle, the operator and all passengers
shall each wear a separate seatbelt.
6-5-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall operate a non-highway vehicle on the Village’s roadways
without first purchasing an annual permit for such non-highway vehicle from the
Village as provided herein. The permit shall be valid, unless suspended or
revoked, from January 1 until December 31 of the year of purchase. The cost of
the permit shall be set from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the
Village; provided, that the cost shall not be prorated based upon the date of
purchase.
   B.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
Village and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Name of insurance carrier and policy number and/or photocopy of
applicable liability insurance coverage card issued specifically for the non-
highway to be operated pursuant to the permit.
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of the non- highway
vehicle;
      4.   A certification from the applicant that the non-highway vehicle
satisfies the requirements of this chapter and the Illinois Vehicle Code; and
      5.   Such other information as the Village may require, including a
release and waiver of liability signed by applicant releasing the Village and
its employees, and agreeing to indemnify and hold the Village harmless,
including the costs of defense, from any and all claims, penalties, costs,
judgments, settlements or causes of action resulting or arising from the
operation of applicant’s non-highway vehicle on Village streets.
   C.   Each person operating a non-highway vehicle, regardless of whether he
or she is the applicant, shall carry the permit issued by the Village at all
times during the operation of said vehicle. The Village shall also issue a
sticker indicating fro which year the permit is valid. Such sticker shall be
applied to the front of the vehicle and must be visible when viewed from the
front. (Ord. 10-01-20, 10-27- 2020)
6-5-7: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The Village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof or other operator of the non-highway vehicle
has violated any provision of this chapter or there is a finding that the
holder or other operator of the non-highway vehicle cannot safely operate a
non-highway vehicle on Village roadways.
   B.   Additionally, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by payment of a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
not more than seven-hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and the Village’s
enforcement costs incurred, including its attorney fees, for each offense. Any
second or subsequent offense shall result in the revocation of the Village
permit for a period of not less than one nor more than three (3) years and bar
the violator from receiving another permit for the same time period. To the
extent that any violation of this chapter may also constitute a violation of a
criminal statute of the State of Illinois, the violator shall also be subject
to criminal prosecution and all other penalties as permitted by law. (Ord. 10-
01-20, 10-27-2020)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision
7-1-2: Street, Sidewalk Construction And Repairs
7-1-2-1: Datum, Bench Mark
7-1-2-2: Permit Required
7-1-2-3: Bond And Insurance
7-1-2-4: Specifications
7-1-2-5: Barricades
7-1-2-6: Sidewalks; Responsibility
7-1-3: Driveways
7-1-3-1: Permit Required; Fee
7-1-3-2: Application For Permit
7-1-3-3: Construction Specifications
7-1-3-4: Repairs; Maintenance
7-1-4: Excavations
7-1-4-1: Permit Required; Fee
7-1-4-2: Application For Permit; Bond And Insurance
7-1-4-3: Repair; Restore Street Surface
7-1-4-4: Liability For Damages
7-1-5: Placement Of Poles, Wires And Mailbox Posts
7-1-6: Openings In Public Ways
7-1-7: Damage To Pavement
7-1-8: Obstructions; Encroachments
7-1-9: Deposits On Streets Or Sidewalks
7-1-10: Private Use Of Public Ways
7-1-11: Parade Permit; Bond Required
7-1-12: Playing Games On Public Ways
7-1-13: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
7-1-14: Snow Removal From Sidewalk In Commercial District
7-1-15: Depositing Brush On Village Terrace
7-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the Village
shall be under the supervision of the Committee on Streets and Alleys. It shall
have supervision over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be
charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such
public places (except traffic ordinances of the Village) and is hereby
authorized to enforce such Village ordinances. (1979 Code §
7-1-1)
7-1-2: STREET, SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS:
7-1-2-1: DATUM, BENCH MARK:
The United States Geological Survey bench mark at the northeast corner of East
Hitt Street and North McKendrie Avenue between the curb and sidewalk, elevation
above sea level nine hundred sixteen feet (916'), is hereby established as the
Village bench mark for the establishment of grades. (1979 Code §
7-1-2-1)
7-1-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without having
first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the Village Clerk, and shall state the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to issue the
necessary permit if it appears that the terms of this title are being complied
with. (1979 Code §
7-1-2-2)
7-1-2-3: BOND AND INSURANCE:
Each applicant shall furnish a cash bond or a bond with a corporate surety in
such amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as may be determined and approved by the Chairman
of the Committee on Streets and Alleys, or by the President and Board of
Trustees, conditioned to indemnify the Village for any liability, loss or
damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same, and
shall furnish evidence acceptable to the Chairman of the Committee on Streets
and Alleys, or the President and Board of Trustees that the person who is to do
the actual construction work has in force satisfactory public liability and
property damage insurance in limits of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for injuries to each person, three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for injuries in each accident and fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for damage to property in each accident, covering all damages
occasioned by or in any manner resulting from such construction work. (1979
Code §
7-1-2-3)
7-1-2-4: SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   All Village street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity
with the specifications then currently on file in the Office of the Village
Clerk.
   B.   All private streets or roads shall meet the following minimum
requirements prior to acceptance by the Village as a Village street or road:
      1.   A sixty six foot (66') right-of-way.
      2.   A twenty foot (20') bituminous driving surface (hot mix or A-3) with
a minimum eight inches (8") aggregate base.
      3.   If the road is not a through road, then a seventy five foot (75')
diameter cul-de-sac must be at its end. (1979 Code §
7-1-2-4)
7-1-2-5: BARRICADES:
   A.   Requirement:
      1.   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in any such place shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of
such work; such barricades shall be protected by lights at nighttime.
      2.   Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent
injury; and any person properly maintaining any such opening or excavation
while the same remains open shall guard it by proper barricades and lights.
   B.   Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new
pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1979 Code §
7-1-2-5)
7-1-2-6: SIDEWALKS; RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to construct the initial
sidewalk across his property. It shall be the responsibility of the Village to
maintain, repair and to replace said sidewalks when deemed necessary by the
Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys, except those sidewalks that
are part of the lot owners' driveways. (1979 Code §
7-1-2-6)
7-1-3: DRIVEWAYS:
7-1-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any
sidewalk or parkway in the Village without first having obtained a permit
therefor; and the fee for such construction permit shall be as provided in
section
9-1-4 of this Code. (1979 Code §
7-1-3-1; amd. 2017 Code)
7-1-3-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by the fee required. It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to
issue the necessary permit for construction of a driveway. (1979 Code §
7-1-3-2)
7-1-3-3: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Grade Surface: No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to
leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade
shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It
shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same
crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery or
dangerous, or hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion
vary from the grade of the sidewalk, or be other than level.
   B.   Materials: Driveways shall be constructed as per specifications on file
in the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code §
7-1-3-3)
7-1-3-4: REPAIRS; MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstructions and
openings. (1979 Code §
7-1-3-4)
7-1-4: EXCAVATIONS:
7-1-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any excavation in or
across or to tunnel under the curb, gutter or roadway of any street or any
Village property within the corporate limits of the Village without having
first secured a permit therefor from the Village Clerk.
   B.   The fee for such permit shall in all cases be fifty dollars ($50.00)
and shall be payable with the application required by section
7-1-4-2 of this chapter. (1979 Code §
7-1-4-1)
7-1-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; BOND AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Application For Permit: Prior to doing any work involving an excavation
in or across or the tunneling under the curb, gutter or roadway of any street
or any Village property, the person desiring to do the same shall file or cause
to be filed with the Village Clerk an application for a permit therefor. The
said application shall state who the applicant is and where he resides, on
whose behalf the work is to be done, the nature of the work that it is desired
to do and the reason therefor, the size and location of the street surface or
other improvement to be injured or torn up, and the exact location where the
work is to be done. Thereupon the Village Clerk shall transmit such application
to the Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys and said Committee
shall, without delay, investigate the propriety of the application, and if he
finds that a permit for such work should be issued, he shall direct the Village
Clerk to issue said permit on payment of required fees.
   B.   Bond: The applicant shall be required to enter into a cash bond or a
bond with a corporate surety in such amount not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the
applicant will do the work for which he has applied for a permit in a proper
and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the specifications set forth in
section
7-1-4-3 of this chapter, that the applicant will pay any and all damages to the
street surface or improvement that may arise due to operations of the applicant
and that the applicant will pay any and all damages that may be recovered
against the Village to any person or property occasioned by or in any manner
resulting from the operations of the applicant on public property, such bond to
be effective for a duration of one (1) year after the date on which the
applicant has ceased his operations.
   C.   Insurance: The person or firm who is to do the actual construction work
will have in force satisfactory public liability and property damage insurance
in limits of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries
to each person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries in
each accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property in
each accident, covering all damages occasioned by or in any manner resulting
from such construction work. (1979 Code §
7-1-4-2)
7-1-4-3: REPAIR; RESTORE STREET SURFACE:
Any person doing any work involving an excavation in or across or the tunneling
under the curb, gutter or roadway of any street or any Village property
pursuant to the permit referred to in sections
7-1-4-1 and
7-1-4-2 of this chapter, shall promptly restore any street surface or other
improvement which he may injure or tear up. Street surfaces so injured or torn
up shall be restored in accordance with the specifications currently on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code §
7-1-4-3)
7-1-4-4: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
Whoever shall injure or tear up, for any purpose whatsoever, any pavement of
any street, alley, sidewalk, curb or gutter or any part thereof, or dig any
hole, trench, ditch or drain, or dig or remove any sod, stone, curb, earth,
sand or gravel from any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public
property shall be responsible and liable to the Village for all damages to
persons or property in consequence thereof which the Village shall suffer or be
adjudged to pay. (1979 Code §
7-1-4-4)
7-1-5: PLACEMENT OF POLES, WIRES AND MAILBOX POSTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any
poles or wires on or over any public street, alley or other public place
without having first secured a permit therefor from the President and Board of
Trustees.
   B.   Erection and placement of poles or posts for street side U.S. mail
delivery or newspaper delivery on the Village right- of-way or terrace will be
permitted only on lots determined by the U.S. Postal Service to be ineligible
for direct door delivery, but shall be limited to one (1) pole or post per lot.
(1979 Code §
7-1-5)
7-1-6: OPENINGS IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without a permit
therefor from the President and Board of Trustees.
   B.   Openings Guarded: All such lawfully maintained openings shall be
guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing, or such construction as will
meet the approval of the Committee on Streets and Alleys. (1979 Code §
7-1-6)
7-1-7: DAMAGE TO PAVEMENT:
It shall be unlawful to damage any sidewalk, street or alley pavement. (1979
Code §
7-1-7)
7-1-8: OBSTRUCTIONS; ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction to any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Committee on Streets and
Alleys when necessary in an emergency or in connection with any lawful
construction, repair or removal work. It shall further be unlawful to obstruct
any drain in any public street or alley.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure
which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1979 Code §
7-1-8)
7-1-9: DEPOSITS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Harmful Materials: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street or
public sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or
any waste material, or any glass or other articles which may do injury to any
person, animal or property.
   B.   Merchandise On Sidewalks: Merchandise or other articles may be
deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width
of the sidewalk is not thereby reduced to less than four feet (4'); and
provided, that no such article shall remain on such walk for more than one-half
(1/2) hour.
   C.   Grass Clippings: It shall be unlawful to deposit grass clippings on any
street within the Village. It shall be the responsibility of the individual
property owner to ensure that grass clippings from said owner's property are
not deposited on any street within the Village. (1979 Code §
7-1-9; amd. 2017 Code)
7-1-10: PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public
place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or
mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavements except by permission of
the Board of Trustees upon application to same. (1979 Code §
7-1-10)
7-1-11: PARADE PERMIT; BOND REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to conduct a parade connected with a circus upon any
public street, alley or other public way or place in the Village unless a
permit therefor (in addition to the license therefor required by subsection 5-
4-2A of this Code) is first obtained from the President and Board of Trustees.
Such permit shall specify the route to be taken and shall be accompanied by a
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to indemnify
the Village for any loss, damage or liability incurred or caused by the conduct
of such exhibition or parade. (1979 Code § 3-5-2-2)
7-1-12: PLAYING GAMES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place, where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with
traffic or pedestrians unless the street is so designated as a play area and
properly signposted. (1979 Code §
7-1-11)
7-1-13: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, or with similar material designed to cause injury to
persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere in the Village
limits, except with written permission from the Village Board. (1979 Code §
7-1-12)
7-1-14: SNOW REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALK IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Responsibility Of Lot Owners: It shall be the responsibility of the lot
owner adjacent to the sidewalks on the following described streets to remove
therefrom any snowfall accumulation by six o'clock (6:00) P.M., the evening of
the accumulation (Sundays excepted):
East Front, the north and south sides, from Wesley Avenue to McKendrie Avenue.
Main Street, the north and south sides, from McKendrie Avenue to Seminary.
Wesley Avenue, the east and west sides, from Hitt Street to Center Street.
   B.   Notice: Whenever it comes to the attention of the Chairman or
Superintendent of the Streets and Sidewalk Department that a lot owner has
failed to comply with this provision, then a written notice shall be served
upon the occupant of the land adjacent to the sidewalk or in case there is no
occupant or the occupant is not present, then upon the adjacent building or
land notifying the owner of the necessity to remove snow from the adjacent
sidewalk. If the snow is not removed, the Streets and Sidewalk Department is
authorized to remove the snow.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each act in violation of any of
the provisions herein shall be deemed a separate offense. (1979 Code §
7-1-13)
7-1-15: DEPOSITING BRUSH ON VILLAGE TERRACE:
   A.   Deposits Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or
place brush on any Village owned terrace or public way where such deposit
covers and/or conceals a water shutoff on said terrace or public way. In
addition to the penalty contained herein, any person placing or depositing
brush on a water shutoff which is subsequently damaged by the Village in the
removal of said brush, shall be obligated to reimburse the Village for any and
all expenses incurred by the Village in the repair or replacement of the water
shutoff and/or repair of any Village equipment damaged in the removal.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each act in violation of the
provisions herein shall be deemed a separate offense. (1979 Code §
7-1-14)
CHAPTER 2
SIGNS AND AWNINGS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permits; Fees
7-2-2: Construction Requirements
7-2-3: Height Above Walk
7-2-4: Inspections
7-2-1: PERMITS; FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall erect or maintain any sign or
signboard, or rigid canopy over any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
in the Village without having first obtained a permit therefor as is herein
provided. Permits for such signs or canopies shall be issued by the Village
Clerk upon the payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and shall designate the
location of the proposed sign or canopy.
   B.   Temporary Permit: Temporary permits may be issued for the maintenance
of a temporary sign or canopy for a short time, upon the payment of a fee of
five dollars ($5.00) for each week or fraction thereof that such sign or canopy
may be maintained. (1979 Code §
7-2-1)
7-2-2: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All signs and canopies extending over any sidewalk, street, alley or other
public place shall be securely fastened and constructed. (1979 Code §
7-2-2)
7-2-3: HEIGHT ABOVE WALK:
The lowest part of any sign or canopy, or of any nonrigid awning or support
thereof which extends over any public way shall be at least seven feet (7')
above the level of the walk or public way over which it extends; but no such
sign shall be maintained over any public way used by vehicles if any part of it
or of its support is less than fifteen feet (15') above the level of such
public way. (1979 Code §
7-2-3)
7-2-4: INSPECTIONS:
The Committee on Streets and Alleys may inspect at regular intervals every
sign, canopy or awning which extends over any sidewalk, street, alley or other
public way. If any such sign or canopy is found to be insecurely fastened, the
member of such committee making such inspection shall report this fact to the
owner of the sign, canopy or awning or to the owner or occupant of the premises
on which it is fastened, and such owner or occupant shall either repair or
remove such sign, canopy or awning within ten (10) days thereafter. (1979 Code
§
7-2-4)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permits Required
7-3-2: Dangerous Trees
7-3-3: Poles And Wires
7-3-4: Gas Pipes
7-3-5: Excavations
7-3-6: Injury To Trees Or Shrubs
7-3-7: Advertisements And Notices
7-3-8: Diseased Trees
7-3-8-1: Declaration Of Nuisance
7-3-8-2: Enforcement Of Provisions
7-3-8-3: Village Owned Trees; Removal
7-3-8-4: Planting On Public Terraces
7-3-8-5: Penalty
7-3-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
   A.   Planting: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public
street or parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit
therefor. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the
direction and approval of the Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys.
   B.   Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub
in any such public place without having secured a permit therefor. Applications
for such permits shall be made to the Chairman of the Committee on Streets and
Alleys, and approved by such Committee before issuance. (1979 Code §
7-3-1)
7-3-2: DANGEROUS TREES:
   A.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the Village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting or of the
premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
   B.   Any tree or limb of a tree which becomes likely to fall on or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which
such tree grows or stands.
   C.   The Committee on Streets and Alleys may trim any such tree or shrub or
remove any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be done away with. (1979 Code §
7-3-2)
7-3-3: POLES AND WIRES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in
any public street, parkway or other public place without permission from the
Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys.
   B.   Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or
other public places shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise
concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any
trees and shrubs in such places as far as may be possible, and shall keep all
such trees and shrubs near such poles and wires properly trimmed, subject to
the supervision of the Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys, so that
no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees
and bushes by their contact. (1979 Code §
7-3-3)
7-3-4: GAS PIPES:
Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the Village shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes free from
leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to any trees or shrubs. (1979
Code §
7-3-4)
7-3-5: EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, whenever possible.
(1979 Code §
7-3-5)
7-3-6: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBS:
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted or growing in any such
public place. (1979 Code §
7-3-6)
7-3-7: ADVERTISEMENTS AND NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or
shrub in any such public place. (1979 Code §
7-3-7)
7-3-8: DISEASED TREES:
7-3-8-1: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Dutch Elm Diseased Trees: Trees of all species and varieties of ulmus
(elm) and zelkova infected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as determined
by laboratory analysis, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall
be removed and burned within ten (10) days following notification of the
discovery of such infection. It shall be unlawful for any person owning
property whereon such a tree is situated to possess or keep such a tree after
the expiration of ten (10) days following notification of the discovery of said
infection.
   B.   Elm Bark Beetle Breeding Places: Trees or parts thereof of ulmus (elm)
or zelkova in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for
the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistristus, are hereby declared to be
public nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for the person owning property
whereon the same is situated to possess or keep the same. (1979 Code §
7-3-8-1)
7-3-8-2: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
The Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys of the Village is charged
with enforcement of this section and to that end he or such person or forestry
service as he may designate, may enter upon private property at all reasonable
times for purposes of inspecting trees thereon, and may remove such specimens
as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same
are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the Chairman of
the Committee on Streets and Alleys or his representative from entering on
private property for the purpose of carrying out his duties hereunder, or to
interfere with the Chairman of the Committee on Streets and Alleys or his
representative in the lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of
this section. (1979 Code §
7-3-8-2; amd. 2017 Code)
7-3-8-3: VILLAGE OWNED TREES; REMOVAL:
Trees on Village owned property requiring removal shall be removed at the
expense of the Village. (1979 Code §
7-3-8-5)
7-3-8-4: PLANTING ON PUBLIC TERRACES:
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree on a public terrace or that portion of
the property between the roadway portion of public streets and the lot line of
the property owners, other than the trees hereinafter listed and providing for
spacing, terrace width and power line restrictions as set forth herein:
Trees                       Minimum Minimum
                            Spacing Terrace Width Power Lines
Common Name Scientific Name (Feet)  (Feet)
Trees                                         Minimum Minimum
                                              Spacing Terrace Width Power Lines
Common Name             Scientific Name       (Feet)  (Feet)

White oak               Quercus alba          50      10            No
Bur oak                 Quercus macrocarpa    50      10            No
Sugar maple             Acer saccharum and    40      8             No
                        cultivars
Red oak                 Quercus rubra         40      8             No
Pin oak                 Quercus palustris     40      8             No
Swamp white oak         Quercus bicolor       40      8             No
Hackberry               Celtis occidentalis   40      8             No
River birch             Betula nigra          40      8             No
Katsuratree             Cercidiphyllum        40      8             No
                        japonicum
Ginkgo                  Ginkgo biloba "Autumn 40      8             No
                        gold"
Hybrid elm              Ulmus "Homestead"     40      8             No
                        Tilia cordata         40      6             No
Linden                  "Greenspire"
                        Tilia x euchlora      40      6             No
                        "Redmond"
Norway maple            Acer platanoides and  40      6             No
                        cultivars
                        Gleditsia triacanthos 40      6             No
Honeylocust (thornless) "Imperial"            40      6             No
                        "Moraine"             40      6             No
Red maple               Acer rubrum and       40      6             No
                        cultivars
Eastern redbud          Cercis canadensis     30      10            No
Hornbeam                Carpinus betulus      30      6             No
                        Carpinus caroliniana  30      6             No
Pear                    Pyrus calleryana      30      6             No
Ironwood (hophornbeam)  Ostrya virginiana     30      6             No
                        Malus                 25      10            Yes
                        "Red jewel"           25      10            Yes
                        "Red splendor"        25      10            Yes
                        "Zumi"                25      10            Yes
                        "Adams"               25      10            Yes
Flower crab             "Snowdrift"           25      10            Yes
                        "Indian magic"        25      10            Yes
                        "Prairie fire"        25      10            Yes
                        "Candied apple"       25      10            Yes
                        "Donald Wyman"        25      10            Yes
                        "David"               25      10            Yes
                        "Profusion"           25      10            Yes
Hawthorn (thornless)    Crataegus crus-galli  25      10            Yes
Pagoda dogwood          Cornus alternifolia   25      10            Yes
 
(1979 Code § 7-3-8-6)
7-3-8-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
7-3-8 shall be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day upon which such violation shall continue. Imposition of
any penalty for a violation of this section
7-3-8 shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the Village to collect
the costs of removal of such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of
this section
7-3-8 where it is necessary for the Village to remove such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of this section
7-3-8. (1979 Code § 7-3-8-7; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section:
7-4-1: Purpose
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: Permitted Use
7-4-4: Permit Requirements
7-4-5: Application Fees
7-4-6: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
7-4-7: Annual Fee
7-4-8: Miscellaneous
7-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known as the "Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Chapter". The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards
and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way
on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (P.A. 100-0585), as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-10-
2018)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used herein, shall have the following meanings:
 
                  Communications equipment that transmits or receives
ANTENNA:          electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision
                  of wireless services.
                  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
APPLICABLE CODES: codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
                  local amendments to those codes, including the National
                  Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT:        Any person who submits an application, as more specifically
                  provided for herein, and is a wireless provider.
                                        A request submitted by an applicant to
                                        the Village for a permit to collocate
                                        small wireless facilities, and a
APPLICATION:                            request that includes the installation
                                        of a new utility pole for such
                                        collocation, as well as any applicable
                                        fee for the review of such application.
                                        To install, mount, maintain, modify,
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION:               operate, or replace wireless facilities
                                        on or adjacent to a wireless support
                                        structure or utility pole.
                                        Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
                                        522(6), as amended; information
                                        service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (24), as amended; telecommunications
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:                 service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
                                        (53), as amended; mobile service, as
                                        defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
                                        amended; or wireless service other than
                                        mobile service.
                                        A cable operator, as defined in 47
                                        U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider
                                        of information service, as defined in
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER:        47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a
                                        telecommunications carrier, as defined
                                        in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a
                                        wireless provider.
FCC:                                    The Federal Communications Commission
                                        of the United States.
FEE:                                    A one-time charge.
                                        A building, property, or site, or group
                                        of buildings, properties, or sites that
                                        are either (i) listed in the National
                                        Register of Historic Places or formally
                                        determined eligible for listing by the
                                        Keeper of the National Register, the
                                        individual who has been delegated the
                                        authority by the federal agency to list
                                        properties and determine their
                                        eligibility for the National Register,
                                        in accordance with Section VI(D)(1)(a)
                                        (i) through Section VI(D)(l)(a)(v) of
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK: the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
                                        codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C;
                                        or (ii) designated as a locally
                                        landmarked building, property, site, or
                                        historic district by an ordinance
                                        adopted by the village pursuant to a
                                        preservation program that meets the
                                        requirements of the Certified Local
                                        Government Program of the Illinois
                                        State Historic Preservation Office or
                                        where such certification of the
                                        preservation program by the Illinois
                                        State Historic Preservation Office is
                                        pending.
                                        A federal or state statute, common law,
LAW:                                    code, rule, regulation, order or local
                                        ordinance or resolution.
                         A small wireless facility that is not larger in
                         dimension than twenty-four inches (24") in length,
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12")
                         in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no
                         longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE:  A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
                         public rights-of-way.
                         A written authorization required by the Village to
PERMIT:                  perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a
                         project.
                         An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
PERSON:                  partnership, association, trust, or other entity or
                         organization.
                         The functional division of the federal government, the
                         state, a unit of local government, or a special
                         purpose district located in whole or in part within
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY:    this State, that provides or has authority to provide
                         firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
                         emergency services to respond to and manage emergency
                         incidents.
RATE:                    A recurring charge.
                         The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
RIGHT-OF-WAY:            highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility
                         easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way
                         does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
                         A wireless facility that meets both of the following
                         qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an
                         enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume
                         or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
                         elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
                         could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more
                         than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
                         equipment attached directly to a utility pole
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: associated with the facility is cumulatively no more
                         than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in volume. The
                         following types of associated ancillary equipment are
                         not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
                         electric meter, concealment elements,
                         telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
                         enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
                         switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
                         the connection of power and other services.
 
                                  A pole or similar structure that is used in
                                  whole or in part by a communications service
UTILITY POLE:                     provider or for electric distribution,
                                  lighting, traffic control, or a similar
                                  function.
                                  Equipment at a fixed location that enables
                                  wireless communications between user
                                  equipment and a communications network,
                                  including: (i) equipment associated with
                                  wireless communications; and (ii) radio
                                  transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-
                                  optic cable, regular and backup power
                                  supplies, and comparable equipment,
                                  regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY:                Wireless facility includes small wireless
                                  facilities. Wireless facility does not
                                  include: (i) the structure or improvements
                                  on, under, or within which the equipment is
                                  collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
                                  facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
                                  is between wireless support structures or
                                  utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic
                                  cable that is otherwise not immediately
                                  adjacent to or directly associated with an
                                  antenna.
                                  Any person authorized to provide
                                  telecommunications service in the state that
                                  builds or installs wireless communication
                                  transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: wireless support structures, or utility poles
                                  and that is not a wireless services provider
                                  but is acting as an agent or a contractor for
                                  a wireless services provider for the
                                  application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER:                A wireless infrastructure provider or a
                                  wireless services provider.
                                  Any services provided to the general public,
                                  including a particular class of customers,
WIRELESS SERVICES:                and made available on a nondiscriminatory
                                  basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
                                  whether at a fixed location or mobile,
                                  provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER:       A person who provides wireless services.
                                  A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
                                  tower, either guyed or self-supporting;
                                  billboard; or other existing or proposed
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE:       structure designed to support or capable of
                                  supporting wireless facilities. Wireless
                                  support structure does not include a utility
                                  pole. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-10-2018)
 
7-4-3: PERMITTED USE:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses within the
Village and are subject to administrative staff review, except as provided for
in section 7-4-6(H) relating to height exceptions and variances. (Ord. 07-01-
18, 7-10-2018)
7-4-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a
small wireless facility. Applications received and processed, and permits
issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be subject to the following conditions
and requirements:
A.   Small Cell Facilities Permit Application: Prior to issuance of a permit
under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities onto
utility poles or wireless support structures, a wireless provider shall submit
an application to the Village Clerk which contains the following information:
   1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
   2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
   3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
   4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
   5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
   6.   Certification that collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
   7.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
   8.   Proof of such insurance carried by the wireless provider demonstrating
the wireless provider's compliance with the insurance requirements of section
4-7-8(F) herein.
B.   Submission of Application: Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date
due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
C.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
   1.   Priority: The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
   2.   Existing Utility Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy-five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of: (i) ninety (90) days
after submission of the complete application; or (ii) ten (10) days after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
   3.   New Utility Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new
utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed
approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed application.
   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of: (i) one hundred twenty
(120) days after submission of the complete application; or (ii) ten (10) days
after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of the
deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
   4.   Denial Of Application: The Village shall deny an application which does
not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations
that concern public safety, or the conditions contained in section 7-4-
6 herein, require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be
replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
   The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies
an application.
   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and
resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial
shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the Village's review period.
   The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application.
   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
   5.   Small Wireless Facilities Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days
after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal
utility pole, and in any event prior to the commencement of installation, the
Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Small Wireless Facilities
Attachment Agreement, to be provided by the Village, for the initial
collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent
approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal
utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a License
Supplement of the Master Small Wireless Facilities Attachment Agreement. The
Master Small Wireless Facilities Attachment Agreement contains additional
requirements that are applicable to the wireless provider and the small
wireless facility.
D.   Application Approval: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an
application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice
of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
E.   Tolling Period: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
   1.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
   2.   A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
F.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant shall be allowed to file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up
to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the
same type of structure.
   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village
may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless collocations for which incomplete information has
been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are
denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is
approved in a consolidated application.
G.   Permit Duration: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of five
(5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
   If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-10-2018)
7-4-5: APPLICATION FEES:
A.   Existing Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure: Every application for
the collocation of small wireless facilities upon existing utility poles or
wireless support structures shall be charged an application fee according to
the following fee schedule:
   1.   Application For Single Small Wireless Facility: Applicant shall pay an
application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650) for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure.
   2.   Consolidated Applications: Applicant shall pay an application fee of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350) for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
B.   New Utility Pole Or Wireless Support Structure: Every application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility involving the installation of a new
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be charged an application fee
according to the following fee schedule:
   1.   Application involving installation of a new utility pole or wireless
support structure. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand
dollars ($1000) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application
that includes the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support
structure.
C.   Application Fee Non-refundable: Notwithstanding any contrary provision of
state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be
accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-
refundable.
D.   Application And Permit Not Required: The Village shall not require an
application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way for:
   1.   Routine maintenance;
   2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with this section; or
   3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of
micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable codes.
   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-10-2018)
7-4-6: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
A.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
B.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
C.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless
provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with
the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance
with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such interference,
and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by
the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall
remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
   The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on
such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
D.   Prohibited Areas: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole
or the electric supply zone of the pole.
   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
E.   Compliance With Applicable Law: The wireless provider shall comply with
all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern
public safety.
F.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design
standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district. At a
minimum, the wireless provider shall screen or conceal, as applicable, all
pole-mounted and ground-mounted equipment in the public right-of-way with
aesthetic features, such as canisters, paint, screen walls and landscaping, as
approved by the Village with each permit. Concealing and screening shall blend
with or enhance the surrounding area with the use of artistic and/or
architectural detail and shall take into account scale, form, texture,
materials and color and shall conceal the equipment. Concealing and screening
features shall be noted on the site survey and construction drawings submitted
with each application.
G.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements
and Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility
poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to
use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the
alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional
material costs as determined by the applicant.
   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
H.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall
be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
   1.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
   2.   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
I.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth
in this chapter. A request for variance shall be processed by the Village as
follows:
   1.   The Village building official shall decide whether a variance is
authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the variance
request on an individual basis.
   2.   The Village Building Official may authorize a variance only if the
applicant requesting the variance has demonstrated that: (a) one or more
conditions not under the control of the applicant (such as terrain features or
an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make
enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be
achieved by the provision; and (b) all other designs, methods, materials,
locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a
variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   3.   Any applicant aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination, including denial of a variance, made by the building official
under the provision of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the
Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village clerk
within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7)
days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the
appeal.
J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
K.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with
applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning
the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless
provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of
such exceptions or variances.
L.   Under Grounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local
code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that
prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles
in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver,
zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility
poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement
of utility poles.
M.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted
shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the
permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. (Ord. 07-
01-18, 7-10-2018)
7-4-7: ANNUAL FEE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual fee to collocate a small
wireless facility on a Village utility pole according to the following
schedule:
A.   Located On The Right-Of-Way: If the small wireless facility is collocated
on a Village utility pole located in the right-of-way, the wireless provider
shall be charged an annual fee that equals the greater of (i) two hundred
dollars ($200) per year; or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs
related to the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
B.   Located Outside The Right-Of-Way: If the small wireless facility is
collocated on a Village utility pole located outside the right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall be charged an annual fee that equals the actual, direct
and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the
Village utility pole.
   If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-
10-2018)
7-4-8: MISCELLANEOUS:
A.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person
to collocate small wireless facilities on:
   1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
   2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18(c)-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
   For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given
to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to
obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
B.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village that
it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
C.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its Master Small Wireless Facilities
Attachment Agreement or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells
or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. Any such transfer shall be subject in all respects to the terms of
the Master Small Wireless Facilities Attachment Agreement.
D.   Dispute Resolution: The Circuit Court of Ogle County shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on
its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200) per year
per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute.
E.   Indemnification: A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village
harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property
damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the
Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless
against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall
further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to
consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.
F.   Insurance: The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's
own cost and expense, the following insurance:
   1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and
   3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. The
wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy with its
permit application, and in any event, prior to the commencement of installation
of any small wireless facility.
   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 07-01-18, 7-10-
2018)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Turning On Water
8-1-3: Application For Water
8-1-4: Connections; Permits; Fees
8-1-5: Water Rates And Deposits
8-1-6: Payment Of Bills
8-1-7: Nonpayment Of Bills; Procedure
8-1-8: Administration Of Water Fund
8-1-9: Water Meters
8-1-10: Service Pipes And Connections
8-1-11: Resale Of Water Prohibited
8-1-12: Meter Tampering; Stealing Water
8-1-13: Interruption Of Service; Village Not Liable
8-1-14: Water Service Restrictions Outside Corporate Limits
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
CURB COCK: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main
to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also called curb
stop.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act amendments.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The Village Board.
Village: The Village of Mt. Morris.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act.
State Loan: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of waterworks as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond
Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State
of Illinois.
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public water
system.
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the waterworks.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the waterworks will be operated.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement.
Water Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in
the operation of the water system.
Water Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of
the water facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
section
8-1-5 of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge
and the local capital cost if applicable.
WATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water constituent. It is
0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1000 ml) of water. It
has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen- ion
concentration expressed by one (1) of the procedures outlined in the IEPA
Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods. (Ord. 02-01-08, 2-12-
2008)
8-1-2: TURNING ON WATER:
No water from the Village water supply shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person other than the person authorized by the Village to
perform this service. (1979 Code § 7-4-1)
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR WATER:
A.   Every application for water service shall be made by and signed by the
owner of the premises to be served. Every premises served shall constitute a
separate account in the owner's name. All bills for water service shall be the
responsibility of, and sent to, the owner of the premises served. The owner of
the premises served, included successors in title, shall be deemed to be the
applicant, customer, consumer and user for all water service provided to the
premises regardless of whether such owner or successor in title is the end-user
of the water service provided or whether such owner or successor has signed the
service application.
B.   Every application for water service shall constitute an agreement by the
applicant to pay for all water used on the premises through said service and to
comply with all ordinances, rules, regulations and policies of the Village then
in effect or that may thereafter be adopted. The application shall be on forms
provided by the Village Clerk. The Village reserves the right to deny water
service when an application is incorrect or incomplete.
C.   The Village may deny water service to any applicant when such applicant
owes the Village a delinquent bill for service to another premises.
D.   It shall be the duty of the purchaser of any premises within the Village
(including by deed into trust or deed in lieu of foreclosure) to first
ascertain from the Village any delinquent water sendee bill which may have
accrued before purchasing the premises. The purchaser shall notify the Village
in writing of the intention to purchase the property at least five (5) days
prior to the closing date of the purchase. Upon such notice, the Village shall
cause a final reading of the water meter to be taken in order to determine the
amount owed for water services by the selling customer being inactivated at the
premises. Amounts owed by the selling customer shall be paid to the Village
prior to the inactivation of the selling customer's account and activation of a
new account for the purchaser. Failure by the purchaser of the premises to
provide such notice shall cause the purchaser to be added to the delinquent
account and to be jointly and severally liable for the cost of all water
service provided before such reading is made. (1979 Code § 7-4-2; amd. Ord. 07-
02-19, 7-23-2019)
8-1-4: CONNECTIONS; PERMITS; FEES:
   A.   No connection to the Village water system shall be made without a
permit being issued therefor and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been
given to the Village. All such connections shall be made under the supervision
of the Village and no connections shall be covered until the work has been
inspected by the Village or the person authorized by it. Applications for such
connections shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee based upon the following fee schedule for each such connection:
 
Pipe Size   Fee
(Inches)
   3/4 - $ 250.00
   11/4 -500.00
   4 - 6 700.00
   7 - 8 1,000.00
   9 - 131,500.00
   14 - 12,000.00
 
   B.   In addition to the fee as set forth in the above referenced schedule,
there shall be an additional hookup fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
any new construction hookups to the waterworks system extension along Mud Creek
Road east of Nancy Street to Leaf River Road and east along Illinois Highway
64, said waterworks extension project, being more fully described in ordinance
7-1-99 available for inspection in the Office of the Village Clerk. (1979 Code
§ 7-4-3)
8-1-5: WATER RATES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.    Monthly Rates: There shall be and there are hereby established monthly
rates and charges for water of the Village, based upon the amount of water
consumed, as shown by the water meter readings, such rates and charges hereby
established being as follows:
      1.   Commencing March 1, 2013, the monthly rate shall increase to thirty
four dollars twenty nine cents ($34,29) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet
($12.00 per 350 cubic feet and $20.57 per 600 cubic feet). Provided that the
minimum charge for water service will be twelve dollars ($12.00) for each
monthly period or fraction thereof.
      2.   Commencing June 1, 2013, the monthly rate shall increase to thirty
five dollars two cents ($35.02) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet ($12.26 per
350 cubic feet and $21.01 per 600 cubic feet). Provided that the minimum charge
for water service will be twelve dollars twenty six cents ($12.26) for each
monthly period or fraction thereof.
      3.   The minimum charge for water service shall increase automatically
with no further action necessary on the part of the Village Board, as follows:
commencing July 1, 2024, the minimum charge will be twenty-two dollars ($22.00)
for each monthly period or fraction thereof; commencing July 1, 2025, the
minimum charge will be twenty-seven dollars ($27.00) for each monthly period or
fraction thereof; commencing July 1, 2026, the minimum charge will be thirty-
two dollars ($32.00) for each monthly period or fraction thereof; and
commencing July 1, 2027, the minimum charge will be thirty-seven dollars
($37.00) for each monthly period or fraction thereof.
   B.   Outside Corporate Limits: Users of water of the Village located outside
of the corporate limits of the Village shall pay double the rate charged for
water consumed by users within the Village limits as set forth in subsection A
of this section.
   C.   Water Deposit: A deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made
with each application for water service, or for the reinstatement of said
service, for a residential consumer, and the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be made with each application for water service, or for the
reinstatement of said service, for a commercial or industrial consumer. The
deposit so required shall be returned to the applicant upon termination of the
water service and upon payment of all amounts due the Village for water or
sewerage service rendered. If at any time payment to the Village for the
charges to which the Village is entitled for water services rendered is not
made as required, the Village Clerk shall credit the amount owing with all or
so much of said deposit as may be necessary to pay said charges. The provisions
of this section shall not be taken or deemed to be a waiver of the provisions
for nonpayment of bills in section
8-1-7 of this chapter or the right of the Village to refuse water and sewerage
service to any person whose account shall be unpaid.
   D.   Potable Water Service Charges; Billing And Administration: The potable
water service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the potable
water facilities of the Village shall consist of a basic water charge for
operation and maintenance plus replacement; and, if applicable, a debt charge.
      1.   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual
debt service of all outstanding revenue bonds by the number of users. Through
further divisions, the monthly debt service charge can be computed.
      2.   The adequacy of the basic water charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the Village in their
annual audit report. The basic water service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or operation and
maintenance, plus replacement costs.
   E.   Access To Records: The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are
applicable to the Village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the loan agreement and rules of any State loan.
   F.   Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges herein shall be made available to a user within
thirty (30) days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement
over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the
Village Board within thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written
appeal outlining the discrepancies. (1979 Code § 7-4-4; amd. Ord. 02-01-08, 2-
12-2008; Ord. 05-02-10, 5-11-2010, eff. 5-12-2010; 2017 Code; Ord. 07-01-19, 7-
23-2019; Ord. 24-09, 06-25-2024)
8-1-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
   A.   For the purpose of the operation of the water system of the Village,
all residential, commercial, industrial and other establishments in the Village
shall pay the charges and rates hereinabove provided for water service, and
such charges shall be made monthly after the expiration of the monthly period
for which the service has been supplied, and such charge shall be payable
within fifteen (15) days after rendition of the monthly water bill.
   B.   In the event such bills are not paid within said fifteen (15) day
period, a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added thereto.
   C.   Payments by Tenant of Current Bill: The tenant or tenants of a
premises, in order to continue or resume water service for which there is a
delinquency in the payment of bills for water service, may apply to the Village
for such continuance or resumption upon payment of the charges owed for the
most recent month and turn-on fee if required. (1979 Code § 7-4-5; amd. Ord.
07-02-19, 7-23-2019)
8-1-7: NONPAYMENT OF BILLS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Notice Of Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   In the event the charges for water service are not paid within
fifteen (15) days after the rendition of the bill, then such service charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. If the delinquency
and payment of the water charges continues for a period of more than fifteen
(15) days, the water service may be discontinued; provided, however, that prior
to such shutoff, a written notice shall be mailed or delivered to the persons
liable for such bill, notifying them of their right to request an
administrative hearing before the Village President or his designee within ten
(10) days of the date of the notice, and at the hearing, present their
objections to such actions. The water shall not be shut off until the hearing
has been held and the Village President or his designee has made a decision on
the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
      2.   When the water service has been discontinued by reason of a bill
remaining unpaid for thirty (30) days after it is rendered, connection for
restoring use of the water system shall not be made except upon compliance with
the provision of this section, including payment of the fee required in
subsection C of this section.
      3.   In addition, a lien claim may be filed with the Recorder of Deeds at
the Ogle County Courthouse, Oregon, Illinois, by the Village Clerk for any bill
for water service which remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been
rendered by the Village Clerk. The lien shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the
Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water
services subsequent to the period covered by the bill. Notice of the lien shall
be mailed to the owner of such premises as shown on the real estate tax records
of the Assessor's Office at the Ogle County Courthouse, Oregon, Illinois.
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid water
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case of
the foreclosure of statutory liens.
   C.   Restoring Of Service; Fee: There shall be a one hundred dollar
($100.00) fee to restore the water service, which such restoration of water
service will take place only during normal weekday daytime shifts.
   D.   In accordance with 765 ILCS 735/1.4, the Village shall not terminate
water service to a tenant upon a request from the landlord. (1979 Code § 7-4-6;
amd. 2017 Code; amd. Ord. 07-02-19, 7-23-2019)
8-1-8: ADMINISTRATION OF WATER FUND:
   A.   It is hereby made the duty of the Village Clerk to render bills each
monthly period for the users of water and other charges in connection therewith
and the Clerk shall collect all monies due therefor.
   B.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system
of the Village shall be held by the Village Clerk separate and apart from his
private funds and separate and apart from all other funds that may come into
his hands as Village Clerk, and all of such sums, without any deduction
whatsoever, shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10)
days after receipt of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from
time to time be ordered and directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
   C.   The Village Treasurer shall receive all of such revenue from the water
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of said system
as the same may be delivered to him by the Village Clerk as provided in this
section, and shall deposit the same in a separate bank account, and the same
shall be accounted for as a separate fund which shall be designated as "Water
Fund of the Village of Mt. Morris", and the Village Treasurer shall administer
such fund in every respect in the manner and form provided by the provisions of
the statutes of the State.
   D.   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts separate from all other books,
records and accounts which he may be required to keep as such Village
Treasurer, which such books, records and accounts shall show complete and
correct entries of all transactions to the water system of the Village; and at
regular intervals, the Village Treasurer shall cause to be made an audit by a
recognized public auditor of such books, records and accounts which show the
receipts and disbursements of the water system. (1979 Code § 7-4-7)
8-1-9: WATER METERS:
   A.   Meters Required; Faulty Meters; Care Of Meters:
      1.   All premises using water from the Village water supply must be
supplied by an adequate meter conforming with specifications required by the
Village, such meter to be furnished by and at the expense of the property
owner; provided, that the Village may, but is not obligated to, supply water
service on a temporary basis at a flat rate of charge until such meter is
installed; and provided further, that in the event that a consumer's meter
shall fail to register properly, such consumer shall be billed and charged and
shall pay for water during the time such meter is out of order on the basis of
the consumption during the same monthly period of the preceding year, unless no
such basis of comparison exists, in which case the consumer shall be charged
and shall pay such amount as reasonably may be determined by the Village.
      2.   Owners of meters must protect them from theft, freezing, hot water,
breakage or other damage; it shall be the user's or owner's duty to immediately
notify the Village when a meter is out of repair or fails to register. All
defective meters shall be repaired and the cost of such repair shall be paid by
the property owner or water user. No person, unless authorized by the Village,
shall connect, disconnect, repair or otherwise disturb any water meter.
   B.   Installation: Water meters shall be installed in a location which is
ready of access and acceptability to the Village. All meters shall be with
outside reading.
   C.   Reading Meters: The Village Clerk shall read or cause to be read every
water meter used in the Village on a monthly basis so that bills for water
service may be issued monthly. In any monthly period in which there is no
actual reading of the meters, an estimated billing may be issued based upon
actual water usage as read on the water meters during previous readings. Any
adjustments would then be made on the next billing based upon an actual meter
reading. The Village or its authorized agents or employees shall have free and
ready access to the premises and the buildings wherein meters are located for
the purpose of reading, examining, testing and repairing said meters. (1979
Code § 7-4-8)
8-1-10: SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Installation: All service pipes, corporation cocks, curb stops and
fittings from the Village water main to the premises to be served shall be
installed by and at the cost of the owner of the property to be served or the
applicant for service. Such installation shall be made under the supervision of
the Village.
   B.   Pipes: All water service pipes from the water main to the water meter
shall be not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in size. Pipe materials shall
be either copper or plastic conforming to the specifications adopted by the
President and Board of Trustees and on file in the Office of the Village Clerk.
All fittings and connections shall also comply with these specifications. All
service pipes shall be buried at least four and one-half feet (41/2') deep in
the ground, and may be in the same trench as sewer pipes if placed on a shelf
at least eighteen inches (18") above such sewer pipes.
   C.   Repairs, Discontinuance Of Water Service: All repairs on water service
pipes from the Village mains to the plumbing system of any building shall be at
the expense of the owner of the premises served. In the event that a break
occurs in any service pipe from the Village water main, resulting in the
leakage of unmetered water from the Village supply system, the owner of the
property served by the defective pipe shall have the pipe repaired at the
property owner's expense. Such repair shall be initiated by the property owner
within twenty four (24) hours after the leak is discovered and completed as
soon as possible thereafter. Upon discovery of the leak, the Village shall shut
off such service pipe at the shutoff box or disconnect it at the water main.
Water shall not again be withdrawn from the Village water system through such
service pipe until repairs satisfactory to the Village have been made at the
property owner's expense and further that the property owner has complied with
all provisions of this chapter relating to deposits, payment of bills and other
applicable sections.
   D.   Emergency Repairs: The Village may, in case of emergency, repair or
order the repair of any service pipe, and if it does so, the cost of such
repair work shall be repaid to the Village by the owner of the premises served,
which cost shall be treated and collected in the same manner and with the same
remedies as for collection of charges for water used.
   E.   Excavations: Excavations for installation of water service pipes or
repair thereof shall be made in compliance with the provisions of this Code
relating to excavations in streets, and any other Village ordinances relating
to such excavations.
   F.   Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff or service boxes shall be placed on every
service pipe to each water user, and shall be located between the curb line and
the sidewalk where practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are
easily accessible, and shall be protected from frost.
   G.   Abandoned Water Service Pipes: No water service pipe shall be abandoned
until notice of intent to abandon a water service pipe has been given in
writing to the Village. Water service pipes which are to be abandoned shall be
disconnected at the Village main within twenty four (24) hours after such pipe
has been permanently disconnected from the plumbing supply system of any
building. The work shall be done under the supervision of the Village and shall
conform to all specifications provided in this Code. All costs of such work
shall be paid by the property owner, including, but not limited to, returning
the surface above said pipe to its original condition. The owner of any
building damaged by fire, decay or any cause to the extent the building is torn
down either voluntarily or pursuant to notice issued by the Board of Trustees
shall be required upon written notice from the Board of Trustees to disconnect
and cap the water service pipe consistent with the requirement set forth above.
   H.   Metered Water Dedicated Exclusively To Lawn Sprinkler Systems: A
customer within the Village with an existing water meter may apply for an
additional water meter and hookup for a water line dedicated exclusively to a
lawn sprinkler system. The existing hookup fees and water rates shall apply.
The Village may waive the water deposit. The customer shall notify the Village
of any change in the use of the additional meter and line. The Village shall
have the right to periodically inspect the additional meter and line. (1979
Code § 7-4-9)
8-1-11: RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
Water shall not be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
Village supply to any premises other than that for which application has been
made and the water meter therefor installed, except in case of emergency, nor
shall the right to use water from the Village supply be sold by any person.
(1979 Code § 7-4-10)
8-1-12: METER TAMPERING; STEALING WATER:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water
meter or by means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from the
service pipe so that the same will not pass through the meter or while passing
through the meter cause the same to register inaccurately. If any water meter
is found to have been tampered with, the water rent shall be estimated for the
rental period and the meter shall be repaired and tested. Upon repetition of
the offense, it will be optional with the Village to discontinue the water
service or to collect the amount estimated to be due. (1979 Code § 7-4-11)
8-1-13: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; VILLAGE NOT LIABLE:
The Village shall not in any manner be liable for any damage caused by the
shutting off of the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any
part thereof is undergoing repairs, or caused by the freezing of the main or
the breaking of any pipe or service cock, or by a shortage of water due to
accident or when necessary for extension or improvements of mains, valves or
hydrants, or other circumstances over which the Village has no control. (1979
Code § 7-4-12)
8-1-14: WATER SERVICE RESTRICTIONS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS:
Effective July 1, 1988, no additional hookups to the Village water service will
be allowed for any potential users lying outside of the corporate limits. (1979
Code § 7-4-14)
ARTICLE A. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Definitions
8-1A-2: Compliance With Existing Laws
8-1A-3: Cross-Connections Prohibited
8-1A-4: Local Cross-Connection Control Program
8-1A-5: Corrections And Protective Devices
8-1A-6: Piping Identification
8-1A-7: Private Water Storage Tanks
8-1A-8: Elimination Of Existing Cross-Connections
8-1A-9: Inspection
8-1A-10: Discontinuance Of Water Service
8-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering
a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS-CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance which a
backflow could occur.
SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall be not less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources not meeting the requirements of Act No. 98 of the Public
Acts of 1913, as amended, being sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the Compiled
Laws of 1948, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been
treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other
than an approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of
questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected
against backflow.
WATER UTILITY: The Village of Mt. Morris. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-2: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing
laws and rules and the provisions of this Code. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-3: CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Cross-connections of the public water supply system and any other water supply
system or source including, but not limited to, the following are prohibited:
   A.   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
   B.   By submerged inlet.
   C.   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
   D.   Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant.
   E.   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or
vessel which may contain a contaminant. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-4: LOCAL CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM:
The Village shall develop a comprehensive control program for the elimination
and prevention of all cross-connections, and removal of all existing cross-
connections and prevention of all future cross-connection. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-5: CORRECTIONS AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
Any users of Mt. Morris water shall obtain written approval from the Village
for any proposed corrective action or protection device before using or
installing it. The total time allowed for completion of the necessary
corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include
the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has
not been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the Village shall
physically separate the public water supply from the on-site piping system in
such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by any authorized
person. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-6: PIPING IDENTIFICATION:
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the Mt. Morris water
supply, exposed Mt. Morris water and secondary water piping shall be identified
by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced
readily in its entirety and it will be necessary to protect the Mt. Morris
water supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the Village.
(1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-7: PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS:
A private water storage tank supplied from Mt. Morris water supply system shall
be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for
potable water usage. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-8: ELIMINATION OF EXISTING CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
Within one (1) year from the effective date hereof, all existing cross-
connections to the Mt. Morris water supply system shall be eliminated. The
expenses of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on
which cross- connection exists. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-9: INSPECTION:
Any designated employee of the Village shall have the authority to inspect any
premises to determine the presence of an existing cross-connection and to order
the elimination of such cross-connection. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
8-1A-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The Village shall discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any
person owning any property where a cross- connection in violation of this Code
exists. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such cross-
connection has been eliminated. (1979 Code § 7-4-13)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-2-3: Private Sewage Disposal
8-2-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-2-5: Prohibited And Restricted Discharges
8-2-6: Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
8-2-7: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-2-8: Wastewater Service Charges, Billing And Administration
8-2-9: Industrial Users
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers acting by and
through the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Mt. Morris, or
the person designated by it as their duly authorized agent or representative.
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
BASIC USER CHARGE: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning ten feet (10') (3.0 m) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for a Village representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of revenue bonds outstanding and shall be
computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected
to the wastewater facilities.
DIRECTOR: The Chief Administrative Officer of the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Defined in any applicable "NPDES" permit.
FEDERAL GRANT: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as
defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL USER: For the purpose of industrial cost recovery, any
nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
   A.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
   B.   Division B - Mining.
   C.   Division D - Manufacturing.
   D.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
   E.   Division I - Services.
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the
Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Industrial user, for the purpose of developing the user charge system, may be a
manufacturing or process facility which is engaged in a productive and profit
making enterprise.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted
to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system, including building drains and
sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. (Infiltration does not
include and is distinguished from, inflow.)
INFILTRATION/INFLOW: The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains and
sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders; cellar, yard,
and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling water discharges; drains
from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers, cross-connections from storm
sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface runoff, street
wash waters or drainage. (Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration.)
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per
average work day; b) has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow
carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; c) has in its waste, a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section
307(a) of the Act; or d) is found by the permit issuance authority, in
connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment
works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon
the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1000
ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the
United States pursuant to section 402 of Pub.L. 92-500.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or groundwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: All costs, direct and indirect, (other than
debt service) necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing
basis, conforming with related Federal, State and local requirements, and
assuring optimal long term facility management. (These costs include
depreciation and replacement.)
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration
expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined by one (1) of
the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods".
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One (1) population equivalent is
one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and
0.20 pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated
as the equivalent of the highest of three (3) parameters. Impact on a stream is
the higher of the BOD/suspended solids parameters.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction into
the wastewater treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer dedicated to or provided by or subject to the
jurisdiction of the Village consisting of collector sewer, interceptor sewer,
forcemain and pumping station. It shall also include sewers within or outside
the Village boundaries that serve one (1) or more persons and ultimately
discharge into the Village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may
not have been constructed with Village funds.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL USER: Non-industrial user, shall mean any user of the
treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for as defined herein.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwaters
or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices, structures and equipment
for treating sewage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
SEWERAGE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
and expenses incurred in the operation of the sewerage system.
SEWERS: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY: Any industry that will contribute greater than ten
percent (10%) of the design flow and/or design pollutant loading of the
treatment works.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage,
and Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Federation of Sewage
and Industrial Wastes Association.
STATE ACT: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act.
STATE GRANT: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works and provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of the State of
Illinois.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Chairperson of the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers
of the Village or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SURCHARGE: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge (subsection 8-2-
8D of this chapter) and debt service charge (subsection 8-2-8C of this chapter)
which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established as representative of normal sewage in
subsection 8-2-8A of this chapter.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the treatment works will be
operated and shall be thirty (30) years from the date of start up of any
wastewater facilities constructed with a Federal or State grant.
USER CHARGE: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance including replacement of such works pursuant to
section 204(b) of Pub.L. 92-500 and the cost of any bond debt of such works and
shall consist of both basic user charges (subsection 8-2-8D of this chapter),
surcharges (subsection 8-2-8E of this chapter) and industrial charges
(reserved).
USER CLASS: The type of user either "residential or commercial" or "industrial"
as defined in this section.
VILLAGE: The Village of Mt. Morris and any reference to "within the Village"
shall mean all territory within the perimeter of the Village of Mt. Morris
boundaries.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of the Village. It may be a combination of the
liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE: The charge per month levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
subsection 8-2-8G of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic
user charge, and the debt service charge and surcharge, if applicable.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "wastewater treatment plant" or "sewage treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (1979 Code § 7-5-1; amd. 2017 Code)
8-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Unlawful Deposition Of Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
   B.   Unlawful Discharge Of Wastes: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet, watercourse or storm sewer within the Village or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the Village, any sewage or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Unlawful Construction Of Sewage Facilities: Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(1979 Code § 7-5-2)
   D.   Mandatory Sewer Hookup: The owner of all houses, buildings, or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes,
situated within the Village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the Village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in a manner approved by the Committee on Water and Sanitary
Sewers, or the person designated by it, within one hundred eighty (180) days
after the official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within
one hundred feet (100') (30.5 m) of the property line. (1979 Code § 7-5-2; amd.
2017 Code)
8-2-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   When Allowed: Where a sanitary sewer of the Village is not available
under the provisions of subsection 8-2-2D of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this section.
   B.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner of the property on which said system is to be
located shall first obtain a permit therefor. The application for such permit
shall be made to and approved by the Village Clerk, and shall be accompanied by
plans, specifications and such other information as shall be requested, and a
permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   C.   Installation Inspection: A permit for a private sewage disposal system
shall not become effective until installation is completed to the satisfaction
of the Village or the person designated by it. He shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Village Clerk when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within eight (8) working hours of the receipt of notice by the
Village Clerk.
   D.   System Design: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and with the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing insufficient subsurface soil absorption
facilities. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any
public sewer or natural outlet.
   E.   Abandonment Of System: When a sanitary sewer of the Village becomes
available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided
in subsection 8-2-2D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the
sanitary sewer of the Village within ninety (90) days in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material; provided,
however, that in the event that a private septic tank sewage disposal system
has been constructed less than three (3) years before such sanitary sewer of
the Village becomes available, then such connection to the sanitary sewer of
the Village need not be made until the expiration of three (3) years following
the construction of such private septic tank sewage disposal system.
   F.   Owner To Operate And Maintain: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the Village. (1979 Code § 7-5-3)
8-2-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit Required; Fees:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any sanitary or storm sewer without having
first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made
to and approved by the Village Clerk, and shall be accompanied by a statement
as to the purpose of the connection, the premises to be served, the
specifications of the pipe to be connected, the specifications of the drain
from the house to the sewer line, other information as requested and a permit
fee based upon the following schedule:
 
Size Of Water Pipe Size Of Sewer Pipe Fee
   3/4" - 1"    4" - 6"            $ 250.00
   11/4" - 3"   4" - 6"            500.00
   4" - 6"      4" - 6"            700.00
   7" - 8"      7" - 8"            1,000.00
   9" - 13"     7" - 8"            1,500.00
   14" - 16"    7" - 8"            2,000.00
 
      2.   In addition to the fee as set forth in the above referenced
schedule, there shall be an additional hookup fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for any new construction hookups to the sewerage system extension
along Mud Creek Road east of Nancy Street to Leaf River Road, as well as any
new construction hookups tributary into the new northeast lift station
including any future lateral extensions thereto, said sewerage extension
project and lift station construction project being more fully described in
ordinance 7-2-99 available for inspection in the Office of the Village Clerk.
   B.   Capacity Of Downstream Sewerage Facilities: A building sewer permit
will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   C.   Cost Borne By Owner: All costs and expense incident to the installation
and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the
property to be served or the applicant for the service. The owner or applicant
shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   D.   Individual Building Sewer Required: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one (1) building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building
sewer.
   E.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the Village or the person designated by it, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
   F.   Building Sewer Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village. In the absence of Code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the material and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
"Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9", and "Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois" shall apply.
   G.   Basement And Floor Drains: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall
be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by
a means which is approved in accordance with subsection F of this section, and
discharged to the building sewer. Floor drains shall have intercepting mud or
grease traps adequate to prevent the flow of mud or grease into the sanitary
sewer system.
   H.   Surface Water Or Groundwater Drain Connections Prohibited:
      1.   The maintenance and connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer is prohibited.
      2.   Existing roof drains, footing tile, or other illegal connections to
the public sanitary sewers shall be disconnected from said sewer within one (1)
year after written notice from the Village to do such work. The expense of such
work shall be paid by the property owner. The Village, or the person designated
by it shall determine if the disconnection has been made in a satisfactory
fashion. (1979 Code § 7-5-4)
      3.   Existing roof drains discharging at the foundation wall shall be
extended by a suitable means, as approved by the Committee on Water and
Sanitary Sewers, to a point at least six feet (6') away from the foundation
wall. This work shall be done and paid for by the owner. All such roof drains
must be extended away from the footing wall within six (6) months from the
effective date hereof. All new homes must provide the extended roof drains as a
part of the construction phase.
   I.   Rainwater Drains: It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the
maintenance of any stormwater drains which discharge water onto any sidewalk in
the Village; and it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the maintenance of
any such drain which discharges into any public street or alley at a height
greater than eighteen inches (18") from the ground or pavement.
   J.   Connection To Public Sewer: The connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing
Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of
Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No.
9", and "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Chairman of the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers before installation.
(1979 Code § 7-5-4; amd. 2017 Code)
   K.   Inspection Required: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall
notify the Village Clerk when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The sewer lateral from the property line to the
Village sewer main shall remain uncovered for inspection and the connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Village, or the person designated by
it.
   L.   Construction Of Sewer Laterals In Streets To Be Improved: In the event
that any street in the Village is proposed to be paved or otherwise improved,
then the owner of each lot abutting on such street shall upon notification by
the Village, at his expense, install a sanitary sewer lateral from the Village
sanitary sewer main to his property line, unless such lateral has previously
been constructed. If such lateral is not constructed within the time specified
in such notice, then the Village may install such lateral, and the cost of such
construction shall be collected and constitute a lien on such property
enforceable in the manner set forth in subsections 8-2-8I and J of this
chapter.
   M.   Repair Of Sewer Laterals: Sanitary sewer laterals shall be maintained
and kept in repair to the point of and including the connection with the
Village sanitary sewer mains, by the owners and occupants of the respective
properties served by such laterals, at their expense.
   N.   Emergency Repairs: The Village may, in case of emergency, repair or
order the repair of any sewer lateral or sewer pipe from the Village sewer main
to the premises served thereby, and if it does so, the cost of such repair work
shall be repaid to the Village by the owner of the premises served, which cost
shall be treated and collected in the same manner and with the same remedies as
for collection of charges for wastewater services as provided in subsections 8-
2-8I and J of this chapter.
   O.   Repairs By Sewer Department: Any maintenance or repair work performed
by the Sewer Department of the Village or any other persons or firm designated
by it, on any sanitary sewer lateral, shall be paid for by the owner or the
occupant (both of whom shall be liable for the cost thereof) of the property
served by such lateral in such amount as the Village may deem reasonable.
   P.   Excavations: Excavations for installation of sewer laterals or repair
thereof shall be made in compliance with the provisions of section
7-1-4 of this Code relating to excavations in streets and any other ordinance
relating to such excavations.
   Q.   Safety Precautions Required: All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Village at no expense to the Village.
   R.   Abandoned Sewer Service Pipes:
      1.   No sewer service pipes shall be abandoned until notice of intent to
abandon a sewer service pipe has been given in writing to the Village. Sewer
service pipes which are to be abandoned shall be disconnected and capped within
twenty four (24) hours after such pipe has been permanently disconnected from
the plumbing system of any building. The work shall be done under the
supervision of the Village and shall conform to all specifications provided in
this Code. All costs for such work shall be paid by the property owner
including, but not limited to, returning the surface above said pipe to its
original condition.
      2.   The owner of any building damaged by fire, decay or other cause to
the extent the building is demolished either voluntarily or pursuant to notice
issued by the Village Board of Trustees, shall be required, upon written notice
from the Village Board of Trustees, to disconnect and cap the sewer service
pipes consistent with the requirement set forth above. (1979 Code § 7-5-4)
8-2-5: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED DISCHARGES:
   A.   Unpolluted Waters Prohibited In Sanitary Sewers: No person shall
discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   B.   Discharge Of Unpolluted Waters: Stormwater and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
Village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Village, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
   C.   Prohibited Wastes: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size, capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   D.   Prohibited Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the Village that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming their opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Village will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) (0°C) and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Village.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Village for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Village as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Village in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      10.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      11.   Discharges from any pretreatment facility and any discharge from an
industry, to Municipal sewers, as measured under the provisions of this
chapter, shall not contain in excess of the following concentrations based on a
twenty four (24) hour composite sample:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Pollutant             Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
                      Maximum Day Monthly Average
Arsenic               0.5         0.25
Barium                4.0         2.0
Boron                 4.0         2.0
Cadmium               0.6         0.3
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.4         0.2
Chromium (total)      2.0         1.0
Copper                3.0         2.0
Cyanide               0.4         0.2
Fluoride              15.0        10.0
Iron, total           4.0         2.0
Lead                  0.6         0.4
Manganese             4.0         2.0
Mercury               0.001       0.0005
Nickel                3.0         2.0
Phenols               1.0         0.5
Selenium              0.1         0.05
Silver                0.5         0.25
Total toxic organics  2.1         2.1
Zinc                  4.0         2.0
 
Should any more stringent requirements for the parameters listed become
effective under State or Federal pretreatment regulations, compliance with the
more stringent requirements will be mandatory for industries discharging to
Village sewers.
   E.   Disposition Of Wastes Containing Prohibitive Substances:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA
Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128- Pretreatment
Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Village may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Village may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of section
8-2-1 of this chapter.
      2.   If the Village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Village, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   F.   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Village, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Village, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   G.   Maintenance Of Pretreatment Facilities: Where preliminary treatment or
flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   H.   Control Manhole: Each new industry shall be required to install a
control manhole and, when required by the Village, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   I.   Measurements, Tests, Analyses: All measurements, tests, and analyses of
the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
   J.   Special Agreements And Arrangements: No statement contained in this
chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for treatment,
subject to payment therefor, in accordance with section
8-2-8 of this chapter, by the industrial concern. (1979 Code § 7-5-5)
8-2-6: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (1979 Code § 7-
5-6)
8-2-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Inspections Authorized: The Village and other duly authorized employees
of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing reasonable identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Easement Rights: The Village and other duly authorized employees of the
Village bearing reasonable identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (1979 Code § 7-5-7)
8-2-8: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES, BILLING AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for
the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the Village
shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus
replacement; and, if applicable, a debt service charge and/or a surcharge.
      1.   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual
debt service of all outstanding revenue bonds by the number of users. Through
further divisions, the monthly debt service charge can be computed.
      2.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l); and
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred forty milligrams
per liter (240 mg/l).
         c.   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus
replacement and shall be computed as follows:
            (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the next
fiscal year, for all works categories.
            (2)   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility
categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
            (3)   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of BOD5 and pounds of SS
to be treated.
            (4)   Compute unit treatment costs for volume (dollars per 1,000
cubic feet) for BOD5 (dollars per pound) and for SS (dollars per pound).
            (5)   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet for volume,
BOD5 and SS at normal sewage strength. Add these costs to determine the charge
for operation and maintenance including replacement.
            (6)   Adjust the unit treatment rate per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet to the actual billings ratio to provide adequate income to operate the
system.
      3.   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastewater exceeds the
normal concentrations for BOD (200 milligrams per liter) and SS (240 milligrams
per liter). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the two hundred
milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240
mg/l) concentration for BOD and SS respectively. Subsection F of this section
specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the Village in their annual audit report. The
wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs including
replacement costs.
   B.   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the
lowest even increments of ten (10) cubic feet. (1979 Code § 7-5-8)
      1.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
may be required by the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers to install and
maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the Committee on
Water and Sanitary Sewers for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
      2.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers if these volumes cannot otherwise
be determined from the metered water consumption record.
      3.   Meter devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. The period between meter
calibration shall not exceed two (2) years. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers. (1979 Code §
7-5-8; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Debt Service Charge: Effective May 1, 2015, each user shall be assessed
a monthly debt service charge which shall be equal to one hundred fifty four
percent (154%) of the basic user rate charged to such user for the same month.
The Village shall review the debt service charge annually in accordance with
subsection A1 of this section and modify or eliminate the debt service charge
as Village obligations, in respect of the wastewater facilities, are satisfied
or retired. (Ord. 04-02-15, 4-14-2015)
   D.   Basic User Rates: There shall be and there are hereby established
monthly rates and charges for the use of and the service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the Village, such rates and charges hereby established
being as follows:
      1.   Metered Water And Sewerage Consumer: Based upon the amount of water
meter readings, the basic user rates shall be as follows: forty one dollars
thirty three cents ($41.33) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet. Provided that
the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be fourteen dollars forty seven
cents ($14.47) to all users whose water consumption does not exceed three
hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         a.   Effective June 1, 2010, the basic user rates shall be increased
to forty five dollars sixty seven cents ($45.67) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be fifteen
dollars ninety eight cents ($15.98) to all users whose water consumption does
not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         b.   Effective September 1, 2010, the basic user rates shall be
increased to fifty dollars one cent ($50.01) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be seventeen
dollars fifty cents ($17.50) to all users whose water consumption does not
exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         c.   Effective December 1, 2010, the basic user rates shall be
increased to fifty four dollars thirty five cents ($54.35) per one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall
be nineteen dollars two cents ($19.02) to all users whose water consumption
does not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         d.   Effective March 1, 2011, the basic user rates shall be increased
to fifty eight dollars sixty nine cents ($58.69) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be twenty
dollars fifty four cents ($20.54) to all users whose water consumption does not
exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         e.   Effective June 1, 2011, the basic user rates shall be increased
to sixty three dollars three cents ($63.03) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be twenty two
dollars six cents ($22.06) to all users whose water consumption does not exceed
three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         f.   Effective September 1, 2011, the basic user rates shall be
increased to sixty seven dollars thirty seven cents ($67.37) per one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall
be twenty three dollars fifty eight cents ($23.58) to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly
period.
         g.   Effective December 1, 2011, the basic user rates shall be
increased to seventy one dollars seventy one cents ($71.71) per one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall
be twenty five dollars ten cents ($25.10) to all users whose water consumption
does not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         h.   Effective March 1, 2012, the basic user rates shall be increased
to seventy six dollars five cents ($76.05) per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet.
Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be twenty six
dollars sixty two cents ($26.62) to all users whose water consumption does not
exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         i.   Effective June 1, 2012, the basic user rates shall be increased
to eighty dollars thirty nine cents ($80.39) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be twenty
eight dollars fourteen cents ($28.14) to all users whose water consumption does
not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
         j.   Effective September 1, 2012, the basic user rates shall be
increased to eighty four dollars seventy three cents ($84.73) per one thousand
(1,000) cubic feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall
be twenty nine dollars sixty five cents ($29.65) to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly
period.
         k.   Effective December 1, 2012, the basic user rates shall be
increased to eighty nine dollars seven cents ($89.07) per one thousand (1,000)
cubic feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be
thirty one dollars seventeen cents ($31.17) to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly
period.
         l.   Effective March 1, 2013, the basic user rates shall be increased
to ninety three dollars forty one cents ($93.41) per one thousand (1,000) cubic
feet. Provided that the minimum charge for sewerage service shall be thirty two
dollars sixty nine cents ($32.69) to all users whose water consumption does not
exceed three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet per monthly period.
In any monthly period in which there is no actual reading of the meters, an
estimated billing may be issued based upon actual water usage as read on the
meter during previous readings.
      2.   Nonmetered Residential Sewerage Consumer: All residential users of
the sewerage system of the Village who do not use the water services of the
Village shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per monthly period of twenty eight
dollars ninety four cents ($28.94) plus any minimum debt service charge. The
flat rate charge is based on water consumption of seven hundred (700) cubic
feet and is computed by multiplying the basic user rate per subsection D1 of
this section by two (2).
         a.   Effective June 1, 2010, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty one dollars ninety six cents
($31.96).
         b.   Effective September 1, 2010, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty five dollars ($35.00).
         c.   Effective December 1, 2010, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty eight dollars four cents
($38.04).
         d.   Effective March 1, 2011, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty one dollars eight cents
($41.08).
         e.   Effective June 1, 2011, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty four dollars twelve cents
($44.12).
         f.   Effective September 1, 2011, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty seven dollars sixteen cents
($47.16).
         g.   Effective December 1, 2011, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty dollars twenty cents ($50.20).
         h.   Effective March 1, 2012, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty three dollars twenty four cents
($53.24).
         i.   Effective June 1, 2012, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty six dollars twenty eight cents
($56.28).
         j.   Effective September 1, 2012, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty nine dollars thirty cents
($59.30).
         k.   Effective December 1, 2012, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to sixty two dollars thirty four cents
($62.34).
         l.   Effective March 1, 2013, the nonmetered residential sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to sixty five dollars thirty eight cents
($65.38).
      3.   Nonmetered Commercial Sewerage Consumer: All commercial users of the
sewerage system of the Village who do not use the water services of the Village
shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per monthly period of twenty eight dollars
ninety four cents ($28.94) plus any minimum debt service charge. The flat rate
charge is based on water consumption of seven hundred (700) cubic feet and is
computed by multiplying the basic user rate per subsection D1 of this section
by two (2).
         a.   Effective June 1, 2010, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty one dollars ninety six cents
($31.96).
         b.   Effective September 1, 2010, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty five dollars ($35.00).
         c.   Effective December 1, 2010, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to thirty eight dollars four cents
($38.04).
         d.   Effective March 1, 2011, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty one dollars eight cents
($41.08).
         e.   Effective June 1, 2011, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty four dollars twelve cents
($44.12).
         f.   Effective September 1, 2011, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to forty seven dollars sixteen cents
($47.16).
         g.   Effective December 1, 2011, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty dollars twenty cents ($50.20).
         h.   Effective March 1, 2012, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty three dollars twenty four cents
($53.24).
         i.   Effective June 1, 2012, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty six dollars twenty eight cents
($56.28).
         j.   Effective September 1, 2012, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to fifty nine dollars thirty cents
($59.30).
         k.   Effective December 1, 2012, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to sixty two dollars thirty four cents
($62.34).
         l.   Effective March 1, 2013, the nonmetered commercial sewerage
monthly usage rate shall be increased to sixty five dollars thirty eight cents
($65.38). (Ord. 05-03-10, 5-11-2010, eff. 5-12-2010)
      4.   Outside Corporate Limits:
         a.   Additional Cost: Each user of the sewerage system of the Village
located outside the corporate limits shall have one hundred percent (100%)
added to the bill rendered for the type of service as set out above. (1979 Code
§ 7-5-8)
         b.   High Usage Rate: Effective May 1, 2015, each user located outside
the corporate limits of the Village whose water consumption exceeds forty
thousand (40,000) cubic feet per monthly period shall be assessed the high
usage rate in lieu of the basic user rate. The "high usage rate" shall be equal
to one hundred thirty percent (130%) of the basic user rate applicable to such
user for the same month. Additionally, the monthly debt service charge assessed
to each user being assessed the high usage rate shall be equal to one hundred
fifty four percent (154%) of the high usage rate charged to such user for the
same month. (Ord. 04-02-15, 4-14-2015)
      5.   Restriction Of Sewerage Service To Users Outside Corporate Limits:
         a.   Effective July 1, 1988, no additional hookups to the Village
sewerage system will be allowed for any potential users lying outside of the
corporate limits.
         b.   The President and Board of Trustees may enter into separate
contracts with consumers who do not fall into the rate classifications outlined
above, provided the contractual rates and charges for sewerage service are
based on the basic user charge as developed in subsection A2 of this section.
      6.   Rate Waiver For Metered Water Dedicated To Lawn Sprinkler Systems:
There shall be no charges for the use of and the service applied by the
wastewater facilities for customers with an additional and separate water meter
and line dedicated exclusively to a lawn sprinkler system.
   E.   Surcharge Rate: The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as
follows:
      1.   For biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), sixteen cents ($0.16) per
pound.
      2.   For suspended solids (SS), thirteen cents ($0.13) per pound.
   F.   Computation Of Surcharge:
      1.   The surcharge per person shall be computed by the following formula:
S = V (0.06238) [ (A (BOD5 - 200) ) + (B (SS - 240) ) ]
Where:      
 S       = Amount of surcharge in dollars.
 V       = Wastewater volume in thousand cubic feet units.
 0.06238 = Unit weight of water x 10-6 per thousand cubic feet.
 A       = Unit charge for BOD5 per pound (subsection E of this section).
 BOD5    = 5 day biochemical oxygen demand, milligrams per liter.
 200     = Allowable BOD strength.
 B       = Unit charge for SS per pound (subsection E of this section).
 240     = Allowable SS, milligrams per liter.
 
      2.   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as
may be deemed necessary by the Committee on Water and Sanitary Sewers and shall
be binding as a basis for surcharge.
   G.   Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge
per person shall be computed by the following formula:
W = D + M + ( V - 1,000) R+S
     1,000
Where:
    
 W = Amount of wastewater service charge in dollars per billing period.
    
 D = Debt service charge.
    
 M = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D
      of this section).
    
      Wastewater volume in cubic feet, per billing period to the lowest
 V = increments of 10 cubic feet. For a wastewater volume less than 1,000
      cubic feet per billing period, this part of the formula equals 0.
    
 R = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection D
      of this section).
    
 S = Amount of surcharge (subsection F of this section).
 
   H.   Bills:
      1.   For the purpose of the operation of the sewerage system of the
Village, all residential, commercial, industrial and other establishments in
the Village shall pay the charges and rates hereinabove provided for sewer
service, and such charges shall be made monthly after the expiration of the
monthly period for which the service has been supplied, and such charge shall
be payable within fifteen (15) days after rendition of the monthly sewer bill.
In the event such bills are not paid within said fifteen (15) day period, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added thereto.
      2.   Every application for sewer service shall be made by and signed by
the owner of the premises to be served. Every premises served shall constitute
a separate account in the owner's name. All bills for sewer service shall be
the responsibility of, and sent to, the owner of the premises served. The owner
of the premises served, included successors in title, shall be deemed to be the
applicant, customer, consumer and user for sewer service provided to the
premises regardless of whether such owner or successor in title is the end-user
of the sewer service provided or whether such owner or successor has signed the
service application.
      3.   Every application for sewer service shall constitute an agreement by
the applicant to pay for all water used on the premises through said service
and to comply with all ordinances, rules, regulations and policies of the
Village then in effect or that may thereafter be adopted. The application shall
be on forms provided by the Village Clerk. The Village reserves the right to
deny sewer service when an application is incorrect or incomplete.
      4.   The Village may deny sewer service to any applicant when such
applicant owes the Village a delinquent bill for service to another premises.
      5.   It shall be the duty of the purchaser of any premises within the
Village (including by deed into trust or deed in lieu of foreclosure) to first
ascertain from the Village any delinquent sewer service bill which may have
accrued before purchasing the premises. The purchaser shall notify the Village
in writing of the intention to purchase the property at least five (5) days
prior to the closing date
   I.   Nonpayment Of Bills; Notice Of Delinquency; Shutoff: In the event the
charges for sewer service are not paid within fifteen (15) days after the
rendition of the bill, then such service charges shall be deemed and are hereby
declared to be delinquent. If the delinquency and payment of the sewer charges
continues for a period of more than fifteen (15) days, the sewer service may be
discontinued; provided, however, that prior to such shutoff, a written notice
shall be mailed or delivered to the persons liable for such bill, notifying
them of their right to request an administrative hearing before the Village
President or his designee within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, and
at the hearing, present their objections to such actions. The sewer service
shall not be shut off until the hearing has been held and the Village President
or his designee has made a decision on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. When the sewer service has been discontinued by reason of a bill
remaining unpaid for thirty (30) days after it is rendered, connection for
restoring use of the sewer system shall not be made except upon compliance with
this provision. In addition, a lien claim may be filed with the Recorder of
Deeds at the Ogle County Courthouse, Oregon, Illinois, by the Village Clerk for
any bill for sewer service which remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after it
has been rendered by the Village Clerk. The lien shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice
that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for
sewer services subsequent to the period covered by the bill. Notice of the lien
shall be mailed to the owner of such premises as shown on the real estate tax
records of the Assessor's Office at the Ogle County Courthouse, Oregon,
Illinois.
   J.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as in the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens.
   K.   Administration Of Sewerage Fund:
      1.   It is hereby made the duty of the Village Clerk to render bills each
monthly period for the users of the sewerage system for sewer service and other
charges in connection therewith and he shall collect all monies due therefor.
      2.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be held by the Village Clerk separate and apart from his private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds that may come into his hands
as Village Clerk, and all of such sum without any deduction whatsoever shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of
the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
ordered and directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
      3.   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenue from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him by the Village Clerk as
provided in this section, and shall deposit the same in a separate bank account
and the same shall be accounted for as a separate fund which shall be
designated as "Sewerage Fund of the Village of Mt. Morris", and the Village
Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner and form
provided by the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-141-1 et seq.,
as amended and supplemented.
      4.   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts separate from all other
books, records and accounts which he may be required to keep as such Village
Treasurer, which such books, records and accounts shall show complete and
correct entries of all transactions relating to the sewerage system of the
Village and at regular annual intervals the Village Treasurer shall cause to be
made an audit by a recognized public auditor of such books, records and
accounts to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
   L.   Notice Of Rates: A copy of the provisions of this section, properly
certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Ogle County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
the charges of the sewerage system of said Village on their properties.
   M.   Access To Records: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the Village which are applicable to the Village system of user
charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the
terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant. (1979 Code § 7-
5-8; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 07-02-19, 7-23-2019)
8-2-9: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
   A.   Pretreatment Plant: An industrial user which is required to install and
maintain a pretreatment plant, as set forth in this chapter, shall, in addition
to complying with the provisions of this chapter, be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The industrial user shall maintain sampling equipment for the
purpose of obtaining grab samples from each pretreatment batch prior to
discharge and for obtaining composite samples from each pretreatment plant
during discharge.
      2.   The industrial user shall perform laboratory tests on grab samples
from each pretreatment plant batch prior to discharge for Fe, Cu, Cr+6, TCr, Zn
and pH. The concentration of each parameter prior to discharge shall be within
limits established in this Code.
      3.   The industrial user shall collect and retain for one (1) week a
composite sample from each batch discharged. The Village shall split one (1) or
more composite samples at random per week and shall have one (1) of the weekly
samples analyzed once a month for Fe, Cu, Cr+6, TCr, Zn and pH.
      4.   For the monthly test performed under subsection A3 of this section
the industrial user shall reimburse the Village for outside laboratory analysis
expenses and reasonable delivery expenses within fifteen (15) days of receipt
of a copy of the outside laboratory results and invoice.
      5.   The batch discharge and laboratory test records shall be maintained
by the industrial user for seven (7) years and made available to the Village
upon reasonable notice.
      6.   The industrial user shall notify the Village of any change in its
industrial process which involves elements or materials not listed in
subsections A2 and A3 of this section. (1979 Code § 7-5-9)
   B.   Control Vault: Any industrial user which is required to install and
maintain a pretreatment plant and control vault, as set forth in this chapter,
shall, in addition to complying with all the provisions of this chapter, be
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The industrial user shall reimburse the Village for outside
laboratory analysis on the control vault sample once monthly for one (1) or
more of the parameters Fe, Cu, Cr+6, TCr, Zn and pH, TSS, BOD5 or COD, toluene,
oil/grease and phenols. Reimbursement for said tests shall be within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of a copy of the outside laboratory results and invoice.
      2.   Industrial users shall reimburse the Village for any outside
laboratory testing where the test parameters exceed the concentration limits
for the first follow up test within the concentration limits. Reimbursement for
said tests shall be in the same manner as set forth in subsection B1 of this
section.
      3.   The Village shall analyze a weekly sample from the control vault for
BOD5, TSS and pH and average results quarterly for the purpose of determining
applicable surcharges as set forth in subsection 8-2-8A of this chapter. (1979
Code § 7-5-10)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: License Required; Fee; Insurance
8-3-3: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
8-3-4: Municipal Service Rates
8-3-5: Receptacles Required; Deposits In Streets
8-3-6: Disposal Service Regulations
8-3-7: Recyclables
8-3-8: Leaf And Landscape Waste
8-3-9: Responsibility Of Occupant Of Premises
8-3-10: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ASHES: Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
COMPOSTING MATERIALS: All accumulations of grass, leaves, decomposing vegetable
garbage and related products which are normal and customary material for soil
compost.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food; and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
LANDSCAPING WASTES: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: A. The following:
1. Glass: Whole bottles and jars; food and drink jars; clear, green and brown
glass only.
2. Plastic containers: Only containers stamped code 1 and 2 are acceptable. No
automotive oil containers are acceptable.
3. Aluminum: All types of aluminum, TV dinner food trays and aluminum foil.
4. Tin cans: Food and drink cans only.
5. Newspapers.
   B.   The following materials are not recyclable and must be bagged with
other rubbish: pyrex glass, window glass, light bulbs, mirrors, broken glass.
(1979 Code §
8-3-1)
8-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; INSURANCE:
   A.   Compliance With Chapter: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in the business of removing garbage and refuse without having obtained a
license therefor as is provided in this chapter. Any person conducting such
business shall conform to the provisions in this chapter contained.
   B.   License Fee: The fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
annually for the period contracted for by the Village.
   C.   Insurance: Each licensee shall provide a certificate of insurance in a
minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   D.   License Issuance; Containers: Only one (1) license shall be issued and
in effect at any one (1) time for general removal of garbage and refuse from
private residences and retail commercial businesses. Additional licenses shall
be available for such other garbage removal firms to provide twenty (20) yard
or greater roll off containers to property owners on an individual contract
basis. No such container may be placed on Village streets or alleys without the
prior consent of the Village Clerk. Any container placed on a Village street or
alley must be marked by lighted barricade provided by the property owner or
contractor. (1979 Code §
8-3-2)
8-3-3: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The license issued under this chapter shall be subject to revocation by the
President and Board of Trustees if they determine that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this Code or of any valid ordinance or
resolution enacted by the Board of Trustees, or any applicable rule or
regulation established by the President and Board of Trustees or the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, which is not inconsistent with law. However, no such license
shall be so revoked or suspended except after a public hearing by the President
and Board of Trustees with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend himself. (1979 Code
§
8-3-3)
8-3-4: MUNICIPAL SERVICE RATES:
The person or firm licensed under this chapter shall furnish garbage and
refuse, recycle and yard waste pick up service to each home in the Village.
Each home must have refuse service as part of the Municipal services package
and/or make full payment thereof at the monthly rates on file. Each residential
unit with multiple-family units must pay monthly rates at one (1) rate per each
family unit. The rates shall be on file as approved by the Village Board of
Trustees, said rates to be billed monthly. If delinquency in payment of
disposal service shall occur, a penalty, on file as approved by the Village
Board of Trustees, shall be charged and if such delinquency shall continue for
more than thirty (30) days, disposal service shall be discontinued. If the
disposal service is discontinued, there shall be a discontinuance fee charged.
There shall be an additional fee charged to reinstate the services. Should
service be discontinued, the property owner will be responsible for all
delinquent charges, penalties and other costs, as liens and other costs of
collection. All fees and costs must be paid in full prior to releasing liens
and/or reinstatement of service. (1979 Code §
8-3-4; amd. 2017 Code)
8-3-5: RECEPTACLES REQUIRED; DEPOSITS IN STREETS:
   A.   Containers Required: It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent
or the occupant of any house, building, flat, apartment or tenement in the
Village where people reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable
matter is prepared or served, at all times to maintain in good order and
repair, a metal or appropriate plastic container for garbage.
   B.   Specifications:
      1.   Standard Containers: All solid waste for collection by the Village
shall be placed in containers not to exceed thirty three (33) gallons' capacity
nor fifty (50) pounds' gross full weight, so that the container may be
reasonably lifted and carried by one (1) person.
      2.   Recycling Containers: The Village shall furnish two (2) recycling
containers for each person, agreed by the Village to be eligible to participate
in the curbside recycling. Any container that is damaged or missing except for
the fault of the Village or the Village's agents shall be replaced at the cost
and expense of the person using the recycling service. A replacement charge
shall be assessed for any container not returned to Village Hall when service
is discontinued for any reason.
   C.   Deposits In Streets: No garbage or refuse shall be deposited in any
street, alley or public way, excepting as is provided in this section; no such
refuse shall be so placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind.
(1979 Code §
8-3-5)
8-3-6: DISPOSAL SERVICE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Materials will be collected by the disposal contractor, consisting of
all kitchen waste and household trash, including small furniture and
appliances.
   B.   Materials which are not to be included in regular collection services
(but for which the contractor shall provide on a private contractual basis to
residents) are bulky items which are beyond the loading capacity of the
contractor's standard compactor truck equipment and materials attendant to
construction.
   C.   All perishable materials shall be placed in standard containers not to
exceed thirty three (33) gallons' capacity and of not more than fifty (50)
pounds' gross weight. Nonstandard containers may be used for nonperishable
inert refuse, and shall be picked up and disposed of by the disposal
contractor.
   D.   The contractor shall not be required to pick up toxic or poisonous
materials, or large quantities of liquids which require tank truck disposal.
   E.   Residents shall place containers and materials for pick up in the
parkway or terrace not before six o'clock (6:00) P.M. the night before the
appointed day for pick up, and shall remove such containers by six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. of the same day for regular weekly residential service on weekdays
only, following a schedule approved by the Village Board, with schedule
modification to accommodate legal holidays.
   F.   Service will not be provided to those who have failed to pay the
charges for the service. (1979 Code §
8-3-6)
8-3-7: RECYCLABLES:
   A.   Curbside Recycling:
      1.   All recyclable materials shall be separated from solid waste by the
person in possession of the premises from which the materials are collected.
      2.   The Village shall cause to be collected and removed, all recyclable
materials which are segregated by material type and placed in recycling
containers at the curbside, or on public streets or alleys adjacent to family
residences and other locations served by solid waste collection services and
agreed by the Village to be enrolled in the curbside recycling service.
      3.   All recyclable materials, except newspapers, shall be thoroughly
rinsed clean from food and food products. Tin cans shall be cut out at one (1)
end.
      4.   All paper and labels shall be removed from tin cans. Lids must be
removed from all recyclable materials. Newspapers must be loose, no wrappers,
strings or rubber bands. Newspapers can be placed in kraft paper bags. (1979
Code §
8-3-7)
   B.   Theft Of Recyclable Materials: It is a violation of this chapter for
any person except the Village or the Village's contractor under Village
agreement for solid waste disposal and curbside recycling, to collect, obtain,
possess or pick up any recyclable material placed for collection as part of the
curbside recycling program as herein defined. (1979 Code §
8-3-9)
8-3-8: LEAF AND LANDSCAPE WASTE:
It shall be deemed a violation of this chapter to place leaf and landscape
waste for collection whether alone or mixed with other solid waste. The Village
shall provide a collection service for leaf pick up. The dates for the leaf
pick up shall be set annually by the Board of Trustees. Residents shall be
required to place all leaves next to the adjacent curb for the curbside leaf
pick up service. (1979 Code §
8-3-8)
8-3-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF OCCUPANT OF PREMISES:
The fact that solid waste remains on any premises in the Village in violation
of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of such
premises is responsible for the occurrence of such violation. (1979 Code §
8-3-10)
8-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1979
Code § 8-3-11)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Permit Required; Conditions
9-1-2: Application For Permit
9-1-3: Approval Of Plans
9-1-4: Permit Fees
9-1-5: Variations
9-1-6: Enforcement; Inspections
9-1-7: Building Operations Restricted
9-1-8: Numbering Of Buildings And Lots
9-1-9: Public Buildings; Requirements
9-1-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Buildings: It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or
structure in the Village when the cost of such construction exceeds two hundred
dollars ($200.00), or where the effect of such construction or alteration is to
enlarge capacity or affect the bearing walls of any building or the roof
thereof, without having first secured a building permit. (1979 Code § 4-1-1)
   B.   Fences: Building permits for fences shall be governed by this chapter
and also by section
10-3-16 of this Code.
   C.   Conditions: It shall be a condition of all building permits that:
      1.   Sidewalks complying with the standard specifications on file in the
Office of the Village Clerk and the applicable ordinances of the Village as now
or hereafter may be in effect shall be provided by the owner of the premises
with respect to which such permit is issued, along the frontage of such
premises, at the expense of such owner, and construction of which shall be
completed not later than the date of completion of the construction of the
improvement for which such permit is issued.
      2.   No structure shall be erected in the residence districts described
in the zoning title (title 10 of this Code), any part of which is closer than
five feet (5') from the side lot line or side boundary of the property for the
improvement of which such permit is issued. (1979 Code § 4-1-1)
      3.   No structure or enclosure of a temporary or permanent nature, the
roof or sides of which are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, nylon fabric or
similar pliable material, shall be constructed or erected within the Village
for the storage of vehicles or other equipment. (Ord. 10-01-13, 10-8-2013; 2017
Code; Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-1-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk, and shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate showing the work to be
done, such plans to be verified by either the signature of the owner of the
premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of the operations. (1979
Code § 4-1-2)
9-1-3: APPROVAL OF PLANS:
   A.   Examination Of Application And Plans: Such applications with plans
shall be referred to the Building Inspector, who shall examine the same to
determine whether the proposed alteration or construction will comply with the
provisions of the Village ordinances relative thereto.
   B.   Approval; Issuance: Upon approval, one (1) set of plans shall be
returned to the applicant with a permit. No permit shall be issued except after
approval of the plans and payment of the permit    fees. Upon approval of the
plans and payment of the permit fees, the Building Inspector shall issue a
permit number.
   C.   Posting Of Permit: The permit shall be posted in a prominent location
upon the subject premises which can be easily viewed from the nearest adjacent
street. The permit shall remain posted through completion of the work set forth
in the approved plans. (1979 Code § 4-1-3; amd. Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-1-4: PERMIT FEES:
The fees for building permits shall be as follows:
   A.   Residential:
      1.   New Construction: Twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot with a
minimum charge of seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      2.   Additions, Remodeling, Alterations: Twenty cents ($0.20) per quare
foot with a minimum charge of seventy five dollars ($75.00).
   B.   Commercial:
      1.   New Construction: Thirty cents ($0.30) per square foot with a
minimum charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Additions, Remodeling, Alterations: Thirty cents ($0.30) per square
foot with a minimum charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   Electrical, First Five (5) Fixtures: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   Electrical, Additional Fixtures Over First Five (5): One dollar
($1.00) per fixture.
      5.   Mechanical, First Five (5) Openings: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      6.   Mechanical, Additional Openings After First Five (5): One dollar
($1.00) per opening.
   C.   Miscellaneous:
      1.   Move Or Upgrade Electrical Service: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      2.   Storage Shed, Up To Two Hundred Fifty (250) Square Feet: Seventy
five dollars ($75.00).
      3.   Pool, Above Ground: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      4.   Pool, In Ground: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      5.   Fence: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      6.   Sign: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      7.   Deck, Porch, Steps, Ramp, Slab: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      8.   Electric work in connection with subsections C1 through C7 may have
an additional fee, as applicable, under A or B hereunder. (1979 Code § 4-1-4;
amd. 2017 Code; Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-1-5: VARIATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and
specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan and
approved by the Building Inspector. (1979 Code § 4-1-5; amd. Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-1-6: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS:
The President and Board of Trustees shall make or cause to be made such
inspections as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter, and to make any tests or examinations of materials or methods to
be used for the purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (1979 Code § 4-1-6)
9-1-7: BUILDING OPERATIONS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Use Of Streets: The use of streets for the storage of materials in the
process of construction or alteration of a building may be granted where the
same will not unduly interfere with traffic and will not reduce the usable
width of the street to less than eighteen feet (18'). No portion of a street
other than that directly abutting on the premises on which work is being done
shall be used except with the consent of the owner or occupant of the premises
abutting on such portion. (1979 Code § 4-1-7)
   B.   Night Operations: No construction or altering operation shall be
carried on between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M., if the same are accompanied by loud noises. (1979 Code § 4-1-7; amd.
2017 Code)
   C.   Sidewalks: No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building
operations.
   D.   Safeguards: It shall be the duty of a person doing any constructing,
altering or wrecking to do the same with proper care for the safety of persons
and property. Warning barricades and lights shall be maintained whenever
necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic; and temporary roofs
over sidewalks shall be constructed whenever there is danger to pedestrians
from falling articles or materials. (1979 Code § 4-1-7)
9-1-8: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS:
All lots, buildings and structures in the Village shall be numbered in
accordance with the following plan:
The base line for streets running east and west shall be Wesley Avenue and the
base line for streets running north and south shall be Main Street. Numbers
shall begin at the base lines with the Number 1. Odd numbers shall be on the
south and east sides of the streets. (1979 Code § 4-1-8)
9-1-9: PUBLIC BUILDINGS; REQUIREMENTS:
The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any public
building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall or church, and in the case of
schools, the President of the Board of Education or the person in charge
thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipment and
maintenance of such apparatus as is required by the applicable statutes and
regulations of the State. (1979 Code § 9-1-3)
CHAPTER 2
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Adoption Of Code
9-2-2: Amendments To Code
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code,
2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village for the regulating of
buildings and structures, as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in Village Hall are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter verbatim, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 01-02-17, 1-10-2017; amd. Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read
as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of Mt. Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      103.1 Creation of agency. The Village of Mt. Morris Building Department
is hereby created, and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
code official. The function of the agency shall be the implementation,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   C.   Section 302.4 is amended to read as follows:
      302.4 Weeds. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches. Noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
      Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with Section 109.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any
duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and
cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall
be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
   D.   Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
      304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to October 31, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be including or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screen of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every
screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.
      Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such
as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   E.   Section 602.3 is amended to read as follows:
      602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a minimum
temperature of 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms.
      Exceptions:
         1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
         2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30
degrees F (-1 degrees C), a minimum temperature of 65 degrees F (18 degrees C)
shall be maintained.
   F.   Section 602.4 is amended to read as follows:
      602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a
minimum temperature of 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) during the period the spaces
are occupied.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
         2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(Ord. 01-02-17, 1-10-2017; amd. Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 3
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Dangerous Buildings Prohibited
9-3-2: Dangerous Building Defined
9-3-3: Enforcement Power
9-3-4: Notice Of Dangerous Building
9-3-5: Lis Pendens
9-3-6: Demolition Lien; Personal Judgment
9-3-7: Penalty
9-3-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or structure or part thereof in any unsafe or dangerous condition. The
word "building", as used in this chapter, shall describe any walled or roofed
structure including mobile homes, commercial establishments, dwellings and any
accessory structures. The provisions contained in this chapter do not preclude
the Village from proceeding under provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-31-1 et seq. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-2013)
9-3-2: DANGEROUS BUILDING DEFINED:
For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any of the
following defects or is in any of the conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed a "dangerous building" and any conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed unsafe:
   A.   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to or might use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit.
   B.   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind, flood, fire or
by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability
thereof is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than
the minimum requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   D.   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is
required in the case of new construction.
   E.   Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to
partially or completely collapse; or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give way.
   F.   Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
   G.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or
flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive
nuisance to children who might play in or about the building or structure to
their danger.
   H.   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or
flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to afford a harbor for
trespassers, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing a nuisance or unlawful acts.
   I.   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation and is
likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living
within.
   J.   Whenever a building or structure is infested with rodents, insects,
pests or other vermin; or is likely to cause sickness or disease.
   K.   Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated or open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-
2013)
9-3-3: ENFORCEMENT POWER:
   A.   The Village President and Board of Trustees or its designee shall have
full power to decide any question arising under the provisions of this chapter,
subject to the conditions, modifications and limitations contained in this
chapter.
   B.   The Village President and Board of Trustees or its designee is hereby
authorized to demolish or repair or cause the demolition or repair of dangerous
buildings or uncompleted buildings or abandoned buildings within the
territorial limits of the Village. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-2013)
   C.   The Village President and Board of Trustees or its designee is hereby
authorized, when removing or causing the demolition of a dangerous building,
uncompleted building or abandoned building from a lot, to remove all private
sidewalks, fences, concrete foundations and driveways located on the lot with
such building. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
9-3-4: NOTICE OF DANGEROUS BUILDING:
   A.   When a building or structure within the Village is found to be a
"dangerous building" or contains an unsafe condition, the Village Clerk shall
issue and cause to be served a notice thereof upon all owners of record or
persons having an interest therein as shown by documents recorded in the Office
of the County Recorder of Deeds and upon persons in apparent possession of the
premises.
   B.   The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the conditions and
factors of the building or structure which renders it dangerous or unsafe. The
notice shall further specify that the owners make the building safe (by
complete elimination of any unsafe conditions) or commence demolition at
owner's costs within fifteen (15) days of such notice. The notice shall further
specify that demolition shall commence no later than fifteen (15) days of such
notice, and a date for completion of demolition. The date for completion shall
be reasonably set in light of the nature of the building, weather conditions,
and other related factors. The fifteen (15) day time period shall commence
three (3) days after the notice is mailed or upon personal service of the
notice.
   C.   The notice authorized by this section shall be served by either
personal service or by mail. Personal service may be made by a Police Officer
of the Village or other person designated by the Village President and Board of
Trustees.
   D.   Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner
or owners of any such building, including the lienholders of record, are not
ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real
estate was last assessed for general real estate taxes is sufficient notice
under this section.
   E.   In the event the owner fails to comply with any time period set forth
in the notice, the Village Attorney is authorized to commence a civil action in
the Circuit Court of the County seeking a court order authorizing demolition or
repair of the building or structure subject to the notice provided by this
section and to create the lien described in this chapter. It shall not be a
defense to this cause of action that the building is boarded up or otherwise
enclosed. It further shall not be a defense that the building is put in a safe
condition during the pendency of the civil action.
   F.   Joined as defendants in such cause shall be the owner of record and
other parties having an interest in the property as shown by documents recorded
in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds on the date of the filing of the
complaint for demolition. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-2013)
9-3-5: LIS PENDENS:
Upon the commencement of the civil action set forth in subsection 9-3-4E of
this chapter, a lis pendens designating the property upon which the subject
building is located shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds. Failure to file
or the improper filing of the lis pendens does not, however, affect the civil
action for demolition. Any person obtaining or recording in such office an
interest in the property after such filing may become party to the civil action
only if he intervenes by order of the court. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff.
12-10-2013)
9-3-6: DEMOLITION LIEN; PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
   A.   The cost of demolition or repair incurred by the Village, including
court costs, attorney fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this
chapter is recoverable from the owner or owners of the real estate and is a
lien thereon, which lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days
after completion of the demolition or repair, the Corporation Counsel shall
file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred by the Village, in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds of the County. Upon payment of such cost of
demolition by the owner or any person who has an interest in the property, the
lien shall be released by the Corporation Counsel.
   B.   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of
mortgages or mechanic's liens or any procedure allowed by law.
   C.   If payment of the Village's cost of demolition is not paid to the
Village within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of lien, the
Village Attorney may commence proceedings in the Circuit Court seeking a
personal judgment from the owner of the subject property at the time the
complaint for demolition was filed with the Circuit Clerk in the amount of such
costs. The action authorized by this subsection shall be in addition to, and
without waiver of, any other remedies. (Ord. 12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-
2013)
9-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or permitting any dangerous
building or other manmade structure to remain in dangerous condition, shall be
fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord.
12-01-13, 12-10-2013, eff. 12-10-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Permit Required; Application
9-4-2: Approval Of Route; Fee
9-4-3: Bond
9-4-4: Lights And Warnings
9-4-5: Wires, Cutting
9-4-6: Penalty
9-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall move any building from one (1) lot to another lot, on or over
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or way in the Village without
a permit for the same from the Village Clerk. Applications for permits shall be
made in writing to the Clerk, and shall state thereon the proposed route and
the number of days it is intended that the building shall occupy any public way
or place. (1979 Code §
4-3-1)
9-4-2: APPROVAL OF ROUTE; FEE:
Upon approval of the intended route by the committee on streets and alleys, a
fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each day it is
intended that such building shall occupy such portion of any public way or
place shall be paid to the Village Clerk and a permit issued. An additional fee
of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day or fraction thereof, over and above the
time stated in the application, shall be paid for occupying such way or place.
(1979 Code §
4-3-2; amd. 2017 Code)
9-4-3: BOND:
Every person applying for a permit under this chapter shall submit with his
application a bond with corporate sureties to be approved by the Village Clerk
conditioned on compliance with all the provisions of this chapter, and agreeing
to pay and hold the Village harmless from any claim which may be made against
it by reason of the occupation of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place or way by the building or structure moved. (1979 Code §
4-3-3)
9-4-4: LIGHTS AND WARNINGS:
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being
moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the contractor so as to warn
vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street which is so
blocked. The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning
signs and lights at night on the building or structure so as to guard against
any person or vehicle colliding with it. (1979 Code §
4-3-4)
9-4-5: WIRES, CUTTING:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with the wires or cables of a
public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special franchise
ordinance shall apply and the bond specified therein given. If no such terms
apply, then the President and Board of Trustees shall estimate the expense of
replacing the wires and the bond to be given to the Village shall cover such
expense. (1979 Code §
4-3-5)
9-4-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1979
Code § 4-3-6; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 5
BILLBOARDS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definition
9-5-2: Permit Required; Fee
9-5-3: Application For Permit
9-5-4: Frontage Consents
9-5-5: Dangerous Billboards, Nuisance
9-5-6: Enforcement
9-5-7: Penalty
9-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "billboard", as used in this chapter, shall have the same meaning as
that set out in section
10-1-4 of this Code. (1979 Code § 4-4-1; amd. 2017 Code)
9-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required; Exceptions; Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to
construct a billboard anywhere in the Village without having first secured a
permit from the Village Clerk; provided, that this section shall not be
construed to require a permit for the construction of a billboard other than a
roof sign, the total display area of which does not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet; and provided, that no permit issued under this chapter shall provide for
the construction or maintenance of any billboard or sign which extends over any
public alley, sidewalk, street or other public way or place.
   B.   Fee: The fee for a permit to construct a billboard shall be ten cents
($0.10) per square foot. (1979 Code § 4-4-2)
9-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk.
Each application shall state thereon the name of the owner of the premises, the
name of the person or corporation constructing the billboard, and the
specifications showing the size, material and manner of construction of the
billboard. (1979 Code § 4-4-3)
9-5-4: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
It shall be unlawful to construct any billboard for which a permit for
construction is required in any place in which a majority of the property on
both sides of the street of the block in which the billboard is located is used
exclusively for residence purposes, without first securing and filing with the
Village Clerk the written consents of the owners of a majority of all of the
property in the block; provided, that where a permit to construct a billboard
on a corner lot is sought, frontage consents shall be required from the owners
of a majority of the property in the block on all streets meeting at the
intersection where a majority of all such property is used for residence
purposes; and provided also, that where any block extends more than four
hundred feet (400') from the location of the proposed billboard, for the
purposes of this section, the block shall be construed as terminating four
hundred feet (400') from this location. Frontage consents once secured and
filed shall not be withdrawn; and need not be renewed except on the
construction of a new billboard to replace the one for which consents were
granted, but where consents are required and have been obtained for the
construction of one (1) or more billboards on any particular lot, additional
consents for any additional billboards on the same lot must be secured and
filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (1979 Code § 4-4-4)
9-5-5: DANGEROUS BILLBOARDS, NUISANCE:
Any billboard or signboard which is dangerous because of insecure fastening or
construction with resultant danger of falling or because it is an extreme fire
hazard and in fact a nuisance, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be
abated as such. (1979 Code § 4-4-5)
9-5-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Building Inspector to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they are hereby empowered to do so.
(1979 Code § 4-4-6; amd. Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1979
Code § 4-4-7; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 6
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Compliance; Definition
9-6-2: Location Restrictions
9-6-3: Permit Required; Fee
9-6-4: Approval Of Plans
9-6-5: Construction Specifications; Requirements
9-6-6: Electric Wiring
9-6-7: Safety Precautions
9-6-8: Operation And Maintenance
9-6-9: Inspection
9-6-1: COMPLIANCE; DEFINITION:
Every private residential swimming pool constructed and maintained hereafter
shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. The term "private
residential swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet
(2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of
human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment, constructed and
maintained in or above the ground outside of a building used for a single-
family dwelling unit, maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of
his household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection
with any business operated for profit. (1979 Code § 4-5-1)
9-6-2: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a
distance less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line, or
building line, and pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall be located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from
any side property line, except that a pool may be jointly constructed in or on
two (2) adjoining properties. In any case, pools and appurtenant equipment
shall not be constructed or maintained in the side yard between dwellings.
(1979 Code § 4-5-2)
9-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming
pool and appurtenances within the Village unless permits therefor shall have
first been obtained from the Village Clerk. (1979 Code § 4-5-3)
   B.   Fee: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a
swimming pool shall be determined in the same manner as set out in section
9-1-4 of this title. (1979 Code § 4-5-3; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-6-4: APPROVAL OF PLANS:
Plans for the construction, enlargement or for which a permit is required shall
be referred to the Building Inspector for examination and approval as to the
proper location, construction and use. All private residential swimming pools,
appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be construction in
conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are
desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall
be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code § 4-5-4; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-6-5: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Recirculation: All private residential swimming pools shall be of the
recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the
pool by pumps; the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected
before being returned to the pool.
   B.   Walks: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36")
wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool.
   C.   Fences: All private residential swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a fence erected along the exterior side of the pool walks. All
fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be
equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be at least four feet six inches
(4'6") in height above the walk grade level. All gates shall be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate and made
inaccessible to small children.
   D.   Water Supply: No source of water shall be used in private residential
swimming pools other than that supplied in the Village water distribution
system or other source after good and sufficient evidence of purity of the
water from such source. When a source of water other than Village supply is
used, a rate shall be established for the disposal of waste water by the
President and Board of Trustees.
   E.   Drainage: Pools shall be equipped with the facilities for completely
emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at
a rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct
connection shall be made to the sewer. Water drained from the pool shall not be
discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storm. At no time
shall the rate of drain water discharged exceed a flow of two hundred fifty
(250) gallons per minute.
   F.   Disinfection: Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all
pool water. Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a
disinfection method of pool water. (1979 Code § 4-5-5)
9-6-6: ELECTRIC WIRING:
No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential
swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within fifteen feet (15') of
such pools. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to
private residential swimming pools which might become electrically alive as a
result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall
be effectively grounded. (1979 Code § 4-5-6)
9-6-7: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential
swimming pools are in use. Every private residential swimming pool shall be
equipped with one (1) or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen inches
(15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of three-sixteenth inch (3/16")
manila line attached, and one (1) or more light but strong poles with blunted
ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach assists or
rescues. No diving board or platform more than three feet (3') above water
level shall be installed for use in connection with any private residential
swimming pool. (1979 Code § 4-5-7)
9-6-8: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory
operating condition during periods the pools are in use. No private residential
swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the Village, if
such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any
nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. (1979 Code §
4-5-8)
9-6-9: INSPECTION:
The Village and its agents and employees shall have the right to inspect all
private residential swimming pools to determine whether the provisions of the
Village ordinances and of this chapter regarding health, sanitation and safety
applicable thereto are being complied with. (1979 Code § 4-5-9)
CHAPTER 7
MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Placement In Parks Required
9-7-1: PLACEMENT IN PARKS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any mobile home, motor home,
travel trailer or camper used for human habitation upon any plot of ground in
the Village, except in a duly licensed mobile home park or recreational vehicle
park which has been constructed and is being maintained in compliance with
State law. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 8
DEMOLITIONS
Section:
9-8-1: Permit Required For Demolition
9-8-2: Permit Application And Approval
9-8-3: Proof Of Insurance
9-8-4: Water And Sewer Disconnection
9-8-5: Wells, Septic Tanks And Fuel Tanks
9-8-6: Safety Requirements And Miscellaneous Provisions
9-8-7: Penalties
9-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DEMOLITION:
A demolition permit shall be required for and prior to the demolition of any
building, structure or parts thereof within the Village limits. A demolition
permit shall be valid for a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days from
the date of issuance. (Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-2: PERMIT APPLICATION AND APPROVAL:
Applications for demolition permits shall be made to the Village Clerk, on the
form approved by the Village, and shall state the legal description and street
address of the property on which the demolition is to be done and signed by the
owner of the property or his or her duly authorized representative. The
application shall identify the person or persons responsible for the
performance of the demolition and provide proof of insurance in such amounts as
are set forth in this chapter. In addition, the application must be accompanied
by:
A.   A non-refundable application fee of thirty-five cents ($0.35) per square
foot of building or structure to be demolished;
B.   An up-to-date plat of survey identifying the buildings or structures to be
demolished and any well, septic tank and fuel tank located on the property, if
applicable;
C.   Proof of written notification (either by personal delivery or certified
mail) to all neighboring property owners located within two hundred and fifty
feet (250') of the property on which demolition is to take place, specifying
the date and time on which demolition is anticipated to occur. If a neighboring
property owner receiving such notice shares a common wall or party wall with
the building or structure to be demolished, the notice to the owner shall
specifically identify such wall;
D.   A written release or acknowledgment from all applicable utility companies
(including the Village) for services including, but not limited to electric,
gas, water, sewer and telecommunications that their respective service
connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been
removed or disconnected, or otherwise plugged and sealed in a safe manner in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
E.   Proof of adequate insurance from the party responsible for the demolition
work to be performed as required in section 9-8-3 of this chapter.
   The Village Board shall review all applications for compliance with this
section 9-8-2. The Village Board may in its discretion waive any of the
foregoing application requirements to the extent not applicable to the subject
demolition. (Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-3: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
No demolition shall occur unless and until the Village has been provided a
certificate of insurance from the party responsible for the demolition which
provides for liability coverage for bodily injury in an amount not less than
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) and for property damage in an amount
not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). Any such insurance
policy or policies shall designate the Village and its officers, agents and
employees as additional insureds. (Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-4: WATER AND SEWER DISCONNECTION:
The Village shall take a final water meter reading and have the water meter
removed prior to the demolition of any building or structure. The water and
sewer services must be disconnected and capped, as necessary, and inspected by
the Village. No demolition permit will issue to any applicant with outstanding
charges and fees to the Village for water and sewer services until the same
have been paid in full. (Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-5: WELLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND FUEL TANKS:
If any well, septic tank or fuel tank is located on the property subject to the
demolition, the Village must be provided with the following, as applicable:
A.   If a well is located on the property, a well-capping report from a
certified well driller showing the well has been sealed and abandoned in
accordance with the Illinois Water Well Construction Code;
B.   If a septic tank is located on the property, a report from the Ogle County
Health Department showing the septic tank has been sealed and abandoned in
accordance with the Illinois Private Sewerage Disposal Licensing Act and Code;
and
C.   If a fuel tank is located on the property, a copy of the permit for
removal of the fuel tank from the Office of the State Fire Marshall, which
removal shall be witnessed by a representative of the Village Fire Department.
(Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-6: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A.   All foundations must be buried below ground level and covered with at
least one foot (V) of clean top soil. Basement walls shall be removed to at
least twelve inches (12") below grade. All concrete slabs and basement floors
existing at grade or above shall be removed. Basements or other cavities must
be filled in and leveled throughout with clean, compacted clay fill. No
building material, debris, litter, refuse, wood or other decomposable or
combustible materials may be used in fill or otherwise buried at the site.
B.   Accessory structures must be removed in the event the principal structure
is removed from the property.
C.   The demolition site, if necessary, must be wet down with water to control
dust during the demolition.
D.   No less than ten (10) days prior to demolition, the Village shall be
provided an asbestos assessment report conducted by a licensed asbestos
inspector, including any plan for removal and disposal of asbestos, and if
applicable, a copy of the Illinois EPA Notification of Demolition and
Renovation form mailed to the Illinois EPA.
E.   Following demolition, the site shall be removed of all refuse and debris,
and the site graded and seeded with silt fencing installed to prevent erosion
until adequate grass levels have germinated.
F.   Any public property damaged during the demolition, including, but not
limited to sidewalks, curbs and road surface, shall be restored to
substantially the same condition as it was in prior to the demolition, or
otherwise replaced.
G.   A field inspection shall be conducted by the Village prior to the issuance
of the demolition permit and after completion of the demolition and clean-up
for the purpose of verifying compliance with all applicable requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 04-01-19, 4-9-2019)
9-8-7: PENALTIES:
A.   Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, or who refuses to remedy a violation of any such provision
herein, shall be fined for each offense in an amount not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each
day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.   Any person who commences a demolition without first obtaining a demolition
permit as required in this chapter shall be required to pay twice the
calculated amount for the required demolition permit. This fee shall be
exclusive of any other fines or penalties assessed under this chapter.
C.   It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, partnership or entity to
commence demolition on a subject property once a stop work order has been
issued for the property. Failure to stop work as ordered shall subject the
owner of the property to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 04-01-19,
4-9-2019)
CHAPTER 9
BUILDING CODE
Section:
9-9-1: Adoption Of Code
9-9-2: Amendments To Code
9-9-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2021 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the Village for the control of buildings and structures, as
therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in Village Hall are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter verbatim, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in section
9-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The Building Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Mt.
Morris, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Village of Mt. Morris Building
Department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the building official. The function of the agency shall be the
implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
(Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 10
LIFE SAFETY CODE
Section:
9-10-1:    Adoption Of Code
9-10-2:    Conflicting Provisions
9-10-3: Penalty
9-10-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the Life Safety Code, 2021 edition, as published
by the National Fire Protection Association, be and hereby is adopted as the
Life Safety Code of the Village for occupant safety strategies based on
construction, protection and occupancy features in all stages of a building
life cycle, as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the Life Safety Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. , 1-
24-2023)
9-10-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of the Life Safety Code adopted in section 9-10-
1 of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the provision of any zoning,
building, fire, safety or health chapter of this code existing on the effective
date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the people shall
prevail. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or neglects to comply with the terms hereof, shall upon conviction, be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall
be regarded as committed every day on which such person, firm or corporation
shall continue to operate in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
, 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 11
PLUMBING CODE
Section:
9-11-1: Adoption Of Code
9-11-2: Amendments To Code
9-11-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2021 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the Village for the regulations and control of mechanical
systems as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Plumbing Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter verbatim except the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in section
9-11-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Plumbing Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Plumbing Code of Mt.
Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The Village of Mt. Morris Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The function of
the agency shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
   C.   Section 115.4 is amended to read as follows:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair plumbing work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not
more than $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   D.   Section 305.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
      305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewerage
disposal systems shall be installed not less than eighteen (18) inches below
finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be
installed not less than eighteen (18) inches below grade.
   E.   Section 903.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
      903.1.1 Roof extension unprotected. Open vent pipes that extend through a
roof shall be terminated not less than six (6) inches above the roof. (Ord. ,
1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 12
FUEL GAS CODE
Section:
9-12-1: Adoption Of Code
9-12-2: Amendments To Code
9-12-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Fuel Gas Code of the Village for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and
gas fired appliances as therein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in
Village Hall are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter verbatim, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-12-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-12-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of Mt.
Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The Village of Mt. Morris Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The function of
the agency shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
   C.   Section 115.4 is amended to read as follows:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more
than $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 13
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section:
9-13-1: Adoption Of Code
9-13-2: Amendments To Code
9-13-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2021, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of Mt. Morris, Illinois, for regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of single-family houses, two-family
houses (duplexes) and buildings consisting of three (3) or more townhouse units
not more than three (3) stories in height in the Village; and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential
Code on file in Village Hall are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-13-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-13-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Residential Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as
follows:
   A.   Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code of
the Village of Mt. Morris, Illinois, and shall be cited as such and will be
referred to herein as "this code."
   B.   Section R113.4 is amended to read as follows:
      R113.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor
more than $750.00. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Table R301.2 is amended by inserting the information set forth below
under the applicable headings in such Table:
      Under GROUND SNOW LOAD, insert 30 Under Speed (mph), insert 115
      Under Topographic effects, insert NO Under Special wind region, insert NO
Under Wind-borne debris zone, insert NO
      Under SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY, insert A
      Under Weathering, insert SEVERE Under Frost line depth, insert 42" Under
Termite, insert MOD/HEAVY
      Under WINTER DESIGN TEMP, insert -4 DEG F
      Under ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED, insert YES
   D.   Section R313 is amended to read as follows:
      R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses containing
more than two dwellings.
      Exceptions:
      1.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required
where additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have
an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed, unless the
installation of automatic fire sprinkler is required by local municipal
ordinance or ordinance of the local fire protection district.
      R313.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler
systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in accordance with
Section P2904 or NFPA 13D.
      R313.1.2 Other code requirements. All structures built without automatic
fire sprinkler systems shall comply with all code requirements of the
International Residential Code for non-sprinklered construction.
      R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems. An
automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required to be
installed in one- and two- family dwellings, including additions and
alterations to such dwellings.
      Exceptions.
      1.   This provision shall not apply where the installation of automatic
fire sprinklers is required by local municipal ordinance or ordinance of the
local fire protection district.
      R313.2.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler
systems for one- and two-family dwellings shall be designed and installed in
accordance with Section P2904 or NFPA 13D.
      R313.2.2 Other code requirements. All structures built without automatic
fire sprinkler system shall comply with all code requirements of the
International Residential Code for non-sprinklered construction.
   E.   Section P2603.5.1:
      P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches below finished
grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall not be less
than eighteen (18) inches below grade. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 14
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Section:
9-14-1: Adoption Of Code
9-14-2: Amendments To Code
9-14-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2021
edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the Village for regulating and
governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy
efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems as therein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy
Conservation Code on file in Village Hall are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter verbatim, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-14-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-14-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as
follows:
   A.   Section C101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of
Mt. Morris, Illinois, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as
"this code."
   B.   Section C109.4 is amended to read as follows:
      C109.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor
more that $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of
Mt. Morris, Illinois, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as
"this code."
   D.   Section R109.4 is amended to read as follows:
      R109.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor
more that $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice shall
be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 15
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Section:
9-15-1: Adoption Of Code
9-15-2:    Amendments To Code
9-15-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2021
edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Existing Building Code of the Village for regulating and
governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation
of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as therein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Existing Building Code on file in Village Hall are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter verbatim, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
9-15-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-15-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Existing Building Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as
follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building
Code of Mt. Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      1.3.1 Creation of agency. The Village of Mt. Morris Building Department
is hereby created, and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
code official. The function of the agency shall be the implementation,
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code.
   C.   Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
      113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who repairs,
alters or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and no
more than $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice shall
be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 16
MECHANICAL CODE
Section:
9-16-1: Adoption Of Code
9-16-2: Amendments To Code
9-16-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the
Mechanical Code of the Village for the regulations and control of mechanical
systems as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter verbatim except the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in section
9-16-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-16-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Mechanical Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of
Mt. Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
   B.   Section 103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The Village of Mt. Morris Building Department is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. The function of
the agency shall be the implementation, administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this code.
   C.   Section 115.4 is amended to read as follows:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code officials, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more
than $750.00. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. , 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 17
ELECTRICAL CODE
Section:
9-17-1: Adoption Of Code
9-17-2: Conflicting Provisions
9-17-3: Penalty
9-17-1:  ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, be and hereby is adopted
as the Electrical Code of the Village for the control of electrical
installations as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the National Electrical Code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-17-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In any case where a provision of the National Electrical Code adopted in
section
9-17-1 of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the provision of any
zoning, building, fire, safety or health chapter of this code existing on the
effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the
people shall prevail. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-17-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or neglects to comply with the terms hereof, shall upon conviction, be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall
be regarded as committed every day on which such person, firm or corporation
shall continue to operate in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
, 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 18
FIRE CODE
Section:
9-18-1: Adoption Of Code
9-18-2:    Amendments To Code
9-18-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in Village Hall,
being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2021 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the
Fire Code of the Village for the regulations and control of mechanical systems
as therein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Fire Code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter verbatim
except the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section
9-18-2 of this chapter. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
9-18-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The International Fire Code, 2021 edition, is amended to read as follows:
   A.   Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Mt.
Morris, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   B.   Section 112.4 is amended to read as follows:
      115.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, or repair plumbing work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not
more than $750.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. , 1-24-2023)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Preamble
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-3: Title
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-5: Construction And Interpretation
10-1-6: Separability
10-1-1: PREAMBLE:
This title is enacted to the end that adequate light, pure air, and safety from
fire and other dangers may be secured, that the taxable value of the land and
buildings throughout the Municipality may be conserved, that congestion in the
public streets may be lessened or avoided, that the hazards to persons and
damage to property resulting from the accumulation of runoff of stormwaters or
floodwaters may be lessened or avoided, and that the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted, and to ensure and
facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical,
architectural and aesthetic importance. (1979 Code §
5-1-1; amd. 2017 Code)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare of the people;
To divide the Village into zones and districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business and manufacturing
and other specified uses;
To protect the character and stability of the residential, business and
manufacturing areas within the Village to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas;
To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
To regulate the intensity of use and lot areas, and to determine the area of
open space surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air
and to protect the public health;
To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within such areas;
To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform
therein;
To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of
development of intended uses within specified zoning districts;
To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the
interest of the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare;
To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village;
To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and
structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable
development in each district;
To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided herein. (1979 Code §
5-1-2)
10-1-3: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING TITLE
FOR THE VILLAGE. (1979 Code §
5-1-3)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A use which: a) is subordinate to and serves a
principal building or principal use; b) is subordinate in area, extent or
purpose to the principal building or principal use served; c) contributes to
the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal
building or principal use served; and d) is located on the same lot as the
principal building or principal use served.
AGRICULTURE: Land, or land and structures, the principal use of which includes
one (1) of the following: the growing of farm crops, truck garden crops, animal
and poultry husbandry, dairying, floriculture, horticulture, nurseries,
pasturage, greenhouses (wholesale); and accessory uses customarily incidental
to agricultural activities including, but not limited to, the farm dwelling,
dwelling for tenants and full time farm workers, and dwellings or lodging rooms
for seasonal workers.
ALLEY: A public way, not more than thirty feet (30') wide, which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen facilities permanently installed must always be included for
each apartment.
AUTO WRECKING AND JUNK YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not
in running condition or the parts thereof, or any other machinery or parts
thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation or any
land, building or structures used for the wrecking or storing of such motor
vehicles or the parts thereof, or any other machinery or parts thereof, or for
commercial salvaging or scavenging.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored in underground
tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of automobiles, are
offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and including minor
accessories and the service of automobiles; but not including major automobile
repairs, and including washing of automobiles where production line methods are
not used. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil
is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include
sale or storage of automobiles or trailers (new or used).
BANK AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Commercial banks, currency exchanges, savings
and loan associations, brokerage offices, loan offices, financial companies,
pawnshops and other similar financial institutions.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2)
of its height is above the established curb level or above the average level of
the adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established. A basement
shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services, or to display court or other
public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by street or, in lieu of a street or streets, by
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or corporate boundary lines
of the Village.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are
provided for compensation to four (4) or more persons, but not more than twelve
(12), who are not members of the keeper's family.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows, or openings; and
which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally
accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, and other similar structures are not considered as buildings.
BUILDING AREA: The space remaining of a building lot after the minimum yard
requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line
of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, that where buildings are set back from
the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the buildings.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the regulations
of this title prescribing the use, required yards, coverage, height and
setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and
minimum required usable open space for the district in which such building is
located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
zoning lot, on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from
it, regulated by the front yard requirements as provided in this title.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is, or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to described the size and mutual relationships of buildings
and other structures, as to size; height; coverage; shape; location of exterior
walls in relation to lot lines, to the centerlines of the streets, to other
walls of the same buildings, and to other buildings or structures; and to all
open spaces relating to the building or structures.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or
where services are offered for compensation.
CAR WASH: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more
than two (2) motor vehicles, using mechanical methods.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: A medical center or medical clinic is an
establishment where three (3) or more licensed doctors of medicine engage in
the practice of medicine, operating on a group or individual basis, with pooled
facilities such as coordinated laboratory, X-ray and allied departments, for
the diagnosis and treatment of humans, which need not but may include a drug
prescription counter (not a drugstore) for the dispensing of drugs and
pharmaceutical products to the patients of the said organization. In addition
to the above, the medical center or medical clinic may include the space for
the practice of dentistry.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which: a) complies
with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment thereof governing
bulk of districts in which said building or structure is located; or b) is
designed or intended for a permitted use or conditional permitted use, as
herein allowed in the district in which it is located.
DAYCARE CENTER: An institution or place in which are received three (3) or more
children, not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardian, for
part or all of a day but not later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. The term
"daycare center" includes, but is not limited to, the following: nursery
schools, childcare centers, day nurseries, kindergartens or nursery schools
operated by public or private elementary or secondary school systems.
DISTRICT: The area into which the Village has been divided for which uniform
regulations governing the use, size and intensity of land and buildings and
open space about buildings is established.
DRIVEWAY: A private road connecting a house, garage, or other building with the
street.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including house trailer or
mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family
dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1)
or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space and
is not connected to any other dwelling unit by roof, walls or porches on the
same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof designed or altered
for occupancy by two (2) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and
occupancy by one (1) family.
DWELLING UNIT: One (1) or more rooms in a residential structure which are
arranged, designed, used, or intended for use by one (1) family, for living or
sleeping purposes and which includes complete kitchen facilities permanently
installed.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Public, parochial, charitable or non- profit junior
college, college or university, other than trade or business schools including
instructional and recreational uses with or without living quarters, dining
rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental facilities for
students, teachers and employees.
FAMILY: One (1) or more persons each related to the other by marriage, blood or
legal adoption, together with such blood relatives, of respective spouses, who
are living together in a single dwelling maintaining a common household. A
"family" includes any domestic servants or farm hands and any gratuitous guests
residing with said "family". For the purpose of this title, "immediate family"
shall be construed to mean husband, wife, mother, father, son, daughter, son-
in-law, daughter-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, grandson, granddaughter,
mother-in-law, and father-in-law.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (For The Purpose Of Determining Requirements For Off-Street
Parking): A. The floor area shall mean the sum of gross horizontal area of the
several floors of the buildings or portion thereof, devoted to such use,
including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space, such
as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
   B.   However, floor area for the purpose of measurement of off-street
parking spaces shall not include floor area devoted primarily to storage
purposes. The following areas shall not be included for the purpose of
measurement of off-street parking spaces:
1. Floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including
aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space;
2. Basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing or service
activities or the production or processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building measured at
grade from the exterior walls but excluding open porches or terraces, garages
or carports.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises, in connection with which no person
is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises, and where no material or equipment is used which may constitute a
hazard, create a nuisance, or interfere with the reception of broadcast
signals; where it does not generate traffic or parking congestion; where all
material, equipment, merchandise or work in process is wholly enclosed within
the dwelling structure or an accessory building; and where the total area
devoted to such use shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the area of
one (1) floor of the principal building. No article shall be sold or offered
for sale except such as may be produced on the premises by members of the
immediate family. Clinics, hospitals, animal hospitals, kennels, among others,
shall not be deemed "home occupations".
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less than
twenty four (24) hours in any week of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals
suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical
conditions.
HOTEL, MOTEL, INN OR AUTO COURT: An establishment containing lodging
accommodations or designed for use by transients, or travelers or temporary
guests. Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used
on the premises, telephone and secretarial desk service, restaurants, cocktail
lounges, meeting rooms and ancillary retail uses, provided access to such uses
are from the exterior of the principal use.
HOUSE TRAILER: A recreational trailer or semitrailer equipped and used for
living quarters or for human habitation (temporarily or permanently) rather
than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste scrap metal, paper, rags or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses
taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs
or four (4) cats or combination thereof are kept over four (4) months of age or
where dogs, cats or other domestic animals are boarded for compensation or kept
for sale.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing
and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not included
within this definition.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self- service type washing,
drying, dry-cleaning, and ironing facilities; provided, that:
   A.   Not more than four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on the
premises; and
   B.   No pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms
where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangements,
but not open on a daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.
LOT: Parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of
record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by vertical planes containing
the front, side and rear lot lines (see definition of zoning lot).
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty degrees (130°)
or less.
LOT COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or
structures including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of
a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public
street; for a corner lot, the owner may elect either street line as the front
lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership except that where any portion of the lot extends to the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most
remote from the front lot lines.
LOT LINES, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot
lines.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured within the lot boundaries at the required setback line.
MANUFACTURE: The production, making or processing of products or commodities
for general consumption of the public or for sale to specialized institutions
or organizations. Also included is the subassembly, fabrications, or processing
of parts or components for use in other products or commodities.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way and is designed and
intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.
MOBILE HOME: A. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one (1) or
more persons.
   B.   A mobile home does not include dependent mobile home, camper, house
trailer, recreational vehicle, private living coach, house car or any other
sports or camping trailers not identified.
MOTEL: See the definition of hotel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building in which freight, brought to said building
by motor trucks, is assembled and sorted for routing in either intrastate or
interstate shipment by motor truck.
NET SITE AREA: The area of a zoning lot, parcel or tract, excluding boundary
rights-of-way.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure lawfully
established which: a) does not comply with all the regulations of this title or
of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building
or structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of
land that does not conform with the regulations of this title or any amendment
hereto governing use in the district in which it is located, but conformed with
all of the Codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements applicable at the
time such building or structure was erected, enlarged, or altered, and the use
thereof or the use of land was established.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A commercial establishment for the care of children
or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders,
but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for
surgical care.
OCCUPANCY, CERTIFICATE OF: A certificate issued by the Village Clerk stating
the occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred to therein
complies with the provisions of this title.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private
passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which
the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or
public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, and available
to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients
or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9 x 20 feet), exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the
storage of one (1) passenger automobile or commercial vehicles under one and
one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure
and temperature.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMANENT HABITATION: A period of two (2) or more months.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Village of Mt. Morris Plan Commission as constituted by
ordinance.
PORCH: A roofed over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a main
structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer privately owned and not directly controlled by public
authority.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area including, but not limited to,
the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, parkways and streets.
PUBLIC UTILITY: As defined by Illinois Compiled Statutes, a mutual company, or
a political subdivision or municipal corporation of the State of Illinois, or
its lessees or operating agents, engaged in the ownership, control, operation
or management of any plant, equipment or property for any of the purposes
enumerated in the aforesaid section 10.3 of "an Act Concerning Public
Utilities", as amended; a natural gas company as defined by the "Natural Gas
Act", as amended (title 15, chapter 15B, section 717a(6), of the United States
Code); or a public utility or licensee as defined by the Federal Power Act, as
amended (title 16, chapter 12, sections 796 and 824 of the United States Code).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle originally designed or permanently
converted and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation and
not used as a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house trailer,
camper or private living coach.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house
where meals are provided for compensation including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee
shop, lunch room, drive-in stand, tearoom and dining room and including the
serving of alcoholic beverages when served with and incidental to the serving
of meals.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the
travel of motor vehicles.
SCREENING: Structures or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of
concealing from view the area behind such structures or evergreen vegetation.
When a use is required to be separated from an adjoining lot or district by
screening, such screening shall be of sufficient size and design to completely
conceal such use when viewed from the adjoining lot or district; provided,
however, that no structure used for screening shall exceed the height of eight
feet (8').
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Any real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space located either (a)
within one (1) or more buildings, (b) upon an outdoor parking lot satisfying
the requirements hereinafter set forth, or (c) a combination of (a) and (b), to
occupants who are to have access to such for the purpose of storing and
removing personal property. A self-service storage facility is not a warehouse
or a junkyard. No self-service storage facility shall be used for any purpose
other than storage; residential use, conducting retail sales of any kind,
servicing or repair of vehicles, industrial use, or any other occupation shall
not be permitted. The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or
explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals shall not be permitted. With
respect to storage upon an outdoor parking lot, the following additionally
requirements apply:
   A.   Only licensed, operable vehicles and trailers may be stored upon the
outdoor parking lot. No inoperable vehicles may be stored. An inoperable
vehicle is any vehicle that cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason
including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state
of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
   B.   Vehicles shall include any self-propelled device, excluding aircraft,
by which any person or property may be transported, including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, SUV's, recreational vehicles, motor boats, personal
water craft, motorcycles, mini-bikes, and UTV's.
   C.   The parking lot shall be of a paved or gravel material and secured by a
locked fence surrounding the entire perimeter of the parking lot. The fence
shall be permitted in accordance with this code; provided, that,
notwithstanding the provisions in section
10-3-16, the fence shall be at least six (6) feet in height and constructed of
opaque material so that the interior is not visible from outside of the
property. Additionally, the fence shall be set back from the property line a
minimum of ten (10) feet except that the setback shall be at least sixty (60)
feet from any street or road; provided, however, that the conditions of
approval for special use may specify a greater setback requirement in those
cases where the fence may obstruct the vision of vehicles using the public
right of way.
   D.   The parking lot shall contain exterior lighting fixtures sufficient to
light the parking lot; provided, that such fixtures shall be shaded wherever
necessary to comply with section
10-10-1 of this code.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign containing directional information about public
places owned or operated by Federal, State or local governments or their
agencies; publicly or privately owned natural phenomena, historic, cultural,
scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas of natural scenic beauty
or naturally suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the
traveling public.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A structure, building wall or other outdoor surface used
to display and identify the name of the individual, business, profession,
organization or institution occupying the premises upon which it is located.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP: A lot in single ownership is one where the owner does not own
adjoining vacant property.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor above it, or if there is not a floor above, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story
exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STREET FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one (1) side of a street
between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of dead-end street, all of
the property along one (1) side of the street between an intersecting street
and the end of such dead-end street.
STREET LINE: A line separating a lot, piece, or parcel of land from a street.
STREETS: A public way other than an alley, which affords a primary means of
access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building such as the addition,
removal or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundation.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground, excluding a
fence. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium detached or projected,
shall be construed to be a structure.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the
premises but not including restaurants where the principal business is serving
food.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, buildings and structures
thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with
respect to the performance standards of this title.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all
the regulations of this title or any amendment hereto and which conforms with
all of the Codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the
time of the enactment of this title or any amendment thereto, for the structure
or land that is being considered.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and when applicable, performance standards, of this title for the district in
which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL PERMITTED: A use that has operational, physical and other
characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted
uses in a district, but which is a use that complements or is otherwise
compatible with the intended overall developments within a district. Compliance
with special standards not necessarily applicable to other permitted or special
permitted uses in the district shall be required for a special permitted use,
as herein is regulated in this title.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of this title where such variances will not
be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to the conditions peculiar
to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this title would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As
used in this title, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of
structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a
use, otherwise prohibited, shall not be allowed by variance nor shall a
variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning
district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
VILLAGE: The Village of Mt. Morris, Ogle County, Illinois.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group
of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted herein and which extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto, to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between side lot lines.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between
side lot lines.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the Village has been divided as set
forth on the zoning district map for the purposes of zoning regulations and
requirements.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the
time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership
or control. Therefore, a zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of
record.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated herein as a part hereof designating zoning
districts. (1979 Code §
5-1-4; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 25-08, 7-22-2025)
10-1-5: CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Construction: In the construction of this title, the rules and
definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
      1.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
      2.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
      3.   The word "may" is permissive.
      4.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece", and
"parcel"; the word "building" includes all other structures of every kind
regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include
the phrases "arranged for", "intended for", "designed for", "maintained for",
and "occupied for".
      5.   The word "Village" means Village of Mt. Morris, Ogle County,
Illinois.
      6.   The word "Commission" means the Plan Commission of the Village of
Mt. Morris.
      7.   Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured
horizontally.
   B.   Interpretation:
      1.   Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application,
provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
      2.   Overlapping Or Contradictory Regulations: Where the conditions
imposed by any provision of this title are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this
title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern.
      3.   Private Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement; provided, that where the
regulations of this title are more restrictive than such easements, covenants
or other private agreements, the requirements of this title shall govern.
      4.   Unlawful Uses: No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully
existing at the time of the adoption of this title shall become or be made
lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this title; and to the extent that,
and in any matter that, said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict
with the requirements of this title, said building, structure or use remains
unlawful hereunder.
      5.   Not A Licensing Title: Nothing contained in this title shall be
deemed to be a consent, license or permit to use any property or to locate,
construct or maintain any building, structure or facility or to carry on any
trade, industry, occupation or activity.
      6.   Cumulative Effect: The provisions of this title are cumulative and
are additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances, heretofore
passed or which may be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in this
title. (1979 Code §
5-1-5)
10-1-6: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village Board that the several
provisions of this title are separable, in accordance with the following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of
this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building
or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (1979 Code §
5-1-6)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts
10-2-2: Zoning Maps
10-2-3: Zoning Of Annexed Land
10-2-4: Boundary Lines
10-2-1: DISTRICTS:
The Village is divided into the following zoning districts as follows:
R-1 General Residence District.
R-2 Multi-Family Districts.
C-1 General Business District.
C-2 Highway Business District.
I-1 Light Industrial District.
I-2 General Industrial District. (1979 Code §
5-2-1)
10-2-2: ZONING MAPS:
The locations and boundaries of the districts established herein are shown upon
the zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into these standards. The zoning
map, together with all notations, references and other information shown
thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be a part hereof and shall have the
same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and
described herein. (1979 Code §
5-2-2)
10-2-3: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Territory which is annexed to the Village shall automatically be classified to
the highest restrictive use under the then existing Village zoning ordinance,
unless the person or persons petitioning for annexation are requesting a zoning
use other than the highest restrictive use, then in that case, a plan for
zoning the area to be annexed shall be forwarded to the Village Board by the
Plan Commission. Upon approval of such plan for zoning the area to be annexed,
the Village Board shall direct the Village Plan Commission to hold a public
hearing in accordance with the regulations of chapter 15 of this title. (1979
Code §
5-2-3)
10-2-4: BOUNDARY LINES:
Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown
on the zoning map, incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets,
alleys or similar rights-of-way, they shall be construed as following the
centerlines thereof.
   B.   Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   C.   Where a lot held in one (1) ownership and of record at the effective
date of these standards is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot
shall be construed to be within the less restricted district; provided, that
this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less
restricted portion of the lot by more than twenty percent (20%). (1979 Code §
5-2-4)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Permitted Uses
10-3-2: Special Uses
10-3-3: Performance Standards
10-3-4: Lot Size Requirements
10-3-5: Building Bulk Limitations
10-3-6: Signs
10-3-7: Off-Street Parking And Loading
10-3-8: Number Of Buildings On A Lot
10-3-9: Accessory Buildings
10-3-10: Driveways For Business And Industrial Districts
10-3-11: Vision Clearance; Corner Lots
10-3-12: Conditional Uses
10-3-13: Height Exemptions
10-3-14: Area Restriction; Front Yard
10-3-15: Yard Requirement
10-3-16: Fences
10-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or
enlarged, and no use of land shall hereafter be established or enlarged for any
use except a use that is named in the list of permitted uses for the zoning
district in which the building, structure or land is, or will be, located. When
a use is not specifically listed in the sections, it shall be assumed that such
uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless by a written decision of the Plan
Commission it is determined that said use is similar to, and not more
objectionable than, uses listed. There shall be the following exceptions to the
foregoing requirement:
      1.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof may be
continued subject to the conditions and restrictions contained in this Code.
      2.   Special uses may be allowed, but only in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-15-6 of this title.
   B.   The uses permitted in each zoning district are set out in each zoning
district of this title. (1979 Code §
5-3-1)
10-3-2: SPECIAL USES:
In each zoning district, certain enumerated uses may be permitted only if a
special use permit is secured in accordance with the provisions and procedures
of chapter 15 of this title. The special uses which may be allowed in each
zoning district are set out in each district. (1979 Code §
5-3-2)
10-3-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
When the regulations for a zoning district established by this title contain
performance standards, any permitted or special use constructed, established,
altered or enlarged after the effective date hereof shall be operated so as to
comply with the performance standards for the district in which it is, or will
be, located. No permitted or special use already established on the effective
date hereof shall be altered or modified so as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, the applicable performance standards established for the
district in which it is located. (1979 Code §
5-3-3)
10-3-4: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged,
nor shall any use of land be established or enlarged on a lot or tract of land
which is:
   A.   Smaller in area than the minimum lot area prescribed for the zoning
district in which the building, structure or land is located; or
   B.   Less than the minimum lot width prescribed for the zoning district in
which the building, structure or land is located. (1979 Code § 5-3-4)
10-3-5: BUILDING BULK LIMITATIONS:
In this title, building bulk limitations are expressed in terms of lot
coverage, maximum building height, minimum setbacks and minimum side and rear
yards.
   A.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or
enlarged so as to exceed the maximum lot coverage percentage or the maximum
building height for the district in which the building or structure is located.
   B.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or
enlarged unless the minimum setbacks and side and rear yards specified for the
district in which such building, structure or use of land is located are
maintained. All additions to principal buildings (for example, attached
garages) shall comply with the setback and yard requirements for the principal
building. The building bulk limitations applicable in each zoning district are
set out in each chapter of this title. (1979 Code § 5-3-5)
10-3-6: SIGNS:
No sign shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged unless it complies with
the regulations and restrictions imposed on the use and maintenance of signs in
the zoning district in which the sign is, or will be, located. The sign
regulations applicable in each zoning district are provided for in chapter 11
of this title. (1979 Code § 5-3-6)
10-3-7: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or enlarged,
nor shall any use of land be established or enlarged, unless the minimum off-
street parking and loading spaces required by chapter 12 of this title are
provided. (1979 Code § 5-3-7)
10-3-8: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A LOT:
Not more than one (1) principal detached residential building shall be located
on a zoning lot. A principal detached residential building shall not be located
on the same lot with any other principal building. (1979 Code § 5-3-8)
10-3-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
No accessory building or structure shall be constructed and occupied on any lot
prior to the time of completion of the construction of the principal building
to which it is accessory. (1979 Code § 5-3-9)
10-3-10: DRIVEWAYS FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
No land which is located in a residence district shall be used for a driveway,
walkway or access to any land which is located in a business or industrial
district. (1979 Code § 5-3-10)
10-3-11: VISION CLEARANCE; CORNER LOTS:
No building, structure or fence hereafter erected and no planting or other
obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles shall be located:
   A.   In any residential or commercial district exceeding a height of three
and one-half feet (31/2') above the lot grade within twenty five feet (25') of
the intersecting street lines bordering corner lots;
   B.   In any industrial district within twelve feet (12') of the intersecting
street lines bordering a corner lot, provided this regulation shall not apply
to any part of the building above the first floor. (1979 Code § 5-3-11)
10-3-12: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses of land or structures, or both, may be permitted within any
district subject to review by the Plan Commission and final approval by the
Village Board:
Cemeteries, churches, golf courses, hospitals, Municipal buildings, nursery
schools, daycare centers, day nurseries, public parking areas, police stations,
public administration buildings, public or private parks or playgrounds, public
utility facilities, radio and television antennas or towers, educational
institutions and public open space.
Additionally, the following use of land may be permitted for a maximum term of
five (5) years within General Residence Districts (R-1) and Multi-Family
Districts (R-2): limited agricultural use for row crops only on a single parcel
of at least ten (10) acres. No structures shall be permitted in connection with
such limited agricultural use. (Ord. 04-02-16, 4-26-2016)
10-3-13: HEIGHT EXEMPTIONS:
Churches, semipublic buildings, colleges, hospitals, clinics, schools and
sanitariums may exceed the height restrictions of the district in which said
building is located, provided such structure shall have side yards on both
sides complying with the area district regulations of that district and, in
addition, the side yard shall be increased one foot (1') in width for each foot
the building exceeds the height restrictions of that district. (1979 Code § 5-
3-13)
10-3-14: AREA RESTRICTION; FRONT YARD:
In computing the depth of a front yard requirement in the R-1 or R-2 District
where that portion of the district is partially occupied by the permanent
dwellings, three (3) or more in number, and the average established depth of
the front yard of the buildings fronting on a street between the closest two
(2) cross streets exceeds the front yard requirements under this title, the
depth of the front yard of future buildings fronting on said street as required
hereunder shall be increased to conform with such average, which setback need
not, in any instance, exceed thirty five feet (35'). If the average established
depth of the front yards as described above is less than that required under
this title, the depth of the front yard may be decreased to conform with such
average, but in no case shall it be less than ten feet (10').
No existing building shall be altered, enlarged or otherwise changed to reduce
or decrease the depth of the front yard to less than the requirements of this
or any other part of this title. (1979 Code § 5-3-14)
10-3-15: YARD REQUIREMENT:
Every part of the required yard shall be open from its lowest level to the sky
unobstructed. (1979 Code § 5-3-15)
10-3-16: FENCES:
   A.   Building Permit: A building permit is required for all fences to be
constructed within the Village, regardless of the zoning district where the
fence shall be located. No fence shall be constructed without first obtaining a
building permit. No building permit shall be issued if the proposed fence
creates an obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles. Prior to
issuance of the building permit, the owner shall locate all property pins to
insure accurate location of the fence. The owner or contractor shall call
J.U.L.I.E. prior to the commencement of any work. The building permit fee shall
be twice the standard fee in the event work is commenced prior to issuance of a
building permit.
   B.   Solid Structure Fences: Solid structure fences are prohibited in the
front yard in any zoning district. A solid structure fence is described as a
nonpermeable fence which as a result of its construction creates a significant
obstruction of vision.
   C.   Location Of Fence Posts: Any "solid structure fence" as defined in
subsection B of this section shall be constructed with the fence posts placed
on the inside of the fence or built into the fence. Under no circumstances
shall the fence posts be on the outside of a solid structure fence.
   D.   Height Restrictions: No fence in any front yard shall exceed the height
of four feet (4'). No fence in a side yard or a back yard shall exceed the
height of six feet six inches (6'6").
   E.   Acceptable Fence Types and Materials: Any commercially made or
fabricated residential wooden, vinyl, PVC or other types of industry standard
residential fence panels, standard chain link fences, and fences constructed of
residential standard wood fence boards, posts and rails may be utilized. Farm-
type woven wire, chicken wire and other similar light weight wire fence
materials may not be utilized. Metal ag-type posts may not be utilized in
residential zoning districts. Top rails are required on all chain link fences.
(1979 Code § 5-3-16; amd. Ord. 06-02-19, 6- -2019)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT (R-1)
SECTION:
10-4-1: Permitted Uses
10-4-2: Special Uses
10-4-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-4-4: Building Area
10-4-5: Dwelling Standards
10-4-6: Building Height
10-4-7: Off-Street Parking
10-4-8: Signs
10-4-1: PERMITTED USES:
Home occupations.
One-family detached dwelling.
Two-family dwelling. (1979 Code §
5-4-1)
10-4-2: SPECIAL USES:
None. (1979 Code §
5-4-2)
10-4-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
In an R-1 District, the following dimensional standards shall apply:
   A.   Lot Sizes: Every single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than eight
thousand seven hundred (8,700) square feet, and a width at the established
building line of not less than sixty five feet (65').
   B.   Front Yard: Each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed shall have a
front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') or twenty percent (20%) of the
lot depth, whichever is greater.
   C.   Side Yard: On each lot upon which a dwelling is constructed, no
structure shall be constructed closer than five feet (5') from the side lot
line. On corner lots, the side yard requirement shall be the same as interior
lots, except that there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than
fifteen feet (15') on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the
street upon which the building or structure maintains frontage. No accessory
building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the
adjacent lot to the rear or be located nearer than fifteen feet (15') to the
side lot of said adjacent lot.
   D.   Rear Yard: On each lot or parcel of land, no dwelling shall be
constructed closer than fifteen feet (15') from the rear lot line and no
structure shall be closer than five feet (5') from the rear lot line. (1979
Code §
5-4-3)
10-4-4: BUILDING AREA:
No building with its accessories shall cover an excess of thirty five percent
(35%) of an interior zoning lot or an excess of fifty percent (50%) of a corner
zoning lot. (1979 Code §
5-4-4)
10-4-5: DWELLING STANDARDS:
Every one-story dwelling hereinafter erected in any R-1 District shall have a
total ground floor area of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet
measured from the outside of the exterior walls, including utility rooms, but
excluding cellars, basements, open porches, garages and other spaces that are
not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping
purposes, except that rooms intended for such purposes which are "roughed in"
and are to be completed within a reasonable time not to exceed one (1) year,
may be considered in computing such ground floor areas.
Every dwelling of more than one (1) story hereinafter erected in R-1 shall have
a total floor area, measured from the outside of the exterior walls, of not
less than one thousand four hundred eighty (1,480) square feet, including
utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, garages and
other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for
living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that rooms intended for such
purposes which are "roughed in" and are to be completed within a reasonable
period of time not to exceed one (1) year, may be considered in computing such
total floor area. (1979 Code §
5-4-5)
10-4-6: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure nor enlargement of any building or structure shall be
hereinafter erected or maintained in any R-1 District to exceed two and one-
half (21/2) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
(1979 Code §
5-4-6)
10-4-7: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section
10-12-3 of this title. (1979 Code §
5-4-7)
10-4-8: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted as allowed in section
10-11-1 of this title. (1979 Code §
5-4-8)
CHAPTER 5
MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICTS (R-2)
SECTION:
10-5-1: Permitted Uses
10-5-2: Special Uses
10-5-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-5-4: Building Area
10-5-5: Dwelling Standards
10-5-6: Building Height
10-5-7: Off-Street Parking
10-5-8: Signs
10-5-1: PERMITTED USES:
Boarding and lodging houses.
Business offices for professional occupations (provided the building is of a
residential structure).
Clinics.
Daycare centers.
Home occupations.
Medical and dental offices.
Medical health centers.
Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
Nursing homes.
One-family detached dwelling.
Rest homes.
Two-family detached dwelling. (1979 Code §
5-5-1)
10-5-2: SPECIAL USES:
None. (1979 Code §
5-5-2)
10-5-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Total Lot Size: Every building hereinafter erected or structurally
altered as a multiple dwelling, apartment or row dwelling of more than two (2)
dwelling units shall provide total lot size of not less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet and not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per
dwelling unit.
   B.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet
(20').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet
(20') for interior lots nor less than fifteen feet (15') for corner lots.
   D.   Side Yard: On interior lots, there shall be side yards on each side of
a main building of not less than six feet (6') and a combined total side yard
of not less than twenty feet (20'). On corner lots, the side yard on the
intersecting street side shall not be less than twenty feet (20'). (1979 Code §
5-5-3)
10-5-4: BUILDING AREA:
Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by
buildings or structures. (1979 Code §
5-5-4)
10-5-5: DWELLING STANDARDS:
All multiple-family dwelling units hereinafter erected, converted or
reconstructed shall contain not less than four hundred eighty (480) square feet
of usable floor area as measured from the inside of the interior walls of each
unit, exclusive of basement, cellars, unfinished attics, open porches and
garages. (1979 Code §
5-5-5)
10-5-6: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure or enlargement of any building or structure shall be
hereinafter erected or maintained in any R-2 District to exceed two and one-
half (21/2) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
(1979 Code § 5-5-6)
10-5-7: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section
10-12-1 of this title. (1979 Code § 5-5-7)
10-5-8: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted as allowed in section
10-11-1 of this title. (1979 Code § 5-5-8)
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1)
SECTION:
10-6-1: Permitted Uses
10-6-2: Special Uses
10-6-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-6-4: Building Area
10-6-5: Height Of Buildings
10-6-6: Off-Street Parking
10-6-7: Signs
10-6-8: Design Standards For Business And Commercial Buildings
10-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses incidental to any on the same lot as a principal use.
Air conditioning, heating and plumbing sales and service.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products when
prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in teller facilities.
Barbershops.
Beauty parlors.
Book and stationery stores.
Candy and ice cream shops.
Clothing stores.
Drugstores.
Dry-cleaning establishments.
Dry good stores.
Electrical and household appliance stores.
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, fish markets, bakeries,
delicatessens and food lockers.
Funeral homes.
Furniture stores.
Garden supply stores.
Gift and florist shops.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops.
Home occupations.
Jewelry stores.
Laundry and launderettes.
Multi-family dwellings and apartments (provided they are located above the
first floor and provided such dwelling complies with lot size requirements and
building bulk limitations of R-2 Districts; no multi-family dwelling or
apartment unit shall be permitted on the ground floor in C-1 Districts).
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics.
One-family detached dwelling (provided any such dwelling complies with lot size
requirements and building bulk limitations of R-1 Districts).
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Photography studios.
Postal substations.
Public utility collection offices.
Public utility uses.
Restaurants, but not including "drive-ins".
Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Taverns.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
Theaters.
Two-family detached dwelling (provided any such dwelling complies with lot size
requirements and building bulk limitation of R-1 Districts).
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops. (1979 Code §
5-6-1)
10-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Other retail business uses not specifically listed in section
10-6-1 of this chapter, when found to have economic compatibility with
established uses on adjoining property.
Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), fraternal or religious.
Meeting halls. (Ord. 04-01-16, 4-26-2016)
10-6-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Total Lot Size: Every building hereinafter erected or structurally
altered for business use in a C-1 District shall provide total lot size of not
less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
   B.   Front Yard: There shall be no front yard required except where lots
comprising fifty percent (50%) of the frontage on the same street and within
the same block are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation
of not more than ten feet (10') in depth, then the average of such front yards
shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage of that
block.
   C.   Side Yard: No side yard is required except for a lot which abuts upon a
Residential District (R-1 or R-2), then there shall be provided a side yard of
ten feet (10') in such instance.
   D.   Rear Yard: No rear yard is required. (1979 Code §
5-6-3)
10-6-4: BUILDING AREA:
There is no requirement as to building area. (1979 Code §
5-6-4)
10-6-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45') in
height. Parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, stacks and
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above the maximum
height of forty five feet (45'), provided they are constructed in accordance
with all the ordinances of the Municipality. (1979 Code §
5-6-5)
10-6-6: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section
10-12-1 of this title. (1979 Code § 5-6-6)
10-6-7: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted as allowed in section
10-11-1 of this title. (1979 Code § 5-6-7)
10-6-8: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   Purpose: This section is enacted for the following purposes:
      1.   To promote high standards of building and site design in the General
Business District with the purpose of preserving an atmosphere consistent with
the character of the Village.
      2.   To promote and enhance the appeal and attraction of the Village to
residents, visitors and tourists, and to serve as a support and stimulus to
business and industry.
      3.   To foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of
the past.
   B.   Application:
      1.   Existing Buildings: Existing commercial and business buildings
expansion and alteration of exterior.
      2.   Commercial And Business Use Buildings: Commercial and business use
buildings in the General Business District (C-1) and existing on the effective
date hereof shall be allowed to continue with their existing designs upon such
date, except when the exterior appearance of any such building is to be altered
in any manner which requires a building permit. When such building permit is
required, the alteration shall comply with the requirements of this section.
      3.   New Buildings: New commercial and business use buildings in the
General Business District (C-1) which are constructed after the effective date
hereof must comply with the design standards set forth in this section.
   C.   Design Standards: The architectural style of a building subject to the
design standards of this section shall have the following characteristics:
      1.   The building facade shall be finished in materials traditionally
used for Main Street, Center Street, East Front Street and Wesley Avenue
storefronts that maintain the character of the Village, such as brick, glass
and wood.
      2.   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques, or
examples of craftsmanship, that characterize the architectural character of the
property shall be preserved whenever reasonably possible.
      3.   Deteriorated features shall be repaired rather than replaced
whenever reasonably possible. When the severity of the deterioration requires
replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
the design, color, texture and other visual qualities, and, where reasonably
possible, materials.
      4.   New additions or exterior alterations shall be compatible in
material, color, scale and architectural features with the existing building.
      5.   In the case of a proposed new building, such building shall not in
itself, or by reason of its location on the property, materially impair the
architectural value of buildings on adjacent sites or in the immediate vicinity
within the General Business District.
      6.   Signs shall meet all existing Codes and requirements.
      7.   All ground mounted mechanical equipment, including heating and air
conditioning units and trash receptacle areas, shall be completely screened
from adjacent properties by use of a wall or fence or shall be enclosed within
a building whenever practical.
      8.   All roof appurtenances, including air conditioning units and
mechanical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from the
view from adjacent streets and properties.
      9.   There shall be no outdoor display or storage of merchandise on
property without the approval of the Board of Trustees.
   D.   Enforcement: In the event any building or structure subject to the
development standards of this section is proposed to be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or moved or subject to demolition,
in violation of this section, the Village Board of Trustees, in addition to any
other remedies, may:
      1.   Institute a civil action for injunctive relief to stop, prevent or
abate a violation of this section.
      2.   Issue a stop work order to prevent a continuing violation of this
section. Work which proceeds in violation of this section in contravention of a
stop work order, or in disregard of a court ordered injunction shall be a
public nuisance. (1979 Code § 5-6-8)
CHAPTER 7
HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2)
SECTION:
10-7-1: Permitted Uses
10-7-2: Special Uses
10-7-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-7-4: Building Area
10-7-5: Height Of Buildings
10-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted under C-1 Districts.
Agricultural sales, storage and service of related products.
Automobile, motorcycle and truck sales.
Automobile service stations.
Battery and tire service stations.
Blacksmith and welding shops.
Building material offices and yards.
Car washes.
Contractor offices and shops where fabricating of materials is done.
Drive-in restaurants.
Feed stores.
Fertilizer sales, including bulk storage and mixing.
Garages for the storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles.
Grain elevators.
Hotels and motels.
Monument sales.
Package liquor stores.
Pet shops.
Recreational vehicle sales and service businesses. (1979 Code § 5-7-1)
10-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by a special use permit:
   Highway service business found to have economic comparability with
established uses on adjoining property.
   Self-service storage facility. With reference to the definition of "self-
service storage facility" set forth in section
10-1-4 of this code, the application for special use for a self-service storage
facility shall specify whether the special use is for an indoor facility, an
outdoor parking lot, or a combination indoor facility/outdoor parking lot.
(1979 Code § 5-7-2; amd. Ord. 25-08, 7-22-2025)
10-7-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Total Lot Size: Every building hereinafter erected or structurally
altered for business use in the C-2 District shall provide total lot size of
not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
   B.   Front Yard: Every building hereinafter erected or enlarged shall
provide and maintain a front yard sixty feet (60') from any street or road.
   C.   Side Yard: No side yard is required except for a lot which abuts upon a
Residential District (R-1 or R-2), then there shall be provided a side yard of
ten feet (10') in such instance.
   D.   Rear Yard: No rear yard is required. (1979 Code § 5-7-3)
10-7-4: BUILDING AREA:
There is no requirement as to building area. (1979 Code § 5-7-4)
10-7-5: HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of three (3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45') in
height. Parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, stacks and
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above the maximum
height of forty five feet (45'), provided they are constructed in accordance
with all the ordinances in the Municipality. (1979 Code § 5-7-5)
CHAPTER 8
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
SECTION:
10-8-1: Permitted Uses
10-8-2: Special Uses
10-8-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-8-4: Building Area
10-8-5: Building Height
10-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
Agriculture.
Animal hospitals.
Building material sales.
Car washes.
Cement block manufacturers.
Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and other
electronic equipment requiring outdoor towers and including microwave relay
towers and antenna towers for the dispatching of private messages.
Compounding, processing and blending of chemical products, but not including
any materials which decompose by detonation.
Contractor's or construction shops.
Garages, at which the sale of gasoline at retail is only incidental to the
principal use.
Greenhouses.
Kennels.
Laboratories for testing and research, excluding the raising of animals for
research and excluding the testing of fissionable materials.
Livestock depots, sales' yards and auction barns.
Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die shops, provided
they do not include any of the following equipment: punch presses exceeding
fifty (50) tons' pressure, drop forges or riveting and grinding machines.
Manufacture and assembling (or any combination of such processes) of products
from wood, cork, glass, leather, fur, plastic, felt and other textiles, but not
including, as a principal operation, the processing of any raw materials.
Milk depots, creameries and dairies.
Mobile home or trailer sales areas.
Motor freight terminals.
Printing and bindery plants.
Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses.
Recreational vehicle sales, service, storage and retail.
Trade schools.
Truck service centers.
Warehouses and storage facilities, including agricultural products. (1979 Code
§ 5-8-1)
10-8-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Storage of fuel oils, gasoline and other flammable materials. (1979 Code § 5-8-
2)
10-8-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Total Lot Size: Every building hereinafter erected or structurally
altered for business use in I-1 District shall provide total lot size of not
less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Front Yard: Every building hereinafter erected or enlarged shall
provide and maintain a front yard thirty feet (30') from any street or road.
   C.   Side Yard: The total of the side yards must equal ten percent (10%) of
the total lot size, but need not exceed twenty five feet (25') in total side
yard measurements.
   D.   Rear Yard: No rear yard is required. (1979 Code § 5-8-3)
10-8-4: BUILDING AREA:
Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by
buildings or structures. (1979 Code § 5-8-4)
10-8-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure or enlargement of any building or structure
hereinafter erected or maintained in any I-1 District shall exceed twenty five
feet (25') except under the following circumstances:
   A.   For each additional fifty feet (50') of setback in excess of the
required minimums under this chapter, each structure shall be allowed an
additional eleven feet (11') in height.
   B.   For buildings or structures constructed for the purpose of the storage
of agricultural products including grain elevators and grain storage
facilities, the building height shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150')
in height. (Ord. 10-01-14, 10-14-2014)
CHAPTER 9
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2)
SECTION:
10-9-1: Permitted Uses
10-9-2: Special Uses
10-9-3: Lot Size Requirements
10-9-4: Building Area
10-9-5: Building Height
10-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
Any use permitted in the I-1 Light Industrial District.
Compressor stations used for the distribution, transmission and storage of
natural gas as a part of the operations of a public utility as defined in this
title.
Extracting, processing, storage and sale of earth products and other raw
materials.
Railroad yards, terminals, switching and maintenance areas and facilities,
including lodging and sleeping facilities for transient railroad labor.
Ready mix cement plants.
Sewage treatment plants.
Any other production, processing, cleaning, testing, servicing and repair which
can and shall operate in accordance with the standards set forth in the
definition of accessory user, incidental to and of the same zoning lot as a
principal use. (1979 Code § 5-9-1)
10-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the I-1 District.
Automobile wrecking yards, provided they are enclosed throughout the entire
perimeter by a solid fence not less than eight feet (8') in height.
Paint and varnish manufacturing.
Processing plants for meat and vegetable products. (1979 Code § 5-9-2)
10-9-3: LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Total Lot Size: Every building hereinafter erected or structurally
altered for business use in I-2 Districts shall provide total lot size of not
less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet.
   B.   Front Yard: Every building hereinafter erected or enlarged shall
provide and maintain a front yard thirty feet (30') from any street or road.
   C.   Side Yard: The total of the side yards must equal ten percent (10%) of
the total lot size, but need not exceed twenty five feet (25') in total side
yard measurements.
   D.   Rear Yard: No rear yard is required. (1979 Code § 5-9-3)
10-9-4: BUILDING AREA:
Not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of a zoning lot may be covered by
buildings or structures. (1979 Code § 5-9-4)
10-9-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure or enlargement of any building or structure
hereinafter erected or maintained in any I-2 District shall exceed forty five
feet (45') except under the following circumstances: For each additional fifty
feet (50') of setback in excess of the required minimums under this title, each
structure shall be allowed an additional eleven feet (11') in height. (1979
Code § 5-9-5)
CHAPTER 10
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Performance Standards; All Districts
10-10-1: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; ALL DISTRICTS:
Any use established in any district after the effective date hereof shall be so
operated as to comply with the following performance standards. No use lawfully
established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to
conflict with these performance standards.
   A.   Noise: The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below,
shall not exceed the following decibel levels in the designated octave bands
when adjacent to the designated types of use districts:
Octave Band       Residential          Sound Level In
Cycles Per Second Districts (R-1, R-2) Decibels Band
Octave Band       Residential          Sound Level In
Cycles Per Second Districts (R-1, R-2) Decibels Band
   0 to 75     58                   73
   75 to 150   54                   69
   150 to 300  50                   65
   300 to 600  46                   61
   600 to 1,20040                   55
   1,200 to 2,433                   48
   2,400 to 4,826                   41
   Over 4,800  20                   35
 
Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not easily measured
shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
Method of measurement, as follows: Measurement is to be made at the nearest
boundary of the nearest residential area or at any other point along the
boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a
sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the
American Standards Association.
   B.   Operations, Activities And Storage: All operations, activities and
storage (but not off-street parking or loading of motor vehicles in operating
condition) shall be conducted or maintained wholly inside buildings, except
that storage only may be outside a building if no part of the storage is less
than fifty feet (50') from any lot line or line of the tract on which the
storage is maintained, and screening, as defined in this title, is provided
between such storage and any lot line which abuts a residential district.
   C.   Lighting: Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary
to avoid casting direct light upon property located in any residential district
or upon any public street or park.
   D.   Pollution: No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke or gas, and no
odorous or particulate matter detectable beyond the zoning lot lines shall be
emitted.
   E.   Vibration: No vibration shall be detectable beyond the zoning lot
lines.
   F.   Glare; Heat: No glare or heat shall be detectable beyond the zoning lot
lines. (1979 Code § 5-10-1)
CHAPTER 11
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Permitted Signs; Regulations
10-11-1: PERMITTED SIGNS; REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be permitted as follows:
   A.   Residential Districts (R-1, R-2):
      1.   Not more than two (2) non-illuminated signs on any tracts of land,
each one not larger than ten (10) square feet in area pertaining only to the
sale, lease, or identification of the premises upon which they are located.
      2.   Directional signs not larger than ten (10) square feet in area for
any use permitted in the residential district in which the sign is located.
      3.   Non-flashing, non-illuminated accessory signs for use as name plates
or identification are subject to the following:
         a.   For one- and two-family dwellings, there shall be not more than
one (1) nameplate, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, for each dwelling
unit indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted occupant or
a permitted occupation.
         b.   For multiple-family dwellings, for apartment hotels, and for
buildings other than dwellings, a single identification sign not exceeding nine
(9) square feet in area and indicating only the name and address of the
building and the name of the management thereof may be displayed.
         c.   In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building,
there shall be permitted one (1) sign not exceeding twenty five (25) square
feet in area; on corner lots two (2) such signs, one (1) facing each street,
shall be permitted. Said sign shall be removed by the person or persons
erecting same within two (2) weeks after completion of the structure or
improvement indicated.
         d.   No sign shall project higher than ten feet (10') above curb
level.
         e.   No sign shall project beyond the property line.
   B.   Business Districts (C-1, C-2):
      1.   General Business (C-1):
         a.   Maximum gross surface area for all signs on any lot or premises:
Two (2) times the linear feet of frontage on such lot or premises.
         b.   Maximum gross surface area for any one (1) sign: Two hundred
(200) square feet.
         c.   Maximum gross surface area for all illuminated signs on any lot
or premises: One (1) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot or premises.
         d.   Maximum gross surface for any one (1) illuminated sign: One
hundred (100) square feet.
         e.   Each side of a lot or premises which abuts upon more than one (1)
street shall be considered as a separate frontage.
         f.   No sign shall have any flashing or intermittent illumination.
         g.   No sign that is wholly or partially independent of a building for
support shall be higher than twenty feet (20') above the ground level. Each
such sign shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way
line of each street or road on which it fronts. No such sign shall be located
within thirty feet (30') of the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines
of any two (2) or more streets.
      2.   Highway Business (C-2):
         a.   Maximum gross surface area of all signs on any lot or premises:
Five (5) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot or premises.
         b.   Maximum gross surface area of any one (1) sign: Three hundred
(300) square feet.
         c.   Maximum gross surface area of all illuminated signs on any lot or
premises: Three (3) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot or premises.
         d.   Maximum gross surface area of any one (1) illuminated sign: Two
hundred (200) square feet.
         e.   Each side of a lot or premises which abuts upon more than one (1)
street shall be considered as a separate frontage.
         f.   No sign located in the direct line of vision of any traffic
control signal shall have flashing or intermittent illumination.
         g.   No sign that is wholly or partially independent of a building for
support shall be higher than thirty feet (30') above the ground level. Each
such sign that is two hundred (200) square feet in area or more shall be set
back at least twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way line of each street or
road on which it fronts. No such sign shall be located within thirty feet (30')
of the point of intersection of the right- of-way lines of any two (2) or more
streets, roads or highways.
   C.   Industrial Districts (I-1, I-2):
      1.   Maximum gross surface area of all signs on any lot or premises: Five
(5) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot or premises.
      2.   Maximum gross surface area of any one (1) sign: Three hundred (300)
square feet.
      3.   Maximum gross surface area of all illuminated signs on any lot or
premises: Three (3) times the linear feet of frontage of such lot or premises.
      4.   Maximum gross surface area of any one (1) illuminated sign: Two
hundred (200) square feet.
      5.   Each side of a lot or premises which abuts upon more than one (1)
street shall be considered as a separate frontage.
      6.   No sign located in the direct line of vision of any traffic control
signal shall have flashing or intermittent illumination.
      7.   No sign that is wholly or partially independent of a building for
support shall be higher than thirty feet (30') above the ground level. Each
such sign that is two hundred (200) square feet in area or more shall be set
back at least twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way line of each street or
road on which it fronts. No such sign shall be located within thirty feet (30')
of the point of intersection of the right- of-way lines of any two (2) or more
streets, roads or highways. (1979 Code § 5-11-1)
CHAPTER 12
OFF-STREET PARKING
SECTION:
10-12-1: General Provisions
10-12-2: Location Of Facilities
10-12-3: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
10-12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Size Of Vehicle Parking Space: For the purpose of this section, one
hundred eighty (180) square feet of lot or floor area which has means of
ingress or egress from a public alley or street, with vertical clearance of at
least seven feet (7') shall be deemed parking space for one (1) vehicle. Such
space shall not occupy any part of any required front yard, but whereupon, may
be included as part of a required open space for side or rear yard.
   B.   Corner Lots: On corner lots, parking space may not be included as part
of required yards lying adjacent to either street.
   C.   Paving, Curb Cuts, Drainage And Screening: Such parking spaces and
access driveways shall be paved or otherwise surfaced with all-weather dust
proof material equal to the specifications provided for Village streets. There
shall be not more than two (2) curb cuts required for the driveway connection
to the public street or alley. Drainage shall be provided for all surface water
to storm sewer inlets. Where such parking areas or lots abut upon adjacent
residential properties, there shall be provided a wall or solid screen planting
of appropriate shrubs to a height of not less than four feet (4') along the
entire boundary, common to both residential and parking areas. Lighting used to
illuminate such parking lots shall be arranged so as to reflect the lighting
away from adjoining premises to residential districts. Parking facilities
accessory to residential use shall be used for the parking of passenger
automobiles, pickup trucks or van trucks for passenger use, all of which shall
be owned by the occupants of the residence for which such facilities are
accessory or their guests.
   D.   Vehicular Access: All off-street automobile parking facilities shall be
designed with appropriate means of vehicular access in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movement. No driveway or curb cuts in any district
shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in width. (1979 Code § 5-12-1)
10-12-2: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   For Uses In Residential District: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings
shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to
uses other than dwellings shall be at a distance not in excess of one hundred
feet (100') from such use as measured from the entrance to the main building to
the nearest point of the parking area.
   B.   For Uses In Business And Industrial Districts: All required parking
spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the use served, except for
spaces accessory to dwelling units, which shall be within three hundred feet
(300') of the use served; however, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a
business or industrial district shall be located in a residential district.
(1979 Code § 5-12-2)
10-12-3: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided
as required hereinafter. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be
on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the
premises at any one (1) time.
   A.   Residential Districts (R-1, R-2):
 
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
Boarding and lodging houses             each lodging room, plus 1 space for
                                         the owner or manager and each
                                         employee.
Dwellings:                               
 One-family and two-family dwellings   2 parking spaces shall be provided for
                                         each dwelling unit.
                                         2 parking spaces shall be provided for
                                         every dwelling unit. For lodging rooms
 Multiple-family dwellings (including  located in an apartment, 1 parking
  apartments)                            space shall be provided for each
                                         lodging room, plus 1 parking space for
                                         each employee.
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each examining room and 1 additional
Medical or dental offices, clinics and  parking space for each 4 seats in the
medical health centers                   patient waiting room(s), plus 1
                                         parking space for each staff doctor
                                         and employee.
Offices; business, professional and     1 parking space shall be provided for
government                               each 200 square feet of floor area.
                                         1 parking space shall be provided for
                                         each 4 beds, plus 1 parking space for
Rest homes and nursing homes            each 2 employees (other than staff
                                         doctors), plus 1 parking space for
                                         each doctor assigned to the staff.
 
   B.   Business Districts (C-1, C-2):
 
Apartments, boarding and lodging  1 parking space shall be provided for
houses, motels and hotels          each guest or sleeping room or suite.
Funeral homes                     10 parking spaces shall be provided for
                                   each chapel or parlor.
                                   Parking space equal in number to 10
Private clubs and lodges          percent of the capacity in persons shall
                                   be provided.
 
   C.   Industrial Districts (I-1, I-2):
 
                           1 parking space shall be provided for each 2
Manufacturing uses        employees, plus 1 parking space for each vehicle
                           used by the enterprise.
                           1 parking space shall be provided for each 600
Wholesale establishments  square feet of gross floor area in excess of 4,000
                           square feet of gross floor area.
 
   D.   Other Uses: Parking spaces for other permitted or special uses not
listed in this section shall be provided in accordance with the determination
of the Plan Commission with respect to the number of spaces that are required
to serve employees and/or the necessities of the visiting public at each such
use. (1979 Code § 5-12-3)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Continuance Of Use
10-13-2: Discontinuance Of Use And Change Of Use
10-13-3: Repairs And Alterations
10-13-4: Damage Or Destruction
10-13-5: Additions And Enlargements
10-13-6: Existing Special Uses
10-13-1: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
Any lawfully established use of a building or land on the effective date
hereof, or of amendments thereto that does not conform to the use regulations
for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a legal
nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein.
Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date hereof or of amendments thereto may be completed in accordance
with the approved plans; provided, construction is started within ninety (90)
days and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be
deemed a lawfully established building. (1979 Code § 5-13-1)
10-13-2: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE AND CHANGE OF USE:
   A.   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   B.   When a nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof,
has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or
whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a
nonconforming use, such use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned,
be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity
with the regulations of the district.
   C.   A nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, may be
changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted character, but may not
thereafter be changed to any less restricted use.
   D.   No part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming
use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this title shall thereafter be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. (1979
Code § 5-13-2)
10-13-3: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   B.   No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure
containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law.
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the
nonconforming use.
      3.   When a building in a residential district containing residential
nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve liveability, provided
no structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of
dwelling units or the bulk of the building. (1979 Code § 5-13-3)
10-13-4: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
   A.   If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more
of its replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be
rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or
destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based
upon prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original
condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which
existed at the time of such partial destruction.
   B.   In allowing restoration or repair, such restoration of the building or
other structure must be started within a period of six (6) months from the date
of damage or destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion, and
completion shall be within one (1) year from the date of damage. If not
completed within one (1) year, the use shall be abandoned. (1979 Code § 5-13-4)
10-13-5: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
   A.   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire
building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to conform to
all regulations of the district in which it is located.
   B.   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered
in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied
by such nonconforming use.
   C.   No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed on the effective date hereof, or to displace any
conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel. (1979 Code § 5-13-5)
10-13-6: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use exists on the effective date hereof and is permitted by this title
only as a special use in the district in which it is located, such use shall
not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed
a lawful special use in such district. No such lawful special use shall be
substantially expanded unless a supplementary special use permit is secured in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. (1979 Code § 5-13-6)
CHAPTER 14
FLOODPLAIN
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: Permitted Uses
10-14-3: Special Uses
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
This district is created for the purpose of protecting against flood damage or
destruction to structures which might otherwise be constructed in flood hazard
areas. The boundaries of this district shall be the 100-year flood elevation
established according to the Illinois State Water Survey's floodplain
information repository or a detailed engineering study, if available. (1979
Code § 5-14-1)
10-14-2: PERMITTED USES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no structures shall be
erected, converted or structurally altered, and no land and/or structure shall
be used in the floodplain district except for one (1) or more of the following
uses:
   A.   Agricultural uses, including general farming, grazing, outdoor
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming and sod farming.
   B.   Open type uses, such as loading and unloading areas, parking lots,
storage of motor vehicles for not more than twenty four (24) hour periods, when
such uses are permitted in the district in which the floodplain is located.
   C.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, park, wildlife and nature preserves; game farms, fish
hatcheries, hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to all other provisions
of this title.
   D.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
   E.   In the area above the 100-year floodplain, uses are permitted by the
zoning district otherwise established for the lot, subject to the regulations
of such district; provided, however, that the elevation of the lowest floor
designed or intended for human use or habitation, including basements, shall be
at least three feet (3') above the elevation of the nearest point of the 100-
year floodplain.
   F.   In the area below the 100-year floodplain, land may be used to supply
open space or lot area requirements of a lot partially located above; provided,
however, that no building or structure shall be located below the 100-year
floodplain. (1979 Code § 5-14-2)
10-14-3: SPECIAL USES:
In the floodplain district, a special use may be granted pursuant to the
provisions of chapter 15 of this title, in accordance with the following
regulations and conditions:
   A.   In the area below the 100-year floodplain, dumping or backfilling with
any material in any manner is prohibited unless, through compensating
excavation and shaping of the floodplain, the flow and impoundment capacity of
the floodplain will be maintained or improved; and unless all applicable State
regulations are complied with.
   B.   In the area below the 100-year floodplain, the construction or location
of bridges, outdoor play equipment, bleachers, and similar outdoor equipment
and appurtenances is prohibited unless such elements would not harmfully
interfere with the discharge or stage characteristics of a stream to the flow,
or reduction in the impoundment capacity of the floodplain.
   C.   Approval of a special use permit shall be conditional upon compliance
with this title and any applicable State regulations. (1979 Code § 5-14-3)
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-15-1: Zoning Administrator
10-15-2: Duties Of Zoning Administrator
10-15-3: Authority Of Plan Commission
10-15-4: Variations
10-15-5: Amendments
10-15-6: Special Use Permits
10-15-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Chairman of the Ordinance Committee provided in section
1-6-6 of this Code shall be the Zoning Administrator. The Administrator may
hire deputies and assistants as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of
this title, but only with the consent of the Village Board. (1979 Code § 5-15-
1)
10-15-2: DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Zoning Administrator or the duly designated and Acting Deputy shall enforce
this title, and in furtherance of said authority shall:
   A.   Approve all zoning and occupancy certificates and make and maintain
records thereof.
   B.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to
determine whether they comply with the terms of this title.
   C.   Have available in book or pamphlet form the compiled text of the zoning
title and amendments thereof.
   D.   Have available in map form, on or before March 31 of each year, a
zoning map or maps showing the zoning districts, divisions and classifications
in effect in the Village as of December 31 of the preceding year. If no changes
in the zoning districts, divisions and classifications have been made during
the preceding calendar year, then no zoning map need be printed for such year.
   E.   Receive, file and forward to the Plan Commission records in all appeals
and all applications for variations, special use permits, and amendments to
this title.
   F.   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by
the Plan Commission in the exercise of its duties. (1979 Code § 5-15-2)
10-15-3: AUTHORITY OF PLAN COMMISSION:
   A.   The Plan Commission of the Village shall have the following authority
and jurisdiction:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator under this title;
      2.   To hear and pass upon applications for variations from the
regulations and restrictions contained in this title;
      3.   To hold public hearings on all applications for amendments to this
title and report its findings and recommendations with respect to proposed
amendments of the Village Board;
      4.   To hear all applications for special use permits and report its
findings and recommendations to the Village Board; and
      5.   To hear and decide all other matters referred to it or upon which it
is required to pass under this title.
   B.   Meetings and rules of the Plan Commission shall be as prescribed in
title 2, chapter 2 of this Code. (1979 Code § 5-15-3)
10-15-4: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Findings: The Plan Commission may vary the regulations imposed by this
title in harmony with their general purpose and intent, but only in the
specific instances hereinafter set forth. In order to vary the zoning
regulations, the Plan Commission shall make a finding of fact based upon the
standards hereinafter prescribed, that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships involved in the application of the strict letter of the
regulations of this title.
   B.   Application: Application for a variation shall be filed in the same
manner as an application for a special use permit as provided in this Code.
   C.   Hearings: Public hearings shall be held pursuant to this Code.
   D.   Standards: Standards for variations are as follows:
      1.   The Plan Commission shall not vary the regulations of this title,
unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case that:
         a.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
         b.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
      2.   In determining whether the strict application of this title creates
practical difficulties for, or imposes a particular hardship on, an applicant
for a variation, the Plan Commission shall consider the extent to which the
following facts have been established by the evidence:
         a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
         b.   The conditions upon which the petition for a variation are based
are unique and would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the
same zoning classification;
         c.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to obtain a higher financial return on the property;
         d.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
         e.   The granting of the variation will not be materially detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; and
         f.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public
safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood.
      3.   The Plan Commission may impose such conditions and restrictions upon
the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to reduce or minimize
the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood,
and better to carry out the general intent of this title.
   E.   Variations: Variations from regulations of this title may be granted
only in the following instances, and in no others:
      1.   To permit any setback or yard less than the setback or yard required
by this title;
      2.   To permit any building or structure to exceed the height limitations
imposed by this title but not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
allowable height;
      3.   To permit the use of a lot for a use otherwise prohibited solely
because of insufficient area of the lot, but in no event shall the area of the
lot be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot area;
      4.   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial use of
such facility by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week;
      5.   To reduce the applicable off-street parking by not more than one (1)
parking space or twenty percent (20%) of the number of spaces required,
whichever number is greater; and
      6.   To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum
distance that required parking spaces may be located from the use served. To
exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this section, when a lot
of record of a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the effective date hereof
is by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by an authorized
governmental body or by reason of a conveyance under threat of an eminent
domain proceeding, reduced in size so that the remainder of said lot of record
or zoning lot or structure on said lot does not conform with one (1) or more of
the regulations of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or
structure is located.
      7.   To permit a commercial radio and television transmitting antenna
tower and other electronic equipment requiring outdoor towers and including
microwave relay towers and antenna towers for the dispatching of private
messages to exceed the height limitations imposed by this title.
   F.   Final Action: Final action shall be taken by the Plan Commission on the
application as provided by this Code.
   G.   Time Period Of Variation Granted: No order of the Village Board
granting a variation shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
from the date of such order, unless the erection or alteration of a building or
structure is started, or the use is commenced within such period. (1979 Code §
5-15-4)
10-15-5: AMENDMENTS:
The provisions of this title may be amended as provided by this Code. (1979
Code § 5-15-5)
10-15-6: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Permits shall be issued or denied as provided in this Code. A permit shall be
valid for no longer than six (6) months from the date of issuance unless the
structure is started or use is commenced within such period. (1979 Code § 5-15-
6)
CHAPTER 16
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-16-1: Building Permit
10-16-2: Duration Of Permit
10-16-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-16-4: Application For Certificate Of Occupancy
10-16-5: Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy
10-16-6: Fees
10-16-7: Penalties
10-16-1: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   Compliance; Permit Required: No structure shall hereafter be used, no
land use shall be substantially changed, and no structure shall be erected,
moved or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
title and other applicable regulations until a building permit has been issued.
   B.   Application; Plans: All applications for a building permit shall be
made to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by plans, in duplicate,
drawn to scale, showing the name and address of the property owner; location;
actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; a statement as to
whether or not the lot to be built upon is in any floodplain or flood prone
area; centerline of the abutting streets and highways; the exact size and
location on the lot of the proposed or existing building and accessory
buildings; the lines within which the building shall be erected, altered or
moved; the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building;
the number of families the building is intended to accommodate and such other
information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots or buildings as may be
necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this title.
   C.   Fees: The fees for such building permit shall be established from time
to time by the Village Board of the Village.
   D.   Refer Application To Zoning Administrator: The Village Clerk shall
refer the application to the Zoning Administrator within five (5) days after
receipt of a proper application therefor. (1979 Code § 5-16-1)
10-16-2: DURATION OF PERMIT:
A building permit shall be void six (6) months after issuance, unless the
structure is started or the use has commenced within such period. Once
construction has commenced, the permit shall be valid for six (6) months from
the date of commencement of construction. The permit may be extended thereafter
by the Board of Trustees only upon a showing of good cause by the applicant.
(1979 Code § 5-16-2)
10-16-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No building or structure, or addition thereto, constructed after the
effective date hereof, and no addition to a previously existing building, shall
be occupied and no land vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for
any purpose, nor shall there be a change in any use, until an occupancy
certificate has been issued by the Office of the Village Clerk.
   B.   Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or occupancy of
the premises complies with all the applicable provisions of this title. (1979
Code § 5-16-3)
10-16-4: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
Every application for a building shall be deemed to be an application for a
certificate of occupancy. When only a certificate of occupancy is required by
this title, the application shall be filed with the Village Clerk in such form
and such manner as may be required. (1979 Code § 5-16-4)
10-16-5: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No certificate of occupancy for a building or addition thereto, constructed
after the effective date hereof, or for an addition to a previously existing
building, shall be issued until exterior construction has been completed and
the premises inspected and certified by the Zoning Administrator to be in
conformity with the plans and specifications upon which it is located. A
certificate of occupancy shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons
why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than fourteen (14) days after the
Village Clerk is notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for
occupancy. (1979 Code § 5-16-5)
10-16-6: FEES:
   A.   Any application for amendment, special use or variation which is filed
by, or in behalf of, the owner or owners of the property affected shall be
accompanied by the following fees:
 
Amendment (2 acres or less)   $ 75.00 plus publication of $15.00
Amendment (more than 2 acres) $100.00 plus publication of $15.00
Special use                   $ 75.00 plus publication of $15.00
Variations                    $ 35.00 plus publication of $15.00
 
   B.   Fees for application of a building permit are as follows:
 
Commercial-industrial                $150.00
Residential                          50.00
Addition to R-1 or R-2 structure     10.00
Accessory to structure in R-1 or R-2 10.00
 
   C.   When construction starts before a zoning certificate is issued, the fee
will be increased by fifty percent (50%). (1979 Code § 5-16-6)
10-16-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   B.   Upon written notification that a violation of this title exists, the
person notified shall have thirty (30) days to eliminate such violation and/or
comply with this title. Each day any such violation or failure to comply is
permitted to exist after the expiration of such thirty (30) day period shall
constitute a separate offense. The Zoning Administrator may extend such thirty
(30) day period in such cases as he may deem necessary. (1979 Code § 5-16-7)
CHAPTER 17
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-17-1: Introduction
10-17-2: Basic Provisions And Requirements
10-17-3: Location Of Planned Unit Development
10-17-4: Preliminary Plan
10-17-5: Final Development Plan
10-17-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   This chapter details requirements for planned unit development. A
special use permit for a planned unit development allows an innovative and
imaginative design and provides that each case is considered individually.
   B.   Different types of planned unit developments are possible: cluster
developments of single-family dwellings on reduced sized lots with common open
space and developments combining two (2) or more land uses in a coordinated
whole.
   C.   The unique and substantially different character of planned unit
developments requires their administrative processing as a "special use" in
this title. Planned unit developments are more complex and of a different
character than other special uses requiring the establishment herein of
specific and additional procedures, standards and exceptions to guide the
recommendations of the Plan Commission and the action of the Village Board.
(1979 Code § 5-17-1)
10-17-2: BASIC PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The basic provisions and requirements concerning planned unit development are
as follows: The subdivision, development and use of land containing fifteen
(15) or more acres as an integral unit, which may combine more than one (1)
primary land use and which may provide for one-family residential, multiple-
family residential, education, limited commercial, recreational, park and
common use areas may be described as planned unit development.
   A.   In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to
the foregoing provisions, the following procedures, requirements, restrictions,
standards and conditions shall be observed.
   B.   The planned unit development may be excluded from the provisions of the
subdivision regulations of title 11 of this Code to the extent specified in the
final authorization of the planned unit development.
   C.   Any commercial or business use to be combined with a residential or
multiple-family residential use shall be limited as follows:
      1.   The commercial or business use must be confined to a community use
building located within the development.
      2.   The commercial or business use may not exceed twenty percent (20%)
of the total square footage of the community use building.
      3.   The commercial or business use must be available for the general
public's use.
      4.   The proposal shall provide for sufficient off-street parking for the
commercial or business uses. (1979 Code § 5-17-2)
10-17-3: LOCATION OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A planned unit development may be located in any district zoned for a use which
is a component of that planned unit development. No planned unit development
may be located in a district which is not zoned for one (1) component of that
planned unit development. (1979 Code § 5-17-3)
10-17-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
The applicant shall request the special use permit, by letter addressed to the
Village Board, to be placed on the agenda of the meeting of the Plan Commission
for a preliminary discussion of the proposed planned development, and the Plan
Commission shall consider the proposed planned development at such meeting,
which may be continued from time to time. Thereafter, the applicant shall
prepare a preliminary plan which shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, the following:
   A.   Twenty (20) copies of a preliminary plan including a map or maps which
shall be included as part of the application and shall be drawn at a scale of
two hundred feet to the inch (200' = 1"). The following information shall be
shown:
      1.   Boundary Survey: A boundary line survey of the subject site which
shall be prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
      2.   Topography: The existing topographic character of the land with
contours shown at intervals no greater than five feet (5'). Topographic data
shall refer to the USGS North American Datum - Mean Sea Level Elevation.
      3.   Site Analysis: A detailed site analysis of the property in question,
which shall show the following information:
         a.   Physical Factors Information:
            (1)   Existing land uses both on the site and immediately adjacent
to it;
            (2)   Scenic views;
            (3)   Wooded areas;
            (4)   Soil problem areas based upon a soil survey of the site to
include a report from the Soil Conservation Service. Additional soil
information may be requested by the Plan Commission and/or the Village
Engineer;
            (5)   Portions of the site in any floodplain and/or floodplain
fringe areas;
            (6)   Streams, ponds, drainage ditches, culverts and standing
water;
            (7)   Isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in
diameter at one foot (1') above ground level;
            (8)   General directions of the stormwater runoff across the
property.
         b.   Public Utilities Information: Public utilities information, which
shall show the location and size of any existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and water lines both on the site and in easements and rights-of-way immediately
adjacent to the site - gas, electric and telephone.
         c.   Other Information:
            (1)   Existing County and/or Municipal zoning on all parts of the
site;
            (2)   Municipal corporate boundaries across and adjacent to the
subject site;
            (3)   Utility easements across and adjacent to the subject site.
      4.   Land Use Plan: A proposed land use plan which shall be drawn upon a
print of the topographic map for this site. The proposed land use plan shall
contain the following information:
         a.   Identification And Description:
            (1)   Name of the planned unit development;
            (2)   Location of the subject site by section, town and range or by
other approved legal description;
            (3)   Name and address of the site planner and/or engineer;
            (4)   Name and address of the owner and/or trust beneficiary or
developer;
            (5)   Scale, northpoint and date.
         b.   Design Features: Design features information, which shall show:
            (1)   Right-of-way alignments, widths and names of all streets.
Such street names shall not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used in
the Village or its environs unless such street is an extension of or is in the
lie with an already named street, in which event that name shall be used;
            (2)   The location of all multi-family or single-family attached
buildings and structures;
            (3)   Off-street parking and service areas;
            (4)   All areas to be dedicated as common open space and all sites
to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds, community or
commercial buildings, and business areas contained within any community
building;
            (5)   The pedestrian circulation system, and pathway system or
bicycle system;
            (6)   All other information necessary to clearly show the proposed
elements of the planned unit development.
      5.   Utility Plan: A proposed utility plan which shall be drawn on a
print of the proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan shall show the
approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and
water lines for all proposed land uses, drainage ditches, culverts and water
retention areas, as well as any utility easements. The utility plan shall be
accompanied by a statement from the Village Engineer attesting to the
capability of existing sewer systems to service the proposed development.
   B.   A written statement which shall be included as part of the application
for approval of the preliminary plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   The type and number of dwelling units for any proposed residential
land uses.
      2.   The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate
dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin and to end.
   C.   Other information may be requested if the Plan Commission finds that
the planned unit development may create special problems for traffic, parking,
landscaping and/or economic feasibility. Such information may include, but not
be limited to, any of the following:
      1.   An off-street parking and loading plan.
      2.   A traffic study indicating the volume of traffic to be generated by
the planned unit development or this phase of it and proposing any special
engineering design features and/or traffic regulation devices needed to ensure
the proper safety of traffic circulation to, through and around the planned
unit development or this phase of it.
      3.   Economic impact - a tax impact study detailing the impact which the
planned unit development or this phase of it will have upon all taxing bodies.
In addition, the expected number of students to be generated by any residential
portion of it shall also be quantified.
      4.   A landscaping planting plan, indicating the height, size, location,
quantities and variety of stock to be planted.
   D.   The procedure for approval of the preliminary plan shall be as follows:
      1.   The Village Board shall refer the preliminary plan to the Plan
Commission. The Village Board shall instruct the appropriate Village
departments and Village Engineer to collaborate with the Plan Commission in
reviewing the preliminary plan for the planned unit development for its
compliance with these regulations and other ordinances of the Village. Such
collaboration may include meetings at which the developer shall meet with the
Village officials and Engineer in order that the Plan Commission may have,
prior to its public hearing, the informal recommendations of its officials and
engineer.
      2.   The Plan Commission shall notify the applicant as to the time and
place of the public hearing at which the applicant shall present his
preliminary plan. The Plan Commission shall cause notice of such public hearing
to be published in a manner approved by the Village Attorney for the Plan
Commission for all special use permits and as required by statute.
   E.   The Plan Commission shall proceed as quickly as possible in its review
of the preliminary plan. Within no more than thirty (30) days after the final
adjournment of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall:
      1.   Approve and/or disapprove the preliminary plan and shall submit its
written recommendation, which may include the recommendations of the Village
Engineer and Village Attorney, to the Board of Trustees, with a copy being sent
to the applicant; or
      2.   Advise the applicant in writing if the Plan Commission finds that
change, addition, or corrections are required in the preliminary plan. The
applicant shall resubmit twenty (20) copies of the revised preliminary plan for
consideration by the Plan Commission at a continuation of or a new public
hearing. The applicant shall do so without paying an additional filing fee.
   F.   The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the preliminary
plan within forty five (45) days after its next regular meeting following the
receipt of the written recommendations of the Plan Commission. The applicant
and the Village Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the forty five
(45) day period.
      1.   If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the Village Board shall
state in writing the reasons for the disapproval, and such writing, if
prepared, shall be filed with the Village Clerk and a copy shall be sent to the
applicant.
      2.   If the preliminary plan is approved, the Village Board shall
authorize the applicant to submit a final development plan for the planned unit
development.
      3.   Within one (1) year following the approval of the preliminary
development plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission, a final
development plan completing in final form all information required as noted in
this section. (1979 Code § 5-17-4)
10-17-5: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
   A.   Within one (1) year following the approval of the preliminary
development plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission a final
development plan containing in final form the information required in the
preliminary plan. The final development plan shall also include the following:
      1.   A final land use plan, suitable for recording with the County
Recorder of Deeds.
      2.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
      3.   Designation of the location of all buildings to be constructed, and
a designation of the uses for which each building is designated.
      4.   Landscaping plan.
      5.   Utilities and drainage plan.
      6.   Final agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the
use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any
of its common open areas or other common facilities.
      7.   Final development and construction schedule.
      8.   Final architectural plans.
      9.   Final engineering drawings.
   B.   The final development plan shall be approved as follows:
      1.   The Plan Commission shall review the final development plan within
thirty five (35) days of its submission and shall recommend approval if it is
in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The Plan
Commission shall certify to the Board of Trustees that the final development
plan is in conformity with the previously approved preliminary development
plan.
      2.   If the Plan Commission finds that the final plan is substantially
changed from the approved preliminary plan, the Plan Commission shall recommend
to the Village Board that a new public hearing be held in conformance with the
procedures for approval of the preliminary plan.
      3.   The Board of Trustees, after receipt of the recommendation of the
Plan Commission, shall itself review the final development plan, and authorize
issuance of special use permits. If the final development plan is held not to
be in conformity with the preliminary development plan, the Village Board shall
inform the applicant with regard to the specific areas found to be not in
compliance.
   C.   Permits are to be issued only after the final planned unit development
plat and supporting data have been recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds,
and shall be issued in full conformance with this title. Proof of the recording
of the final plat shall be provided to the Village Clerk. However, the Village
may issue permits for public improvements prior to recordation of the final
plat, upon application of the developer and good cause shown and approval by
the Village Board. (1979 Code § 5-17-5)
CHAPTER 18
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
10-18-1: Definitions
10-18-2: Solar Permit And Fees
10-18-3: Accessory Use; Non-Commercial Use
10-18-4: Principal Use; Commercial Use
10-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
                                  An active solar energy system that is an
                                  integral part of a building, rather than a
                                  separate mechanical device, replacing or
                                  substituting for an architectural or
BUILDING- INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY structural component of the building.
SYSTEMS:                          Building-integrated systems include but
                                  are not limited to photovoltaic or hot
                                  water solar energy systems that are
                                  contained within roofing materials,
                                  windows, skylights and awnings.
                                  The intended or actual use of a solar
                                  energy system for commercial purposes,
                                  including but not limited to use by a
COMMERCIAL USE:                   property other than the property upon
                                  which the solar energy system is located
                                  or use involving the sale of electricity
                                  to third parties or electric utilities.
                                  A solar energy system mounted on a rack or
GROUND MOUNT:                     pole that rests on or is attached to the
                                  ground.
                                  An active solar energy system that
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM:              converts solar energy directly into
                                  electricity.
                                  A solar energy system that is mounted on a
ROOF MOUNT:                       rack that is fastened onto a building
                                  roof.
                                  The final exterior slope of a building
ROOF PITCH:                       roof calculated by the rise over the run,
                                  typically but not exclusively expressed in
                                  twelfths.
                                  An assembly, structure, and the associated
                                  equipment and housing, designed for
                                  gathering, concentrating, or absorbing
SOLAR COLLECTOR:                  direct and indirect solar energy for which
                                  the primary purpose is to convert or
                                  transform solar radiant energy into
                                  thermal, mechanical, chemical or
                                  electrical energy.
                                  Radiant energy received from the sun that
SOLAR ENERGY:                     can be collected in the form of heat or
                                  light by a solar collector.
                                  A device, array of devices, or structural
                                  design feature, the purpose of which is to
                                  provide for: (i) generation of
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:              electricity; (ii) collection, storage and
                                  distribution of solar energy for space
                                  heating or cooling; (iii) daylight for
                                  interior lighting; or (iv) water heating.
                                  A commercial facility that converts
                                  sunlight into electricity, whether by
                                  photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar
SOLAR FARM:                       thermal devices (CST), or other conversion
                                  technology, for the primary purpose of
                                  wholesale sales of generated electricity.
                                  Solar Farms shall include solar gardens
                                  that are one (1) acre or more in size.
                                  A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic)
                                  array, of less than one (1) acre in size,
                                  that provides retail electric power (or a
                                  financial proxy for retail power) to
SOLAR GARDEN:                     multiple households or businesses residing
                                  in or located off-site from the location
                                  of the solar energy system. A solar garden
                                  that is one (1) acre or more in size shall
                                  be deemed a solar farm.
                                  A system (also referred to as Solar
                                  Thermal) that includes a solar collector
                                  and a heat exchanger that heats or
SOLAR HOT WATER SYSTEM:           preheats water for building heating
                                  systems or other hot water needs,
                                  including residential domestic hot water
                                  and hot water for commercial processes.
                                  Racking, frames, or other devices that
SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES:           allow the mounting of a solar collector
                                  onto a roof surface or the ground.
                                  A view of the sun from a specific point on
                                  a lot or building that is not obscured by
                                  any vegetation, building, or object for a
SOLAR RESOURCE:                   minimum of four (4) hours between the
                                  hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
                                  three o'clock (3:00) P.M. Standard Time on
                                  all days of the year. (Ord. 09-02-22, 10-
                                  25-2022)
 
10-18-2: SOLAR PERMIT AND FEES:
   A.   Solar Permit Applications: It shall be unlawful to construct, alter,
relocate or demolish any solar energy system without first applying for and
obtaining both a building permit as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 1 of the
village code and a solar permit as more specifically provided in this chapter.
   B.   Review Of Solar Permit Applications: Solar permit applications with
respect to solar energy systems that are a permitted accessory use shall be
made to the village clerk and reviewed for approval by the building inspector.
Solar permit applications with respect to solar energy systems that are a
conditional accessory use shall be made to the village clerk and reviewed
pursuant to the procedures for approval of a special use permit pursuant to
section
2-2-5 and section
10-15-6 of the village code.
   C.   Application Plans: Every solar permit application for the construction,
alteration or relocation of a solar energy system shall be accompanied with a
written plan and drawing for the proposed solar energy system. The written plan
shall:
      1.   Identify the owner of the property upon which the proposed solar
energy system will be located;
      2.   Identify the owner and operator of the proposed solar energy system,
if not the same as the owner of the property upon which the proposed solar
energy system will be located;
      3.   Indicate the zoning classification of the property;
      4.   Include to-scale horizontal and vertical drawings showing all
buildings and accessory structures located on the property, all adjoining
roadways, the location of the solar energy system on the building or on the
property, including all set-back and property lines, the elevation of the solar
energy system, and the location and types of all screening;
      5.   For roof mount solar energy systems other than a flat roof, the
elevation must show the highest finished slope of the solar collector and the
slope of the finished roof surface on which it is mounted; and
      6.   Identify the name of the installer of the solar energy system.
         No solar permit shall be issued except after approval of the written
plan and drawing and after payment of the fees as provided for in this section
and after receipt of a building permit and, if applicable, a special use
permit.
   D.   Application Fees: In addition to payment of all applicable building
permit fees, every solar permit application shall be charged an application
processing fee based on the total wattage anticipated to be generated by the
solar energy system, as follows:
 
0-10 kilowatts (kW)        $150.00
11-50 kilowatts (kW)       $300.00
51-100 kilowatts (kW)      $600.00
101-500 kilowatts (kW)     $1,200.00
501-1,000 kilowatts (kW)   $2,750.00
1,001-2,000 kilowatts (kW) $6,000.00
Over 2,000 kilowatts (kW)  $6,000.00 + $200.00 for each additional 100
                           kilowatts (kW)
 
   E.   Fee Surcharge: Any person who constructs, alters or relocates a solar
energy system prior to the application, payment and issuance of the permits as
required herein shall be charged three (3) times the application fee.
   F.   Cancellation, Abandonment And Discontinuance: A solar permit will
become null and void if construction work is not started within six (6) months
of the date the solar permit is issued. Once started, if the work for which the
solar permit was issued is, in the discretion of the building inspector,
abandoned or discontinued, the solar permit shall be terminated.
   G.   Demolition Permit: Any person desiring to remove or demolish a solar
energy system shall secure a demolition permit pursuant to title 9, chapter 8
of the village code of ordinances. (Ord. 09-02-22, 10-25-2022)
10-18-3: ACCESSORY USE: NON-COMMERCIAL USE:
   A.   Permitted Accessory Use: Except as set forth in subsection B below, the
following solar energy systems shall be allowed as a permitted accessory use in
all zoning districts within the village limits when used exclusively for non-
commercial purposes:
      1.   A ground mount solar energy system;
      2.   Roof mount solar energy systems; and
      3.   Building integrated solar energy systems.
   B.   Prohibitions: Commercial use solar energy systems, including all solar
gardens and solar farms, shall not be permitted within the village limits.
Ground mount solar energy systems shall not be permitted in any residential
zoning district within the village limits
   C.   Requirements: Solar energy systems under this section shall be subject
to the following requirements:
      1.   No solar energy system that is an accessory use may be erected prior
to the establishment or construction of the main building to which such system
is accessory.
      2.   Height: The following height requirements shall be met:
         a.   Building or roof mount solar energy systems shall not exceed the
maximum allowed height in their respective zoning district.
         b.   Ground mount solar energy systems shall not exceed ten (10) feet
in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
      3.   Set-Back: All minimum set-back requirements for the zoning district
in which the solar energy system is in use must be satisfied, in addition to:
         a.   Roof mount or building-integrated solar energy systems shall not
extend beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is
mounted or built.
         b.   Ground mount solar energy systems shall not extend into the side-
yard or rear setback when oriented at minimum design tilt.
         c.   No ground mount solar energy systems shall be allowed in the
front yard of any property.
      4.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be designed to blend into the
architecture of the building or be screened from routine view from public
right-of-ways other than alleys. A solar energy system may be screened from
routine view through use of fencing, shrubbery, trees, or such other
landscaping or building as may be necessary to satisfy the visibility
requirements herein. The color of the solar collector and solar mounting
devices shall be consistent with other roofing materials. The visibility
requirements as set forth herein are also subject to the following:
         a.   Building-integrated solar energy systems shall be allowed
regardless of whether the system is visible from the public right-of-way,
provided that the building component in which the system is integrated meets
all required set-back, land use or performance standards for the zoning
district in which the building is located.
         b.   Roof mount solar energy systems shall be allowed regardless of
whether the system is visible from the public right-of-way, provided that the
highest finished pitch is no steeper than the roof pitch on which the system is
mounted, and shall be no higher than twelve inches (12") above the roof.
         c.   Solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance solar
production shall minimize glare from the reflector affecting adjacent or nearby
properties.
      5.   Glare: Solar energy systems shall be designed, constructed and sited
to minimize or prevent glare and/or reflections on adjacent properties and
roadways, and shall not materially and negatively impact the use thereon. A
solar energy system shall not interfere with traffic, including air traffic, or
otherwise create a safety hazard. In the event that reasonable glare and/or
reflection concerns are raised within the village, the owner will take actions
to address those concerns, including but not limited to additional screening or
otherwise modifying the solar energy system.
      6.   Miscellaneous:
         a.   Roof mount solar energy systems, excluding building-integrated
systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-fighting purposes to the
roof upon which the systems are mounted.
         b.   Roof mount solar energy systems shall not be constructed in any
manner which creates an unreasonable risk of falling ice or snow, or which
causes water to flow directly from any solar collector to ground level.
         c.   Ground mount solar energy systems approved as an accessory use
shall not be larger than the lesser of (i) half the building footprint of the
main building on the property, or (ii) six hundred twenty five (625) square
feet. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation and design of the
solar mounting devices are within accepted professional standards with respect
to local soil and climate conditions.
         d.   No ground mount solar energy system shall be constructed in a
manner which increases water drainage flow to any adjacent property. If it
appears that there is a risk of increased water drainage flow, the zoning
inspector may require the installation and maintenance of appropriate
groundcover or detention areas to mitigate any such risk. If the applicant
provides a written report from a qualified professional engineer indicating
that the proposed ground mount solar energy system will not increase water
drainage flow to adjacent property, the requirement shall be deemed satisfied
for purposes of issuance of the solar permit only.
         e.   Solar energy systems on buildings within designated historic
districts or on locally designated historic buildings (exclusive of State or
Federal historic designation) must be consistent with the standards for solar
energy systems on historically designated buildings published by the U.S.
Department of Interior.
         f.   Solar energy systems must be certified by a third-party for
safety, performance and quality through a UL (formerly Underwriters
Laboratories) listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems must
have an SRCC (Solar Rating & Certification Company) rating.
         g.   Solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable local and
state building, electric and plumbing codes.
   D.   Conditional Accessory Use: Solar energy systems permitted under
subsection A of this section that demonstrate that the requirements in
subsection C cannot be met without materially diminishing the minimum
reasonable performance of the solar energy system, as that term is defined
herein, may request a special use permit from the village.
      1.   Minimum Reasonable Performance: The standards for the minimum
reasonable performance of certain solar energy systems are as follows:
         a.   Fixed-Mount Active Solar Energy Systems: They should be mounted
to face within forty-five (45) degrees of south (one hundred eighty-five (185)
degrees azimuth).
         b.   Solar Electric (Photovoltaic) Systems: The solar collectors
should have a pitch between twenty (20) and sixty-five (65) degrees.
         c.   Solar Hot Water Systems: The solar collectors need to be mounted
at a pitch between forty (40) and sixty (60) degrees.
         d.   Location Of All Solar Energy Systems: The solar energy system
should be located where the lot or building has a solar resource, as defined
herein.
      2.   Special Use Permit: A special use permit shall be granted,
regardless of whether the requirements in subsection B are not met, if the
applicant demonstrates that the minimum reasonable performance of the solar
energy system is materially diminished and that the following conditions are
present:
         a.   Safety Conditions: The solar energy system must meet all
applicable local, state, and federal health and safety standards.
         b.   Aesthetic Conditions: The solar energy system must be designed to
blend into the architecture of the building or be screened from routine view
from public right-of-ways other than alleys to the maximum extent possible,
while still allowing the system to be mounted for efficient performance.
         c.   Non-Tracking Ground Mount Systems: Pole or ground mount solar
energy systems must be set back from the property line by a minimum of five
foot (5').
   E.   Restrictions On Solar Energy Systems Limited: Nothing in this article
shall be deemed a limitation upon any homeowners' agreement, covenant, common
interest community, or other contract between multiple property owners within
the Village that prohibit or restrict homeowners from installing solar energy
systems. (Ord. 09-02-22, 10-25-2022)
10-18-4: PRINCIPAL USE; COMMERCIAL USE:
Solar energy systems shall not be allowed as a permitted or conditional
(special) principal use within the village or for any commercial use. (Ord. 09-
02-22, 10-25-2022)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: State Requirements
11-1-2: Tentative Plat
11-1-3: General Rules, Regulations
11-1-4: Final Plat
11-1-1: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
All laws of the State of Illinois pertinent to the subdividing of lands and
plats therefor, as now or at any time hereafter may be in effect, are made a
part of this chapter as though written herein at length 1 . Three (3) copies of
the applicable statutes shall be and remain on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk for inspection by the public. (1979 Code § 6-1-1; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.
11-1-2: TENTATIVE PLAT:
   A.   Prior to making a subdivision of any tract or parcel of land within the
Village, there shall be filed with the Village Clerk a tentative plat in
duplicate. This tentative plat shall be in compliance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Each plat shall be drawn to a scale of two hundred feet to an inch
(200' = 1"). Variations in scale may be made, however, where necessary for a
proper exhibit of a subdivision.
      2.   All section lines, watercourses and other existing features
pertinent to a proper subdivision shall be shown.
      3.   Width of existing roads; streets with their names; alleys; lots;
easements; building lines on property proposed to be subdivided and full width
of intersecting streets in property adjacent with their names; the location of
existing highways or streets in the subdivision, which may be separated by
intervening property, shall be shown.
      4.   Name of proposed subdivision and name of owner or trustee as owner,
or name of sponsor for the plat, shall be shown; and a brief description as to
location shall be shown as part of the title.
      5.   Names of all adjoining subdivisions shall be included and adjoining
property not subdivided shall be marked "Not Subdivided".
      6.   Where topography has significant bearing upon or controls layouts or
utility, contour lines at not greater than five foot (5') intervals shall be
shown on such tentative plat.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall refer such tentative plats to the proper
official designated by the President and Board of Trustees to act as examiner
of plats, who shall examine the same for conformity with the provisions of
these regulations. If approved, this notation shall be made on each copy of the
plats. If not approved, the points of conflict with these regulations shall be
noted on each copy of the plats. One (1) copy of the plat in each case will
then be returned to the subdivider and the other copy shall be retained by the
Village. (1979 Code § 6-1-2)
11-1-3: GENERAL RULES, REGULATIONS:
After approval of the tentative plat, the subdivision may be laid out, subject
to the following general rules which shall apply to each such layout:
   A.   Frontage Requirement: Each lot shall front on a road, street or
parkway.
   B.   Direct Street Connections: Provisions shall be made for direct
connections with the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions, without
offsets. Where practicable, streets shall be provided having centerlines on
section, quarter section or eighth section lines. Such streets shall be
extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
   C.   Streets Bordering Subdivision: Where conditions warrant, the subdivider
shall provide one-half (1/2) the width of streets bordering the subdivision.
   D.   Private Roads, Streets: Private roads and streets shall be permitted
only when the subdivider submits sufficient evidence to the Village that there
can be no public interest in such private road or street.
   E.   Street Width: The width of streets shall conform to the following:
      1.   On any existing State bond issue or Federal aid road within the
Village, which has been surveyed, laid out, constructed or reconstructed prior
to the time when approval of the tentative plat is given by the Village, and on
which roads the width of the right-of-way has been specifically established by
recorded plats and dedications thereof, the new lot or property line adjacent
thereto shall be the said established right-of-way line, except that in no case
shall the lot or property line adjacent thereto be nearer than fifty feet (50')
from the survey line or centerline of such right-of-way as shown and referred
to in the dedication and recorded plat thereof.
      2.   On any existing State aid roads within the Village, the new lot or
property line adjacent thereto shall be the said established right-of-way line,
except that in no case shall the lot or property line adjacent thereto be
nearer than forty feet (40') from the center of the said road.
      3.   Wherever new streets or roads are created or dedicated within the
proposed subdivision, and which are not of the type specified in subsection E1
or E2 of this section, they shall preferably be located and laid out on or
along established section, quarter section or eighth section lines, and such
streets or roads shall have a minimum width of sixty six feet (66'), except
that in unusual cases where short streets or courts are necessary and where
there is no reasonable assurance that at some future time such streets will be
carried through to form a suitable connection with other streets, then such
streets may be laid out having a minimum width of sixty feet (60'). Where such
streets terminate at a dead end, a turnaround of not less than seventy five
feet (75') in diameter shall be provided at such dead end.
   F.   Alley Width: Where alleys are provided, they shall be not less than
twenty feet (20') in width.
   G.   Easements: Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than
five feet (5') in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines
for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat
mains, but which shall not be used for that purpose until authorized by and
under stipulated regulations of proper authorities having jurisdiction.
   H.   Block Length: Blocks shall not be of greater length than eight hundred
feet (800').
   I.   Side Lot Lines: Whenever possible, the side lines of lots shall be
perpendicular to the street line which forms the front of said lots.
   J.   Monuments: Permanent monuments at all block corners, points of tangency
of curved lines and where street lines intersect the exterior lines of the
subdivision shall be of iron pins three-fourths of an inch (3/4") in diameter
and forty eight inches (48") in length.
   K.   Corner Lots: All lot corners shall be marked by five- eighths inch (5/
8") diameter iron pins thirty six inches (36") in length.
   L.   Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum frontage of lots shall be sixty six
feet (66') and the total area of lots shall not be less than eight thousand
three hundred sixteen (8,316) square feet.
   M.   Building Setback Lines: Building setback lines shall be established
thirty feet (30') from the front lot lines.
   N.   Street Design Requirements: The subdivider shall grade, drain and
surface the roadways of all streets shown on the plat so as to provide
reasonable access for vehicular traffic to each lot of the subdivision. The
roadway shall be graded to cross over all drainage ditches with proper means
providing for continuing use of such existing drainage. The center thirty six
feet (36') or more of such roadway shall be constructed with a minimum of eight
inches (8") of packed slag, gravel, stone or any combination of such materials
and topped with a two inch (2") hot mix bituminous mat. The subdivider shall
also provide concrete curbs (at least 36 feet back to back), concrete gutters
and storm sewers. If a subdivision faces on any existing street or if any of
its streets connect with such existing streets, the subdivider shall build all
concrete curbs, concrete gutters and storm sewers required along such existing
streets or on account of such subdivision and the streets thereof. All required
improvements shall be constructed entirely at the expense of the subdivider
according to the specifications or approval of the Village Engineer and the
Committee on Streets and Alleys, and in conformity with grade lines established
by necessary surveys made at the expense of the subdivider and approved by the
Village Engineer and the Committee on Streets and Alleys.
   O.   Sanitary Sewer Provisions: The subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer
mains, services and appurtenances to serve each lot in the subdivision,
including connections to existing sanitary sewers. Sewer mains shall be of
adequate size to serve the area being subdivided as well as any tributary area
which may reasonably be expected to require sewer service in the future, but in
no case shall the inside diameter of the sewer main be less than eight inches
(8"). Sewer services shall be of not less than six inch (6") inside diameter
and shall be installed to points not less than twenty two and one- half feet
(221/2') on each side of the centerline of the street. Manholes shall be
provided at all junctions, changes in direction of flow, change in grade or
size of pipe, and at not more than three hundred foot (300') intervals of
straight runs. Materials and methods of construction shall comply with the
standard specifications on file in the Office of the Village Clerk and the
applicable ordinances of the Village as now or hereafter may be in effect. The
subdivider shall obtain any permits required by law and shall submit the same,
together with plans for the work, and obtain approval thereof by the Village
Board before starting such work.
   P.   Water Service Provisions: The subdivider shall provide water mains,
services and appurtenances to serve each lot in the subdivision, including the
connection to the existing water distribution system and including fire
hydrants and cutoff valves between such fire hydrants and water mains to which
they are connected in accordance with specifications or approval of the Village
Engineer and the Committee on Water of the Village. Water mains and
appurtenances shall be in accordance with standard specifications on file in
the Office of the Village Clerk. Services shall be not less than three- fourth
inch (3/4") copper pipe and equipped with suitable cutoffs or stops. The size
of the water main shall be approved by the Village, but in no event shall it be
less than six inches (6") in diameter, except that water mains four inches (4")
in diameter may be installed with Village approval where required connection to
existing mains is to a main four inches (4") in diameter. Construction shall be
in accordance with standard specifications aforementioned. The subdivider shall
prepare plans for the layout and shall obtain all necessary permits and
approval of such plans and permits by the Village before commencement of any
work under this subsection.
   Q.   Surety Bond: The subdivider shall do such grading, draining, surfacing
and other construction work in a manner as permanent as the materials used will
allow and to the approval of the Village. The subdivider shall do such work at
his own expense and shall either complete such work satisfactorily to the
Village prior to the final approval of his subdivision plat by the Village, or
deliver to the Village a duplicate signed contract covering all of said work in
compliance with these regulations and a surety bond acceptable to the Village
guaranteeing the completion of such work so contracted for within one (1) year
from the date of such contract.
   R.   Streetlights: The subdivider shall provide streetlights or some other
adequate night lighting provision. The design and installation of each
streetlight or night lighting system in every subdivision shall be reviewed by
the Village Engineer and shall be subject to the following general rules:
      1.   The subdivider shall be responsible for any and all costs of
installing street lighting within the subdivision including, but not limited
to, trenching, wiring, cables, poles and fixtures.
      2.   Streetlights shall be provided at each intersection of streets (or
alleys) within a subdivision and at each cul-de- sac, but in no event shall
there be less than one (1) streetlight per four hundred feet (400') (or portion
thereof) of street frontage between intersections or between a street
intersection and the terminus of a dead end street.
      3.   The lighting intensity of each streetlight shall be equivalent at a
minimum to a one hundred seventy five (175) watt lamp or six thousand eight
hundred (6,800) mercury luminous lamp.
      4.   The source of illumination shall not be lower than sixteen feet
(16') above grade when placed in the street easement.
      5.   Lighting shall be designed and maintained to avoid unnecessary
illumination of residents' interiors.
      6.   Light standards shall not be located within three feet (3') of the
street pavement. Where sidewalks are required, streetlight standards shall be
located between the sidewalk and street pavement. A variation to this section
may be approved by the Village Engineer.
      7.   All public utility lines for light systems shall be placed in
easements or dedicated right-of-way and entirely underground.
      8.   The streetlight system shall be installed before the expiration of
the subdivider's letter of credit.
      9.   Once installed to the approval of the Village Engineer, the Village
will assume the cost of maintenance and operations for the lighting pursuant to
the Village's agreement with the public utility. (1979 Code § 6-1-3)
11-1-4: FINAL PLAT:
After completion of the layout in accordance with the regulations prescribed in
section
11-1-3 of this chapter, the subdivider shall submit in duplicate a final plat
to the Village Clerk. This final plat, which shall be in accordance with the
tentative plat as approved, shall show that the requirements for the layout
have been complied with, either by means of conventional signs on the plat or
by notes and legends thereto attached, and in addition, shall contain the
following data and information:
   A.   All plats for record shall be drawn to a scale of two hundred feet to
one inch (200' = 1"). Variations in scale may be made, however, where necessary
for a proper exhibit of a subdivision.
   B.   Each plat shall show the date of preparation of the plat and the north
sign, section and quarter section lines.
   C.   Each plat shall include a correct survey of property subdivided,
including legal description, section, township and range; location and widths
of all roads, streets, alleys and other lands to be dedicated to public use.
All streets in the proposed subdivision shall be named, which names shall
conform to those of existing streets and roads unless otherwise permitted by
the Village. Offset streets shall not be permitted, but where necessary, the
line of departure from one (1) street to another shall be shown.
   D.   All lot lines shall be shown and lots and blocks properly numbered or
lettered. Building lines and easements shall be shown and determined by
measurements.
   E.   All necessary dimensions, linear and angular, and angles necessary to
properly resurvey shall be shown, linear dimensions to be given in feet and
decimals of a foot.
   F.   The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the
subdivisions shall be shown upon all plats for record.
   G.   All proper certificates, seals and signatures as required by law shall
be shown on the original map and not on separate sheets.
   H.   Evidence that the work of improving the streets, as prescribed in
section
11-1-3 of this chapter, has been accomplished prior to submission of the plat
for final approval, or the receipt of a duplicate signed contract and the
accompanying surety bond hereinbefore referred to, shall be shown on such final
plat by a certificate to read as follows:
All streets shown herein have been graded, drained and surfaced, with curb and
gutter, if required; all required drainage structures have been built; and all
services and facilities completely installed, as required, or have been
provided for by bonded contract, to my satisfaction.
Date:                                 20           .
                                                       
       Examiner of Plats
   I.   The subdivider shall make all adjustments relative to any and all taxes
and special assessments levied against the property platted by him, before
submitting his final plat for approval. Evidence of such adjustments shall be
shown on such plat by a certificate signed by the County Clerk. In vacating
subdivisions previously platted, the petitioner shall submit evidence of the
payment of all taxes and special assessments levied against the property in the
same manner as is required for subdividing. (1979 Code § 6-1-4)
